Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



n 







M 



i 



+ + ^ ^ 



•^O ill** 



M 



H 



+ + ^ + 

+ -♦- ^ + 






VI 



j^W Oji. 







M 



^*^^^ 



+ 




•*2S2S?- 






n i^ml ^ 



■^ 



W 



*0JUJS 

+ ^ + 

-I' ^ + 

^^^^^^4 TAT 

■f + 



'% M 



M 



*W Oji. 




,.*^sf'? 



IM 



•»0 jul6* 



M 







W 







**0 iB»* 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH'S 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



THE MONKISH HISTORIANS OF GREAT 

BRITAIN. 



This Series of the EARLY ENGLISH CHRONICLERS, several 
of which now appear for the first tune in an English dress, will be 
completed in about Twelve Voliunes, of which the following are 
already published : — 

£ s. d. 
Bede's Ecclesiastical History, 8vo. . . 12 

GiLDAS AND NeNNIUS's HiSTORIES, 8V0. . .080 

Richard of Devizes' Chronicle; and 
Richard of Cirencester's Description 
OF Britain {Latin and English) . . .080 

Geoffrey of Monmouth's History, 8vo. . 10 

In the Press, 

Bede's Ecclesiastical Biographies, and Minor 

Works, 8vo. 
William of Malmesbury's History, 2 Vols. 8vo. 
William of Newburgh's History, 8vo. 
The Saxon Chronicle, 8vo. 
Asser's Life of King Alfred, 8vo. 
Historical Collections, and Fragments, 2 Vols. 8vo. 



All the volumes are sold in half morocco, imcut, with fac-similies 

of the Original MSS. 



THE 



BRITISH HISTORY 



OF 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH, 



IN TWELVE BOOKS. 



TRANSLATED FROM THE LATIN, 
BY A. THOMPSON, ESQ. 



A NEW EDITION, REVISED AND CORRECTED. 

BY J . A . GILES, L L . . 

LATE FELLOW OF C. C. COLL. OXFORD. 



LONDON: 
JAMES ROHN, 12, KING WILLIAM STREET, STRAND 



if DCCqXLII . 



DA 



LONDON: 

William stbvxns, printer, bbll yard, 
tbhplb bar. 



Uixo 



TO THE RIGHT REVEREND 

CONNOP, 
LORD BISHOP OF ST. DAVID^S, 

THIS TRANSLATION OF 

GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH, 

IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, 

BY HIS LORDSHIP'S 
OBEDIENT AND HUMBLE SERVANT, 

J. A. GILES. 



^ CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

Editor's Introduction .... xvii 

Chronological Outline . , • . zxv 

BOOK I. 

Chap. I. — The Epistle Dedicatory to Robert Earl of Gloucester 1 

Chap. II.—The first Inhabitants of Britain . . .2 

Chap. III. — Brutus, being banished after the Killing of his Parents, 

goes into Greece • . . . » 3 

Chap. IV.— Brutus's Letter to Pandrasus . . .5 

Chap. V. — Brutus falling upon the Forces of Pandrasus by surprise, 

routs them, and takes Antigonus, the Brother of Pandrasus, 

with Anacletus, Prisoner . . . .6 

Chap. VI. — ^The Town of Sparatinum besieged by Pandrasus . 7 
Chap. V II. — ^The Besieged ask Assistance of Brutus . • ib. 

Chap. VIII.— Anacletus, in fear of Death, betrays the Army of the 

ureeks . . . . « m 9 

Chap. IX. — ^The taking of Pandrasus . . .10 

Chap. X. — A Consultation about what is to be asked of the captive 

King . . • • .11 

Chap. XI. — Pandrasus gives his Daughter Ignoge in marriage to 

Brutus, who, after his Departure from Greece, falls upon a 

Desert Island, where he is told by the Oracle of Diana what 

Place he is to inhabit • . . •12 

Chap. XII. — Brutus enters Aquitaine with Corineus • .16 

Chap. XIIIl — Goffarius routed by Brutus . . .18 

Chap. XIV. — Brutus, after his Victory over Goffarius, ravages 

Aquitaine with Fire and Sword . • .19 

Chap. XV.— Goffarius's Fight with Brutus . . .20 

Chap. XVI. — Albion divided between Brutus and Corineus . 22 

Chap. XVII. — ^The Building of New Troy by Brutus, upon the 

River Thames . . • . .23 

Chap. XVIII. — New Troy being built, and Laws made for the 
Government of it, it is g^ven to the Citizens that were to 
inhabit it • . . • • .24 

BOOK IL 

Chap. I. — After the Death of Brutus, his Three Sons succeed him 

in the Kingdom . . . . .25 

b 2 



Vni CONTEXTS. 

PAOS 

Chap. II. — Locrin, having routed Humber, falls in Love with 

Estrildis . . . . .26 

Chap. III. — Corineus resents the Affront put upon his Daughter ib. 
Chap. IV. — Locrin at last marries Guendoloena, the Daughter of 

Corineus . . . . .27 

Chap. V. — Locrin is killed ; Estrildis and Sabre are thrown into 

a River . . . . . , ib. 

Chap. VI. — Guendoloena delivers up the Kingdom to Maddan, her 

Son, after whom succeeds Menpricius . . .28 

Chap. VII. — Ebraucus, the Successor of Mempricius, conquers 

the Gauls, and builds the Towns Kaerebrauc, &c. . 29 

Chap. VIII. — Ebraucus's Twenty Sons go to Germany, and his 

Thirty Daughters to Sylvius Alba, in Italy . . 30 

Chap. IX. — After Ebraucus reigns Brutus his Son, after him Leil, 

and after Leil, Hudibras .... ib. 

Chap. X. — Bladud succeeds Hudibras in the Kingdom, and prac- 
tises Magical Operations . . . .31 
Chap. XI. — Leir, the Son of Bladud, having no Son, divides his 

Elingdom among his Daughters . . .32 

Chap. XII. — Leir, finding the Ingratitude of his Two eldest 

Daughters, betakes himself to his youngest, Cordeilla, in Gaul 34 
Chap. XIII. — He is very honourably received by Cordeilla and 

the King of Gaul . . . . .36 

Chap. XIV. — Leir, being restored to the Kingdom by the Help of 

his Son-in-law and Cordeilla, dies • . . .37 

Chap. XV. — Cordeilla, being imprisoned, kills herself. Margan, 

aspiring to the whole Kingdom, is killed by Cunedagius . ib. 

Chap. XVI. — The Successors of Cunedagius in the Kingdom. 

Ferrex is killed by his Brother Porrex, in a Dispute for the 

Government . . . . .39 

Chap. XVII. — Dunwallo Molmutius gains the Sceptre of Britain, 

from whom came the Molmutine Laws . .40 

BOOK III. 

Chap. I. — Brennius quarrels with Belinus his Brother, and in 
order to make War against him, marries the Daughter of the 
King of the Norwegians . . . .42 

Chap. II. — Brennius's Sea-Fight with Gxiichthlac, King of the 
Dacians. Guichthlac and Brennius's Wife are driven ashore 
and taken by Belinus . . . . . .43 

Chap. III. — Belinus in a Battle routs Brennius, who thereupon 

flees to Gaul . < . . .44 

Chap. IV. — The King of Dacia, with Brennius's Wife, is released 

out of Prison . . . . .45 



CONTENTS. IX 

PAGE 

Chap. V. — ^Belinus revives and confirpis the Molmutine Laws, 

especially about the Highways . . .46 

Chap. VI. — Brennius, being made Duke of the Allobjroges, re- 
turns to Britain to fight with his Brother . .47 

Chap. VII. — Belinus and Brennius, being made Friends by the 

Mediation of their Mother, propose to subdue Gaul • 48 

Chap. VIII. — Belinus and Briennius, after the Conquest of Gaul, 

march with their Army to Rome . . .50 

Chap. IX. — ^The Romans make a Covenant with Brennius, but 
afterwards break it, for which reason Rome is besieged and 
taken by Brennius . . . , ib. 

Chap. X. — Brennius oppresses Italy in a most tyrannical Manner. 

Belinus returns to Britain . . . .52 

Chap. XI. — Gurgiunt Brabtruc succeeding his Father Belinus, 

reduces Dacia, which was trying to shake off his Yoke . . 53 

Chap. XII. — Ireland is given to be inhabited by the Barclenses, 

who had been banished out of Spain . . . .54 

Chap. XIII. — Guithelin reigning after Gurgiunt Brabtruc, the 

Martian Law is instituted by Martia, a noble Woman . ib. 

Chap. XIV. — Guithelin* s Successors in the Kingdom . . 55 

Chap. XV. — Morvidus, a most cruel Tyrant, after the Conquest of 
; the King of the Morini, is devoured by a Monster • ib. 

Chap. XVI. — Gorbonian, a most just King of the Britons • 56 

Chap. XVII. — Arthgallo is deposed by the Britons, and is suc- 
ceeded by Elidure, who restores him again to his Kingdom . 57 

Chap. XVIII. — Elidure is imprisoned by Peredure, after whose 

Death he is a third Time advanced to the Throne . . 58 

Chap. XIX. — The Names of Elidure's Thirty-three Successors . 59 

Chap. XX. — Heli's Three Sons ; the first of whom, viz. Lud, 

gives Name to the City of London . . .60 



BOOK IV. 



62 
63 
64 



CftAP. I. — Julius Csesar invades Britain 

Chap. Il.-^Cassibellaun's Letter to Julius Caesar 

Chap. III. — Caesar is routed by Cassibellaun 

Chap. IV. — Nennius, the Brother of Cassibellaun, being wounded 

in Battle by Csesar, dies 
Chap. V. — Caesar's inglorious Return to Gaul 
Chap. VI. — Cassibellaun forms a Stratagem for sinking Caesar's 

Ships ..... 
Chap. VII. — Caesar a second Time vanquished by the Britons 
Chap. VIII. — Evelinus kills Hirelglas. Androgens desires Caesar's 

Assistance against Cassibellaun . • .69 



66 
ib. 

67 
ib. 



X CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Chap. IX. — Cassibellaun^ being pat to flight, and besieged by 

Csesar, desires Peace . . . .71 

Chap. X. — Androgeus's Speech to Ceesar . . .74 

Chap. XI. — ^Tenuantius is made King of Britain after Cassibellaun ib. 

Chap. XII. — Upon Goiderius refusing to pay Tribute to the Ro- 
mans, Claudius Ciesar inyades Britain . . .75 

Chap. XIII. — Leuis Hamo, a Roman, by wicked Treachery kills 

Guiderius . . . • , ib. 

Chap. XIV. — Arviragus, King of Britain, makes his Submission 
to Claudius, who with his Assistance conquers the Orkney 
Islands . . . • -.77 

Chap. XV. — Claudius giyes his Daughter Genuissa for a Wife to 

Andragns, and returns to Rome • . .78 

Chap. XVI. — Arviragus revolting from the Romans, Vespasian 

is sent into Britain .... ib. 

Chap. XVII. — Rodric, Leader of the Picts, is yanquished by 

Marius . • ... .80 

Chap. XVIII. — Marius dying, is succeeded by Coillus . 81 

Chap. XIX. — Lucius is the first British King that embraces the 

Christian Faith, together with his People « . ib. 

Chap. XX. — Faganus and Duyanus give an Account at Rome, of 

what they had done in Britain . . .83 

BOOK V. 

Chap. I. — Lucius dies without Issue, and is a Benefactor to the 

Churches • . . . . *84 

Chap. II. — Severus, a Senator, subdues Part of Britain: his War 

with Fulgenius . . . . .85 

Chap. III. — Carausius advanced to be King of Britain . 86 

Chap. IV. — AUectus kills Carausius, but is afterwards himself 

slain in flight by Asclepiodotus . . .87 

Chap. V. — Asclepiodotus obtains the Crown. Dioclesian's Mas- 
sacre of the Christians in Britain . . .89 

Chap. VI. — An Insurrection against Asclepiodotus, by Coel, 

whose Daughter Helena Constantius marries . . 90 

Chap. VII. — ^The Romans desire Constantine's Assistance against 

the Cruelty of Mazentius . . . .91 

sChap. VIII. — Constantine, having reduced Rome, obtains the 
Empire of the World. Octavius, Duke of the Wisseans, is 
put to flight by Trahem . . . .92 

Chap. IX. — Maximian is desired for a King of Britain . 93 

Chap. X. — Maximian, coming into Britain, artfully declines fight- 
ing with Coiian . . . « .95 



CX)NTENTS. XI 

PAGE 

Chap. XI. — ^The Kingdom of Britain is bestowed on Mazimian . 97 
Chap. 'XII. — Mazimian overthrows the Armoricans: his Speech 

to Conan • • • . .98 

Chap. XIII. — Redonum taken by Maximian . • 99 

Chap. XIV. — Mazimian, after the Conquest of Gaul and Germany, 

makes Triers the Seat of his Empire . • .100 

Chap. XV. — A Fight between the Aquitanians and Conan . 101 

Chap. XVI. — Guanius and Melga murder Eleven Thousand 

Virgins. Mazimian is killed at Rome . . • ib, 

BOOK VI. 

Chap. I. — Gratian, being advanced to the Throne, is killed by 
the common People. The Britons desire the Romans to 
defend them against Guanius and Melga . .104 

Chap. II. — Guethelin's Speech to the Britons, at the Romans 

returning Home ..... 105 

Chap. III. — ^The Britons are again cruelly harassed by Guanius 

and Melga ..... 107 

Chap. IV. — Guethelin desires Succours of Aldroen . . 108 

Chap. V. — Constantine, being made King of Britain, leaves Three 

Sons . . . • . .110 

Chap. VI. — Constans is by Vortegim crowned Eling of Britain . Ill 

Chap. VII. — ^Vortegim treacherously contrives to get King Con- 
stans assassinated . . . .112 

Chap. VIII. — Aurelius Ambrosius and Uther Pendragon flee from 

Vortegim, and go to Lesser Britain . . .115 

Chap. IX. — ^Vortegim makes himself King of Britain . . t^. 

Chap. X. — ^Vortegim takes the Sazons that were New-comers, to 

his Assistance ..... 116 

Chap. XI. — Hengist brings over great Numbers of Sazons into 

Britain : his crafty Petition to Vortegim . .118 

Chap. XII. — Vortegim marries Rowena, the Daughter of Hengist 120 

Chap. XIII. — The Bishops, Germanus and Lupus, restore the 
Christian Faith that had been corrupted in Britain. Octa and 
Ebissa are fbur Times routed by Vortimer . .121 

Chap. XIV. — ^Vortimer's Kindness to his Soldiers at his Death . 123 

Chap. XV. — Hengist, having wickedly murdered the Princes of 

Britain, keeps Vortegim Prisoner • • .124 

Chap: XVI. — £ldo]*s valiant Ezploit. Hengist forces Vortegim 
to yield up the strongest Fortifications in Britain, in consider- 
ation of his Release .... 126 

Chap. XVII. — Vortegim, after Consultation with Magicians, orders 

a Youth to be brought that never had a Father . .127 



XU CONTENTS. 

PAOB 

Chap. XVIII.— Vortegim inquires of Merlin's Mother concerning 

her Conception of him .... 128 

Chap. XIX. — Merlin's Speech to the King's Magician, and Advice 

about the Building of the Tower . . . 129 

BOOK VII. 

Chap. I.— Geoffrey of Monmouth's Preface to Merlin's Prophecy 131 
Chap. II. — Geoffrey's Letter to Alexander, Bishop of Lincoln ib. 

Chap. III.— The Prophecy of Merlin . • .132 

Chap. IV. — ^The Continuation of the Prophecy • .138 

BOOK VIII. 

Chap. I. — ^Vortegim asks Merlin concerning his own Death . 146 
Chap. II. — Aurelius Ambrosius, being anointed King of Britain, 

bums Vortegim besieged in a Tower . • .147 

Chap. III. — ^The Praise of Aurelius' s Valour. The Levity of the 

Scots exposed. Forces raised against Hengist • .149 

Chap. IV. — Hengist marches with his Army against Aurelius, 

into the Field of Maisbeli . . • .150 

Chap. V. — A Battie between Aurelius and Hengist . .151 

Chap. VI. — Hengist, in a Duel with Eldol, is taken by him. 

The Saxons are slain by the Britons without Mercy • 153 

Chap. VII. — Hengist is beheaded by Eldol • . 154 

Chap. VIII. — Octa, being besieged in York, surrenders himself 

to the Mercy of Aurelius .... ib. 
Chap. IX. — Aurelius, having entirely routed the Enemies, restores 
all Things in Britain, especially Ecclesiastical Affairs, to their 
ancient State • . • . . 156 

Chap. X. — ^Aurelius is advised by Merlin to remove the Giants' 

Dance from the Mountain Killaraus • • .157 

Chap. XI. — Uther Pendragon is appointed with Merlin to bring 

over the Giants' Dance . • . .158 

Chap, XII. — Gillomanius being routed by Uther, the Britons 

bring over the Giants' Dance into Britain • • 159 

Chap. XIII. — Pascentius brings in the Saxons against the Britons 161 
Chap. XIV. — Pascentius, assisted by the King of Ireland, again 
invades Britain. Aurelius dies by the Treachery of Eopa, 
a Saxon • • . . • , ib. 

Chap. XV. — A Comet presignifies the Reign of Uther . 163 

Chap. XVI. — Pascentius and Gillomanius are killed in Battie . 164 
Chap. XVII. — Uther Pendragon is made King of Britain . 165 

Chap. XVIII. — Octa and Eosa are taken in Battie • . ib. 



CONTENTS. XIU 

FAGS 

Chap. XIX.— Uther, falling in Love with Igterna, enjoys her by 

the Assistance of Merlin's Magical Operations . .167 

Chap. XX. — Gorlois being killed, Uther marries Igema . 170 

Chap. XXI. — Octa and Eosa renew the War. Lot, a Consul, 

marries the King's Daughter . . .172 

Chap. XXII.— Uther, being ill, is carried in a Horse-litter against 

the Enemy • « • . . • 173 

Chap. XXIII. — Octa and Eosa, with a great Number of their 

Men, are killed . . ... . ib. 

Chap. XXIV. — Uther, upon drinking Spring Water that was trea- 
cherously poisoned by the Saxons, dies . •175 

BOOK IX. 

Chap. I. — Arthur succeeds Uther his Father in the Kingdom of 

Britain, and besieges Colgrin . • .176 

Chap. II. — Hoel sends Fifteen Thousand Men to Arthur's Assist- 
ance . • . • • • 178 

Chap. III. — ^Arthur makes the Saxons his Tributaries . 179 

Chap. IV. — Dubricius's Speech against the treacherous Saxons. 
Arthur with his own Hand kills Four Hundred and Seventy 
Saxons in one Battle. Colgrin and Baldulph are killed in 
the same ..... 180 

Chap. V. — ^The Saxons, after their Leader Cheldric was killed, are 

all compelled by Cador to surrender • . . 182 

Chap. VI. — Arthur grants a Pardon to the Scots and Picts, be- 
sieged at the Lake Lumond . • . .183 

Chap. VII. — Arthur relates the wonderful Nature of some Ponds 184 

Chap. VIII. — Arthur restores York to its ancient Beauty, especi- 
ally as to its Churches . ... 185 

Chap. IX. — Arthur honours Augusel with the Sceptre of the 
Scots ; Urian with that of Mureif ; and Lot with the Consul- 
ship of Londonesia . . . .186 

Chap. X. — Arthur adds to his Government Ireland, Iceland, 

Gothland, and the Orkneys . . . 187 

Chap. XI. — Arthur subdues Norway, Dacia, Aquitaine, and Gaul 187 

Chap. XII. — Arthur summons a great many Kings, Princes, Arch- 
bishops, &c. to a solemn Assembly at the City of Legions . 191 

Chap. XIII. — A Description of the Royal Pomp at the Coronation 

of Arthur ..... 193 

Chap. XIV. — ^After a Variety of Sports at the Coronation, Arthur 

amply rewards his Servants . . • .195 

Chap. XV. — A Letter from Lucius Tiberius, General of the 
Romans, to Arthur being read, they consult about an Answer 
to it . • . • . , ib. 



XIV CONTENTS. 

PAGB 

Chap. XVI. — Arthur, holding a Council with the Kingt» desires 

erery one of them to deliver their Opinions . .198 

Chap. XVII. — The Opinion of Hoel, King of Armorica, concern- 
ing a War with the Romans . • . .199 

Chap. XVIIL— The Opinion of Angosel . . .200 

Cbap. XIX. — ^They nnanimonsly agree upon a War with the 

Romans ...... 201 

Chap. XX. — Arthur prepares for a War, and refuses to pay Tribute 

to the Romans .... ib. 

BOOK X. 

Chap. I. — Lncios Tiberias calls together the Eastern Kings against 

the Britons . . . . .203 

Chap. II. — Arthur commits to his Nephew Modred the Govem- 

roent of Briton. His Dream at Hamo's Port . 204 

Chap. III. — Arthur kills a Spanish Giant who had stolen away 

Helena, the Niece of Hoel .... 205 
Chap. IV. — Arthur's Ambassadors to Lucius Tiberius deliver 

Petreius Cotta, whom they took Prisoner, to Arthur . 208 

Chap. V. — ^The Romans attack the Britons with a very great 

Force, but are put to flight by them . . .212 

Chap. VI.— Lucius Tiberius goes to Lengrise. Arthur, designing 

to vanquish him, by a Stratagem possesses himself of the 

Valley of Suesia . . . . .214 

Chap. VII. — Arthur's Exhortation to his Soldiers . . 215 

Chap. VIII. — Lucius Tiberius, discovering Arthur's Design, in a 

Speech animates his Followers to fight . . .216 

Chap. IX. — A Battle between Arthur and Lucius Tiberius . 218 

Chap. X. — Hoel and Walgan signalize their Valour in the Fight 220 
Chap. XI. — Lucius Tiberius being killed, the Britons obtain the 

Victory . . . . . .221 

Chap. XII.— Part of the Romans flee ; the Rest, of their own 

Accord, surrender themselves for Slaves . . 223 

Chap. XIII. — The Bodies of the Slain are decently buried, each 

in their respective Countries . . . 224 

BOOK XI. 

Chap. I. — Modred makes a great Slaughter of Arthur's Men, but 

is l>eaten, and flees to Winchester . . . . 226 

Chap. II. — Modred, after being twice besieged and routed, is 
killed. Arthur, being wounded, gives up the Kingdom to 
Constantino ..... 228 

Chap. III. — Constantine meets with Disturbances from the Saxons 

and Modred's Sons .... 230 



CONTENTS. XV 

PAGB 

Chap. IV. — Constantine, after having murdered the Sons of Mo- 

dred, is himself killed by Conan • . . 230 

Chap. V. — Aurelius Conan reigns after Constantine . .231 

Chap. VI. — ^Wortiporius, being declared King, conquers the 

Saxons • . • • . ib. 

Chap. VII. — Malgo, King of Britain, and a most gracefdl Person, 

addicts himself to Sodomy .... 232 

Chap. VIII.— Britain, in the Flame of a Civil War under King 

Careticus, is miserably wasted by the Saxons and Africans , ib. 

Chap. IX. — ^The Author upbraids the Britons . . 233 

Chap. X. — Loegria is again inhabited by the Saxons. The Bri- 
tons, with their Bishops, retire into Cornwall and Wales . 234 

Chap. XI. — ^The Britons lose their Kingdom . . 235 

Chap. XII. — ^Augustine, being sent by Pope Gregory into Britain, 

preaches the Gospel to the Angles . . . ib. 

Chap. XIII. — Edelfrid kills a great Number of the British Monks, 

but is at last routed by the Britons . . . 236 

BOOK XII. 

Chap. I. — Caduan acquires by Treaty all Britain on this Side of 

the Humber, and Edelfrid the rest . • . 238 

Chap. II. — Cadwallo breaks the Covenant he had made with 

Edwin ...... 239 

Chap. III. — A Quarrel between Cadwallo and Edwin . . 241 

Chap. IV. — Cadwallo is vanquished by Edwin and driven out 

of the Kingdom . . . . . ib. 

Chap. V. — The Speech of Salomon, King of Armorica, to Cad- 
wallo ...... 243 

Chap. VI. — Cadwallo's Answer to Salomon . . 244 

Chap. VII. — Brian kills Edwin's Magician . . 246 

Chap. VIII. — Cadwallo takes Peanda, and routs his Army . 247 

Chap. IX. — Cadwallo kills Osric and Adan in Fight . . 248 

Chap. X. — Oswald routs Peanda in Fight, but is killed by Cad- 
wallo coming in upon him . . . , ib. 
Chap. XI. — Oswald submits to Cadwallo. Peanda desires Leave 

of Cadwallo to make War against him . . - . 249 

Chap. XII. — Cadwallo is advised to suffer Peanda to make an In- 
surrection against Oswin .... 250 

Chap. XIII. — Peanda is killed by Oswin. Cadwallo dies . 251 

Chap. XIV. — Cadwallader succeeds Cadwallo . . 252 

Chap. XV. — ^The Britons are compelled, by Pestilence and 

Famine, to leave Britain. Cadwallader's Lamentation . ib. 

Chap. XVI. — Cadwallader with his People goes to Alan. The 

Saxons seize all Britain .... 253 



XVI CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Chap. XVII. — CAdwallader is by the Voice of an Angel deterred 

frpm returning to Britain • • . .254 

Chap. XVIII. — Cadwallader goei to Rome and dies . . 255 

Chap. XIX. — ^The two Britons, lyor and Ini, in vain attack the 
Nation of the Angles. Athelstan the first King, of the 
Angles ...... 256 

Chap. XX. — Geoffrey of Monmouth's Conclusion . .257 

Index ...... 259 



INTRODUCTION. 



The British History, of which we now oflfer 
to the public a revised translation, has been 
to our early dramatic poets what the ill-fated 
house of (Edipus was to the tragic writers of 
ancient Greece. Those who have felt pleasure 
in the Comus of Milton, Drayton's Polyolbion, 
and still more in the King Lear of Shakespere, 
will not be sorry to see the source whence these 
great poets drew their materials made . more 
accessible to the English reader. It is neces- 
sary to state this in the outset. We do not insert 
the British History in our series of Early 
English Records as a work containing an au- 
thentic narrative, nor do we wish to compare 
Geoflfrey of Monmouth with Bede in point of 
veracity. But the fact of his having supplied 
our early poets so large a portion of their sub- 
jects, and the universal belief which at one time 
prevailed as to the authenticity of his history, 
make it in every respect a question whether he 



XVni INTRODUCTION. 

ought not to be preserved, whilst the ample allu- 
sions, and, if we may use the expression, the 
groundwork, on which .many of the facts are 
based, enable us indubitably to introduce him 
into our series as an addition (though secondary 
in value) to materials which our readers will 
find not to be inexhaustible, respecting our early 
history. The work was translated into English 
by Thompson, and published in 8vo, in the year 
1718.* He followed, for the most part, Comme- 
line's edition of the original, Heidelberg, fol. 
1587. 

Prefixed to the work is a long introduction in 
which the translator endeavours to defend his 
author from the charge of having inserted the 
narrative which he professes to have translated 
from the Old British Tongue. It is now, of 
course, universally admitted that the whole se- 
ries of British Kings, from Brutus downwards, 
is a tissue of fables; but it may readily be 
conceded that Geoffrey did not view the matter 
in this light ; nor shall we be disposed in the 



* The British History, translated into English from the 
Latin of Jeffrey of Monmouth. With a large Preface con- 
cerning the Authority of the History. By Aaron Thompson, 
late of Queen's College, Oxon, Lond. 8vo. 1718. 



INTRODUCTION. xix 

present day to deny the conclusion at which the 
translator arrives, that the work contains a large 
quantity of matter which is fabulous, but that 
Geoffrey has done no more than fulfil the task 
which he took upon himself of translating it 
from the original language- The following are 
a few of Thompson's arguments, which we give 
by way of specimen : — 

1 . That, upon its first appearance in the 
world, the book met with an universal appro- 
bation, and that too from those who had better 
opportunities of examining the truth of it, as 
there were then more monuments extant, and 
the traditions were more fresh and uncorrupted, 
concerning the ancient British affairs, than any 
critics of the present age can pretend to. 

2. That, except William of Newburgh, about 
the end of the reign of Richard I., it met with 
no opponents even down to the seventeenth 
century, but was, on the contrary, quoted by all, 
in particular by Edward I. in a controversy 
before Boniface the Eighth. 

3. That we see in this history the traces of 
venerable antiquity. 

4. That the story of Brute, and the descent 
of the Britons from the Trojans, was universally 
allowed by Giraldus Cambrensis and others, 



XX INTRODUCTION. 

and was opposed for the first time by John of 
Wethamstede,* who lived in the 15th century : 
that Polydore Virgil's contempt for it proceeded 
from his wish to preserve unimpaired the glory 
of the Romans, and Buchanan's observations 
betray his ignorance of the story. 

5. That Leland, who lived under Henry the 
Eighth, Humphrey Lhwyd, Sir John Price, Dr. 
Caius, Dr. Powel, and others, have supported 
the story of Brute, etc. 

It will not be necessary to follow them 
further. Let us then consider the account which 
Geoffrey himself gives of the work which he 
oflfered to his contemporaries. This account, in 
the words of the former translator, and with his 
additional remarks upon it, is as follows : — 

" The story, as collecetd from himself, Leland, 
Bale, and Pitts, is, that Walter Mapes, alias 
Calenius, archdeacon of Oxford, who flourished 
in the reign of Henry L, and of whom Henry 
of Huntingdon and other historians as well as 
Geoffrey himself make honourable mention, being 
a man very curious in the study of antiquity, 
and a diligent searcher into ancient libraries, 
and especially after the works of ancient authors, 

* Nicolson's Eng. Hist. Lit. 2nd ed. P. 1, c. 5. 



INTRODUCTION. XXI 

happened while he was in Armorica to light 
upon a History of Britain, written in the British 
tongue, and carrying marks of great antiquity. 
And being overjoyed at it, as if he had found 
a vast treasure, he in a short time after came 
over to England ; where inquiring for a proper 
person to translate this curious but hitherto 
unknown book, he very opportunely met with 
Geoffrey of Monmouth, a man profoundly versed 
in the history and antiquities of Britain, excel- 
lently skilled in the British tongue, and withal 
(considering the time) an elegant writer both in 
verse and prose ; and so recommended this task 
to him. Accordingly, Geoffrey, being incredibly 
delighted with this ancient book, undertook the 
translating of it into Latin, which he performed 
with great diligence, approving himself, according 
to Matthew Paris, a faithful translator. At first 
he divided it into four books, written in a plain 
simple style, and dedicated it to Robert, earl of 
Gloucester, a copy whereof is said* to be at 
Bennet College, in Cambridge, which was never 
yet published; but afterwards he made some 
alterations, and divided it into eight books, to 
which he added the Book of Merlin's Prophecies, 

* Pitts, 1. c. Voss, I. c. 



XXll INTRODUCTION. 

which he had also translated from British verse 
into Latin prose, prefixing to it a Preface, and a 
Letter to Alexander, Bishop of Lincoln. A great 
many fabulous and trifling stories were inserted 
in the History : but that was not his fault ; his 
business as a translator was to deliver them 
faithfully such as they were, and leave them to 
the judgment of the learned to be discussed. 

" To prove the truth of this relation, and to 
answer at once all objections against Geoffrey's 
integrity, one needs no other argument than an 
assurance that the original manuscript which 
Geoflfrey translated, of whose antiquity the 
curious are able to judge in a great measure 
by the character, or any ancient and authentic 
copy of it, is yet extant. And, indeed. Arch- 
bishop Usher* mentions an old Welsh Chronicle 
in the Cottonian Library, that formerly was in 
the possession of that learned antiquary, Humfrey 
Lhywd, which he says is thought to be that 
which Geoffrey translated. But if that be the 
original manuscript, it must be acknowledged 
that Geoflfrey was not merely a translator, but 
made some additions of his own ; since, as that 
most learned prelate informs us, the account 

* Brit. Eccl. Prim. Cap. 5. 



INTRODUCTION. XXUI 

that we have in this History of the British 
Flamens, and Archflamens, is nowhere to be 
found in it. But besides this, there are several 
copies of it in the Welsh tongue, mentioned 
by the late ingenious and learned Mr. Lhywd 
in his * ArchaBologia Britannica.' And I myself 
have met with a manuscript History of our British 
Affairs, written above a hundred years ago by 
Mr. John Lewis, and shortly to be published, 
wherein the author says, that he had the original 
of the British History in parchment written in 
the British tongue before Geoffrey's time, as he 
concludes from this circumstance, that in his book 
Geoffrey's Preface was wanting, and the Preface to 
his book was the second chapter of that published 
by Geoffrey. My ignorance of the Welsh tongue 
renders me unqualified for making any search 
into these matters ; and though the search should 
be attended with never so much satisfaction, to 
those who are able to judge of the antiquity 
of manuscripts, yet to the generality of readers 
other arguments would perhaps be more con- 
vincing." 

The above extract informs the English Reader 
of the date at which Geoffrey lived, and every 
other particular necessary to be known respecting 
the history of the work. 



XXIV INTRODUCTION. 

In the present edition the translation of 
Thompson has been followed, revised and cor- 
rected wherever the phraseology appeared to be 
unsuited to the more accurate ears of the present 
day. A short Chronology of the History has been 
added, which may not be thought out of place by 
the lovers of Shakspere, Milton, and our early 
poets. 

J. A. GILES. 

Windlesham Hall^ November ^ 1842. 



XXV 



GENEALOGICAL SUMMARY. 



N.B. — It i« hardly necessary to direct the reader's attention to the 
anachronisms in this table. For instance, between the reigns of Brutus 
and Leily is an interval of 156 years ; and yet Geoffrey makes the capture 
of the Ark contemporaneous with the reign of Brutus, and the building 
of Solomon's temple with that of Leil. Now the interral between these 
two events cannot by any possibility be extended beyond eighty years. 
It is, moreover, impossible to bring the chronology of the British kings 
themselves into harmony with the dates before Christ, as there is no 
mention made of the exact interval between the taking of Troy and 
Brutus*s landing in Britain. 

Geoffrey inscribes his work to Robert, Earl of Gloacester, son of 
Henry the Second. — (I. 1.) 

Latinus 

I 



r ) 

== iBneas ^ Lavinla ( — —) 

Ascanius 

I 
Sylvius == (Niece of Lavinia) 

Pandnuias 

Ignoge = I. Brutus at the age of 15 kills his father. B. I. 3. Reigns 24 years. 

At this time £U governed Israel, and the ark was taken by the Phi- 
listines, and the sons of Hector reigned in Troy, and Sylvius iEneas, 
uncle of Brutus, in Italy. B. I. 17. 



r 



i ^ 

Corinseus Albanact Kamber 

I 



2. Locrin==3. Guendoloena r Locrin by Estiildis has Sabre, who being drowned in the 
r. 10 yrs. 15 yrs. 1 Severn, gives name to that river. 



4. Maddan At this time Samuel governed Israel, and Homer flourished. 

40 yrs. 

I 

r \ 

5. Menpricius Malim Saiil reigns in Jud«a, Eurystheus in Lacedaemon. 
20 yrs. 

6. Ebraucus King David — Sylvius Latinus— Gad — Nathan and Asaph. 
40 yrs. 

(or 60, quimre, B. II. 7, 8.) 

7. Brutus II., and 19 other sons and *30 daughters. 
12 yrs. 

I 

8. Leil Solomon— Queen of Sheba— Sylvius Epitus. 
25vrs. 

9. Hudibras Capys—Haggai— Amos—Joel— Azariah. 
39 yrs. 

10. Bladud Elijah. 
20 yrs. 

I 

11. Leir 

60 yrs. 



XXVI 



GENEALOGICAL SUMMARY. 



I 



f j ^ 

12. GonorilU = Maglaunus, D. Regan = Henuinus, D. Ck)rdeilla= Aganippus, K . 



6yn. 



Msrgan 



lag] 
of, 



of Albania 



of Cornwall 



of Gaul. 



13. Cunedag^ua 
SSyra. 

14. RivaUo 

I 



Isaiah— Hosea— Rome built by 
Romulus and Remus. 



r 

15. Gulvustius 

16. Sisillius 
18. Kinmarcns 



^7' 

17. J 



ago 



>rbogudo == 



19. Gorbogudo == Widen 



( \ 

Ferrex Porrex 

Long civil wars. 

At length arose Dunwallo Molmutius, son of Cloten, King of Cornwall. 

20. Dtmwallo Molmutius == Conwenna 
40yr8. 



r 

21. Belinus 

5 yrs. in concert with Brennius 

I 

22. Gurgiunt Brabtruc 

23. Guithelin === Martia 

24. Sisillius 
I 



Brennius 



26. Kimarus 



— ^ 

26. Danius = Tangustela 

27. Morvidus 
I 



r — 

28. Gorbonian 



32. Peredure 



i I I 

29. Arthgallo 30. Elidure 31. Vigenius 

Arthgallo was deposed in favour of Elidure, who, after a reign of 
5 years, restored his brother, who reigned 10 years afterwards. 
Elidure then reigned a second time, but was deposed by Vi- 
genius and Peredure: after whose deaths he reigned a third 
time. 



33. Gorbonian's son 



( ^ 

34. Margan 35. Enniaunus 



86^ Idwallo 



37. Runuo 



38. Geruntius 

I 

39. Catellus 



40. CoUlus 41. Porrex 42. Cherin 
I 



f 
43. Fulgenitts 



I 
44. Eldadus 



45. Andragius 

46. Urianus 



47. Eliud 48. Cledaucus 49. Cletonus 50. Gurgintius 51. Merianus 
52. Bleduno 53. Cap 54. Oenus 55. SisUlius 

r 



56. Blegabred 



57. Arthmail 



GENEALOGICAL SUMMARY. XXVU 

58. Eldol 59. Redion 60. Rederchius 61. Samuilpeniuel 62 Pir 

63. Capoir 

64. CligueiUus 

I 
66. HeU 

! 

( i ^ 

66. Lud 67. Cassibellaun Nenniiu 
Csesar'a invaaion took place during Caaaibellaua'a reign. 

68. Tenuantiua 

69. Kymbelinua JeauaChriat ia born in the reign 

of Kymbelinua or Cymbeline. 

Claudiua 

r ^ I 

70. Guideriua 71. Arviragua = Genuiaaa 

I 

72. Marina 

73. Coillua 

I 
74 Luciua LuciuaembraceaChriatian- 
ity : he diea A. D. 156. 

75. Sevema 

I 

76. Baaaianna or Caracalla 



71. Carauaiua 78. Allectua 79. Aaclepiodotua 80. Coel 

I 



Helena ==81. C!onatantiua 
r. 11 yra. 



82. Conatantine, Emperor of Rome. 
83. Octaviua aaaomea the crown of Britain. 
(Daughter) = 84. Maximian. 
At thia time the Picta and Scota haraaa the Britona, who apply to the Romans. 

85. Conatantine, Prince of Armorica, cornea to aaaiat the Britona. 

I ^ 

/ \ ^ 

86. C!onatana 87. Aureliua Ambrosiua 88. Uther Pendragon s= Igema 

♦ ' • .- *■•"""■ 
89. Vortegim uaurpa the throne and calla in the Saxona 



\ \ 

90. Arthur Anne 

91. Conatantine 92. Aureliua Conan 93. Wortiporiua 94. Malgo 95. Careticus 

96. Caduan 



' ^ 

Peanda ( ) == 97. Cadwallo 

98. Cadwallader 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH'S 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



BOOK I. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO ROBERT EARL OF GLOUCESTER. 

Whilst occupied on many and various studies, I hap- Robert Eari 
pened to light upon the History of the Kings of Britain, and 2L£? wn of 
wondered that in the account which Gildas and Bede, in *™^ 
their elegant treatises, had given of them, I found nothing 
said of those kings who lived here before the Incarnation 
of Christ, nor of Arthur, and many others who succeeded 
after the Incarnation ; though their actions both deserved 
immortal fame, and were also celebrated by many people 
in a pleasant manner and by heart, as if they had been 
written. Whilst I was intent upon these and such like 
thoughts, Walter, archdeacon of Oxford, a man of great 
eloquence, and learned in foreign histories, offered me a 
very ancient book in the British tongue, which, in a con- 
tinued regular story and elegant style, related the actions 
of them all, from Brutus the first king of the Britains, 
down to CadwaUader the son of Cadwallo. A t his request, 
therefore, though I had not made fine language my 
study, by collecting florid expressions from other authors, 
yet contented with my own homely style, I undertook 
the translation of that book into Latin. For if I had 



2 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

swelled the pages with rhetorical flourishes, I must have 
tired my readers, by employing their attention more 
upon my words than upon the history. To you, therefore, 
Robert Earl of Gloucester, this work humbly sues for 
the favour of being so corrected by your advice, that it 
may not be thought to be the poor oflfepring of Geofirey 
of Monmouth, but when polished by your refined wit and 
judgment, the production of him who had Henry the 
glorious king of England for his father, and whom we see 
an accomplished scholar and philosopher, as well as a 
brave soldier and expert commander ; so that Britain 
with joy acknowledges, that in you she possesses another 
Henry. 

CHAPTER II. 

THE FIRST INHABITANTS OF BRITAIN. 

Description Britain, the best of islands, is situated in the Western 
of Britain. Q^^^^ between France and Ireland, being eight hundred 

miles long, and two hundred broad. It produces every 
thing that is useful to man, with a plenty that never 
fails. It abounds with all kinds of metals, and has plains 
of large extent, and hills fit for the finest tillage, the 
richness of whose soil afibrds variety of fruits in their 
proper seasons. It has also forests well stored with all 
kinds of wild beasts ; in its lawns cattle find good change 
of pasture, and bees variety of flowers for honey. Under 
its lofty mountains lie green meadows pleasantly situated, 
in which the gentle murmurs of crystal springs gliding 
along clear channels, give those that pass an agreeable 
invitation to lie down on their banks and slumber. It 
is likewise well watered with lakes and rivers abounding 
with fish ; and besides the narrow sea which is on the 
Southern coast towards France, there are three noble 
rivers, stretching out like three arms, namely, the 
Thames, the Severn, and the Humber ; by which foreign 
commodities from all countries are brought into it. It 



BRITISH HISTORY. 3 

was formerly adorned with eight and twenty cities, of 
which some are in ruins and desolate, others are still 
standing, beautified with lofty church-towers, wherein 
religious worship is performed according to the Christian 
institution. It is lastly inhabited by five different 
nations, the Britains, Romans, Saxons, Picts and Scots ; 
whereof the Britains before the rest did formerly possess 
the whole island from sea to sea, till divine vengeance 
punishing them for their pride, made them give way to 
the Picts and Saxons. But in what manner, and from 
whence, they first arrived here, remains now to be 
related in what follows. 



CHAPTER III. 

BRUTUS, BEING BANISHED AFTER THE KILLING OF HIS PARENTS, 

GOES INTO GREECE. 

After the Trojan war, iEneas, flying with Ascanius 
from the destruction of their city, sailed to Italy. There 
he was honourably received by King Latinus, which 
raised against him the envy of Tumus^ king of the 
Rutuli, who thereupon made war against him. Upon 
their engaging in battle, ^neas got the victory, and 
having killed Tumus, obtained the kingdom of Italy, and 
with it Lavinia the daughter of Latinus. After his 
death, Ascanius, succeeding in the kingdom, built Alba NowAibano. 
upon the Tiber, and begat a son named Sylvius, who, in 
pursuit of a private amour, took to wife a niece of 
Lavinia. The damsel soon after conceived, and the father 
Ascanius, coming to the knowledge of it, commanded his 
magicians to consult of what sex the child should be. 
When they had satisfied themselves in the matter, they 
told him she would give birth to a boy, who would kill 
his father and mother, and after travelling over many 
countries in banishment, would at last arrive at the 
highest pitch of glory. Nor were they mistaken in 

b2 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



their prediction ; for at the proper time the woman 
brought forth a son, and died of his birth ; but the child 
was delivered to a nurse and called Brutus. 

At length, after fifteen years were expired, the youth 
accompanied his father in hunting, and killed him un- 
designedly by the shot of an arrow. For, as the servants 
were driving up the deer towards them, Brutus, in shoot- 
ing at them, smote his father under the breast. Upon 
his death, he was expelled from Italy, his kinsmen being 
enraged at him for so heinous a deed. Thus banished 
he went into Greece, where he found the posterity of 
Helenus, son of Priamus, kept in slavery by Pandrasus, 
king of the Greeks. For, after the destruction of Troy, 
Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles, had brought hither in chains 
Helenus and many others ; and to revenge on them the 
death of his father, had given command that they shpuld 
be held in captivity. Brutus, finding they were by 
descent his old countrymen, took up his abode among 
them, and began to distinguish himself by his conduct 
and bravery in war, so as to gain the affection of kings 
and commanders, and above all the young men of the 
country. For he was esteemed a person of great capacity 
both in council and war, and signalized his generosity to 
his soldiers, by bestowing among them all the money and 
spoil he got. His fame, therefore, spreading over all 
countries, the Trojans from all parts began to flock to him, 
desiring under his command to be freed from subjection 
to the Greeks; which they assured him might easily be 
done, considering how much their number was now in- 
creased in the country, being seven thousand strong, 
besides women and children. There was likewise then 
in Greece a noble youth named Assaracus, a favourer of 
their cause. For he was descended on his mother'^s side 
from the Trojans, and placed great confidence in them, 
that he might be able by their assistance to oppose the 
designs of the Greeks. For his brother had a quarrel 
with him for attempting to deprive him of three castles 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



which his father had given him at his death, on account 
of his being only the son of a concubine ; but as the 
brother was a Greek, both by his father's and mother's 
side, he had prevailed with the king and the rest of the 
Greeks to espouse his cause. Brutus, having taken a 
view of the number of his men, and seen how Assaracus's 
castles lay open to him, complied with their request. 



CHAPTER IV. 

BRUTUS'S LETTER TO PANDRASUS. 

Being, therefore, chosen their commander, he assem- 
bled the Trojans from all parts, and fortified the towns 
belonging to Assaracus. But he himself, with Assaracus 
and the whole body of men and women that adhered to 
him, retired to the woods and hills, and then sent a letter 
to the king in these words : — 

" Brutus, general of the remainder of the Trojans, to 
Pandrasus, king of the Greeks, sends greeting. As it 
was beneath the dignity of a nation descended from the 
illustrious race of Dardanus, to be treated in your king- 
dom otherwise than the nobility of their birth required, 
they have betaken themselves to the protection of the 
woods. For they have preferred living after the manner 
of wild beasts, upon flesh and herbs, with the enjoyment 
of liberty, to continuing longer in the greatest luxury 
under the yoke of slavery. If this gives your Majesty 
any offence, impute it not to them, but pardon it ; since 
it is the common sentiment of every captive, to be desi- 
rous of regaining his former dignity. Let pity therefore 
move you to bestow on them freely their lost liberty, and 
permit them to inhabit the thickets of the woods, to 
which they have retired to avoid slavery. But if you 
deny them this favour, then by your permission and 
assistance let them depart into some foreign country." 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER V. 

BRUTUS FALLING UPON THE FORCES OF PANDRASU8 BY SUR- 
PRISE, ROUTS THEM, AND TAKES ANTIGONUS, THE BROTHER 
OF PANDRASUS, WITH ANACLETUS, PRISONER. 

Pandrasus, perceiving the purport of the letter, was 
beyond measure surprised at the boldness of such a mes- 
sage from those whom he had kept in slavery; and 
having called a council of his nobles, he determined to 
raise an army in order to pursue them. But while he 
was upon his march to the deserts, where he thought 
they were, and to the town of Sparatinum, Brutus made 
a sally with three thousand men, and fell upon him un- 
awares. For having intelligence of his coming, he had 
got into the town the night before, with a design to 
break forth upon them unexpectedly, while unarmed and 
marching without order. The sally being made, the 
Trojans briskly attack them, and endeavour to make a 
great slaughter. The Greeks, astonished, immediately 
give way on all sides, and, with the king at their head. 
The Ache- hastcu to pass the river Akalon, which runs near the 

loua, or, per- , , 

haps, the placc ; but lu passiug are in great danger from the 
rapidity of the stream. Brutus galls them in their 
flight, and kills some of them in the stream, and some 
upon the banks; and running to and fro, rejoices 
to see them in both places exposed to ruin. But 
Antigonus, the brother of Pandrasus, grieved at this 
sight, rallied his scattered troops, and made a quick 
return upon the furious Trojans ; for he rather chose to 
die making a brave resistance, than to be drowned in a 
muddy pool in a shameful flight. Thus attended with a 
close body of men, he encouraged them to stand their 
ground, and employed his whole force against the enemy 
with great vigour, but to little or no purpose ; for the 
Trojans had arms, but the others none ; and from this 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



advantage they were more eager in the pursuit, and 
made a miserable slaughter ; nor did they give over the 
assault till they had made near a total destruction, and 
taken Antigonus, and Anacletus his companion, prisoners. 

CHAPTER VI. 

THE TOWN OP SPARATINUM BESIEGED BY PANDRASUS. 

Brutus, after the victory, reinforced the town with 
six hundred men, and then retired to the woods, where 
the Trojan people were expecting his protection. In 
the mean time Pandrasus, grieving at his own flight 
and his brother's captivity, endeavoured that night to 
reassemble his broken forces, and the next morning went 
with a body of his people which he had got together, to 
besiege the town, into which he supposed Brutus had 
put himself with Antigonus and the rest of the prisoners 
that he had taken. As soon as he was arrived at the 
walls, and had viewed the situation of the castle, he 
divided his army into several bodies, and placed them 
round it in difierent stations. One party was charged 
not to suffer any of the besieged to go out ; another to 
turn the courses of the rivers ; and a third to beat down 
the walls with battering rams and other engines. In 
obedience to those commands, they laboured with their 
utmost force to distress the besieged ; and night coining 
on, made choice of their bravest men to defend their 
camp and tents from the incursions of the enemy, while 
the rest, who were fatigued with labour, refreshed them- 
selves with sleep. 

CHAPTER VII. 

THE BESIEGED ASK ASSISTANCE OF BRUTUS. 

But the besieged, standing on the top of the walls, 
were no less vigorous to repel the force of the enemies' 



8 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

engines, and assault them with their own^ and east forth 
darts and firebrands with an unanimous resolution to 
make a valiant defence. And when a breach was made 
through the wall, they compelled the enemy to retire, by 
throwing upon them fire and scalding water. But being 
distressed through scarcity of provision and daily labour, 
they sent an urgent message to Brutus, to hasten to 
their assistance, for they were afraid they might be so 
weakened as to be obliged to quit the town. Brutus, 
though desirous of relieving them, was under great per- 
plexity, as he had not men enough to stand a pitched 
battle, and therefore made use of a stratagem, by which 
he proposed to enter the enemies' camp by night, and 
having deceived their watch to kill them in their sleep. 
But because he knew this was impracticable without the 
concurrence and assistance of some Greeks, he called to 
him Anacletus, the companion of Antigonus, and with a 
drawn sword in his hand, spake to him after this man- 
ner : — 

" Noble youth ! your own and Antigonus'^s life is now 
at an end, unless you will faithfully perform what I com- 
mand you. This night I design to invade the camp of 
the Greeks, and fall upon them unawares, but am afraid 
of being hindered in the attempt if the watch should 
discover the stratagem. Since it will be necessary, 
therefore, to have them killed first, I desire to make use 
of you to deceive them, that I may have the easier access 
to the rest. Do you therefore manage this affair cun- 
ningly. At the second hour of the night go to the 
watch, and with fair speeches tell them that you have 
brought away Antigonus from prison, and that he is 
come to the bottom of the woods, where he lies hid 
among the shrubs, and cannot get any farther, by reason 
of the fetters with which you shall pretend that he is 
bound. Then you shall conduct them, as if it were to 
deliver him, to the end of the wood, where I will attend 
with a band of men ready to kill them." 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

ANACLETUS, IN FEAR OF DEATH, BETRAYS THE ARMY 

OF THE GREEKS. 

Anacletus, seeing the sword threatening him with 
immediate death while these words were being pro- 
nomieed, was so terrified as to promise upon oath, that 
on condition he and Antigonus should have longer life 
granted them, he would execute his command. Ac- 
cordingly, the agreement being confirmed, at the second 
hour of the night he directs his way towards the Grecian 
camp, aird when he was come near to it, the watch, who 
were then narrowly examining aU the places where any 
one could hide, ran out from all parts to meet him, and 
demanded the occasion of his coming, and whether it 
was not to betray the army. He, with a show of great 
joy, made the following answer : — " I come not to betray 
my country, but having made my escape from the prison 
of the Trojans, I fly hither to desire you would go with 
me to Antigonus, whom I have delivered from Brutus's 
chains. For being not able to come with me for the 
weight of his fetters, I have a little while ago caused 
him to lie hid among the shrubs at the end of the wood, 
till I could meet with some one whom I might conduct 
to his assistance.*" While they were in suspense about 
the truth of this story, there came one who knew him, 
and after he had saluted him, told them who he was ; so 
that now, without any hesitation, they quickly called 
their absent companions^ and followed him to the wood 
where he had told them Antigonus lay hid. But at 
length as they were going among the shrubs, Brutus 
with his armed bands springs forth^ and falls upon them 
while under the greatest astonishment with a most cruel 
slaughter. From thence he marches directly to the 



10 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

siege, and divides his men into three bands, assigning to 
each of them a different part of the camp, and telh'ng 
them to advance discreetly, and without noise; and 
when entered, not to kill any body till he with his 
company should be possessed of the king^s tent, and 
should cause the trumpet to sound for a signal. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE TAKING OF PANDRASUS. 

When he had given them these instructions, they forth- 
with softly entered the camp in silence, and taking their 
appointed stations, awaited the promised signal, which 
Brutus delayed not to give as soon as he had got before 
the tent of Pandrasus, to assault which was the thing 
he most desired. At hearing the signal, they forthwith 
draw their swords, enter in among the men in their 
sleep, make quick destruction of them, and allowing no 
quarter, in this manner traverse the whole camp. The 
rest, awaked at the groans of the dying, and seeing their 
assailants, were like sheep seized with a sudden fear; 
for they despaired of life, since they had neither time to 
take arms, nor to escape by flight. They run up and 
down without arms among the armed, whithersoever the 
fury of the assault hurries them, but are on all sides cut 
down by the enemy rushing in. Some that might have 
escaped, were in the eagerness of flight dashed against 
rocks, trees, or shrubs, and increased the misery of their 
death. Others, that had only a shield, or some such 
covering for their defence, in venturing upon the same 
rocks to avoid death, fell down in the hurry and dark- 
ness of the night, and broke either legs or arms. Others, 
that escaped both these disasters, but did not know 
whither to fly, were drowned in the adjacent rivers; 
and scarcely one got away without some unhappy acci- 



BRITISH HISTORY. 11 

dent befalling him. Besides, the garrison in the town, 
upon notice of the coming of their fellow-soldiers, sallied 
forth, and redoubled the slaughter. 



CHAPTER X. 

A CONSULTATION ABOUT WHAT IS TO BE ASKED OF THE 

CAPTIVE KING. 

But Brutus, as was said before, having possessed 
himself of the king's tent, made it his business to keep 
him a safe prisoner ; for he knew he could more easily 
attain his ends by preserving his life than by killing 
him: but the party that was with him allowing no 
quarter, made an utter destruction in that part which 
they had gained. The night being spent in this manner, 
when the next morning discovered to their view so 
great an overthrow of the enemy, Brutus, in transports 
^f joy, gave full liberty to his men to do what they 
pleased with the plunder, and then entered the town 
with the king, to stay there till they had shared it 
among them ; which done, he again fortified the castle, 
gave orders for burying the slain, and retired with his 
forces to the woods in great joy for the victory. After 
the rejoicings of his people on this occasion, their 
renowned general summoned the oldest of them and 
asked their advice, what he had best desire of Pandrasus^ 
who, being now in their power, would readily grant 
whatever they would request of him, in order to regain 
his liberty. They, according to their different fancies, 
desired difiFerent things : some urged him to request that 
a certain part of the kingdom might be assigned them 
for their habitation ; others that he would demand leave 
to depart, and to be supplied with necessaries for their 
voyage. After they had been a long time in suspense 
what to do, one of them, named Mempricius, rose up, 
and, having made silence, spoke to them thus : — 



12 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

" What can be the occasion of your suspense, fathers, 
in a matter which I think so much concerns your safety ? 
The only thing you can request, with any prospect of a 
firm peace and security to yourselves and your posterity, 
is liberty to depart. For if you make no better terms 
with Pandrasus for his life, than only to have some part 
of the country assigned you to live among the Greeks, 
you will never enjoy a lasting peace while the brothers, 
sons, or grandsons of those whom you killed yesterday 
shall continue to be your neighbours. So long as the 
memory of their fathers' deaths shall remain, they will 
be your mortal enemies, and upon the least trifling pro- 
vocation vrfll endeavour to revenge themselves. Nor will 
you be sufiiciently numerous to withstand so great a 
multitude of people. And if you shall happen to fall out 
among yourselves, their number will daily increase, yours 
diminish. I propose, therefore, that you request of him 
his eldest daughter, Ignoge, for a wife for our general, 
and with her, gold, silver, com, and whatever else shall 
be necessary for our voyage. If we obtain this, we may 
with his leave remove to some other country." 



CHAPTER XI. 

PANDRASUS GIVES HIS DAUGHTER IGNOGE IN MARRIAGE TO 
BRUTUS, WHO, AFTER HIS DEPARTURE FROM GREECE, FALLS 
UPON A DESERT ISLAND, WHERE HE IS TOLD BY THE ORACLE 
OF DIANA WHAT PLACE HE IS TO INHABIT. 

When he had ended his speech, in words to this effect, 
the whole assembly acquiesced in his advice, and moved 
that Pandrasus might be brought in among them, and 
condemned to a most cruel death, unless he would grant 
this request. He was immediately brought in, and being 
placed in a chair above the rest, and informed of the 
tortures prepared for him, unless he would do what was 
commanded him, he made them this answer : — 



BRITISH HISTORY. 13 

'^ Since my iU fate has delivered me and my hrotlior 
Antigonus into your hands, I can do no otlicr than ji^nt 
your request, lest a refusal may cost us our livcfs which 
are now entirely in your power. In my opinion, life is 
preferable to all other considerations ; therefore, wonder 
not that I am willing to redeem it at so gn>at a price. 
But though it is against my inclination tlmt I oIm'v your 
commands, yet it seems matter of comfort to me, that I 
am to give my daughter to so noble a youth, whose <Ie- 
scent from the illustrious race of Priamus and Anchises 
is clear, both from that greatness of mind which a])i>ears 
in him, and the certain accounts we have had of it. For 
who less than he could have released from their ciiains 
the banished Trojans, when reduced under slaver}- to so 
many great princes I Who else could have encouragcil 
them to make head against the Greeks ! or with so small 
a body of men vanquished so numerous and powerful an 
army, and taken their king prisoner in the engagonicnt i 
And, therefore, since this noble youth has gained so much 
glory by the opposition which he lias made to mc, I give 
him my daughter Ignoge, and also gold, silver, ships, 
com, wine, and oil, and whatever you sliall find necessary 
for your voyage. If you shall alter your resolution, and 
think fit to continue among the Greeks, I will grant you 
the third part of my kingdom for your liabitation ; if not, 
I will faithfully perform my promise, and for your greater 
security will stay as a hostage among you till I have 
made it good." 

Accordingly he held a council, and directed messengers 
to all the shores of Greece, to get ships together ; which 
done, he delivered them to the Trojans, to the number 
of three hundred and twenty-four, laden with all kinds of 
provision, and married his daughter to Brutus. He made 
also a present of gold and silver to each man according 
to his quality. When every thing was performed, the 
king was set at liberty ; and the Trojans, now released 
from his power, set sail with a fair wind. But Ig- 
noge, standing u[)on the stern of the ship, swooned 



14 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

away several times in Brutus's arms, and with many 
sighs and tears lamented the leaving her parents and 
country, nor ever turned her eyes from the shore 
while it was in sight. Brutus, meanwhile, endeavoured 
to assuage her grief by kiad words and embn«5e8 inter- 
mixed with kisses, and ceased not from these blandish- 
ments till she grew weary of crying and fell asleep. 
During these and other accidents, the winds continued 
fair for two days and a night together, when at length 
they arrived at a certain island called Leogeciik, which 
had been formerly wasted by the incursions of pirates, 
and was then uninhabited. Brutus, not knowing this, 
sent three hundred armed men ashore to see who in- 
habited it ; but they finding nobody, killed several kinds 
of wild beasts which they met with m the groves and 
woods, and came to a desolate city, in which they found 
a temple of Diana, and in it a statue of that goddess 
which gave answers to those that came to consult her. 
At last, loading themselves with the prey which they had 
taken in hunting, they return to their ships, and give 
their companions an account of this country and city. 
Then they advised their leader to go to the city, and 
after offering sacrifices, to inquire of the deity of the 
place, what country was allotted them for their place of 
settlement. To this proposal all assented; so that 
Brutus, attended with Gerion, the augur, and twelve of 
the oldest men, set forward to the temple, with all things 
necessary for the sacrifice. Being arrived at the place, 
and presenting themselves before the shrine with gar- 
lands about their temples, as the ancient rites required, 
they made three fires to the three deities, Jupiter, Mer- 
cury, and Diana, and offered sacrifices to each of them. 
Brutus himself, holding before the altar of the goddess 
a consecrated vessel filled with wine, and the blood of a 
white hart, with his face looking up to the image, broke 
silence in these words : — 



<t 



Diva potens nemorum, terror sylvestribus apris ; 
Cui licet amfractus ire per sethereos. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 15 

Infemasque domos; terrestria jura resolve, 

£t die quae terras nos habitare veils ? 
Die certain sedem qua te venerabor in aevuro. 

Qua tibi virgineis templa dicabo choris ?" 

Goddess of woods, tremendous in the chase 
To mountain boars, and all the savage race ! 
Wide o'er th' aethereal walks extends thy sway. 
And o'er th' infernal mansions void of day ! 
Look upon us on earth ! unfold our fate. 
And say what region is our destined seat ? 
Where shall we next thy lasting temples raise ? 
And choirs of virgins celebrate thy praise ? 

These words he repeated nme times, after which he 
took four turns round the altar, poured the wine into the 
fire, and then laid himself down upon the hart's skin, 
which he had spread before the altar, where he fell 
asleep. About the third hour of the nighty the usual 
time for deep sleep, the goddess seemed to present 
herself before him, and foretell his future success as 
follow* : — 

" Brute! sub occasum solis trans Gallica regna 
Insula in oceano est undique clausa mari : 
Insula in oceano est habitata gigantibus olim. 

Nunc deserta quidem, gentibus apta tuis. 
Hanc pete, namque tibi sedes erit ilia perennis : 

Sic fiet natis altera Troja tuis. 
Sic de prole tua reges nascentur : et ipsis 
Tortius terrse subditus orbis erit." 

Brutus ! there lies beyond the Gallic bounds 

An island which the western sea surrounds. 

By giants once possess'd ; now few remain 

To bar thy entrance, or obstruct thy reign. 

To reach that happy shore thy sails employ ; 

There fate decrees to raise a second Troy, 

And found an empire in thy royal line. 

Which time shall ne'er destroy, nor bounds confine. 

Awakened by the vision, he was for some time in doubt 
with himself, whether what he had seen was a dream, or 
a real appearance of the goddess herself, foretelling him 



\ 



IG GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

to what land he should go. At last he called to his 
companions, and related to them in order the vision he 
had in his sleep, at which they very much rejoiced, and 
were urgent to return to their ships, and while the wind 
favoured them, to hasten their voyage towards the west, 
in pursuit of what the goddess had promised. Without 
delay, therefore, they returned to their company, and set 
sail again, and after a course of thirty days came to 
Africa, being ignorant as yet whither to steer. From 
thence they came to the Philenian altars^ and to a place 
called Salinse, and sailed between Ruscicada and the 
mountains of Azara, where they underwent great danger 
from pirates^ whom, notwithstanding, they vanquished, 
and enriched themselves with their spoils. 



CHAPTER XII. 

BRUTUS ENTERS AQUITAINE WITH CORINEUS. 

From thence passing the river Malua, they arrived at 
Mauritania, where at last, for want of provisions, they 
were obliged to go ashore ; and, dividing themselves into 
several bands, they laid waste the whole country. When 
they had well stored their ships, they steered to the 
Pillars of Hercules, where they saw some of those sea- 
monsters, called Syrens, which surrounded their ships, 
and very nearly overturned them. However, they made 
a shift to escape, and came to the Tyrrhenian Sea, 
upon the shores of which they found four several nations 
descended from the banished Trojans, that had accom- 
panied Antenor in his flight. The name of their com- 
mander was Corineus, a modest man in matters of coun- 
cil, and of great courage and boldness, who, in an 
encounter with any person, even of gigantic stature, 
would immediately overthrow him, as if he were a child. 
When they understood from whom he was descended, 
they joined company with him and those under his 



"'i 



BRITISH HISTORY. 17 

government, who from the name of their leader were 
afterwards called the Cornish people, and indeed were 
more serviceable to Brutus than the rest in all his en- 
gagements. From thence they came to Aquitaine, and 
entering the mouth of the Loire, cast anchor. There 
they stayed seven days and viewed the country. Goffa- 
rius Pictus, who was king of Aquitaine at that time, 
having an account brought him of the arrival of a foreign 
people with a great fleet upon his coasts, sent ambas- 
sadors to them to demand whether they brought with 
them peace or war. The ambassadors, on their way 
towards the fleet, met Corineus, who was come out with 
two hundred men to hunt in the woods. They de- 
manded of him, who gave him leave to enter the king's 
forests, and kill his game ; (which by an ancient law no- 
body was allowed to do without leave from the prince). 
Corineus answered, that as for that matter there was 
no occasion for asking leave ; upon which one of them, 
named Imbertus, rushing forward, with a full drawn 
bow levelled a shot at him. Corineus avoids the arrow 
and immediately runs up to him, and with his bow m his 
hand breaks his head. The rest narrowly escaped, and 
carried the news of this disaster to Go£&rius. The Pic- 
tavian general was struck with sorrow for it,, and imme- 
diately raised a vast army, to revenge the death of his 
ambassador. Brutus, on the other hand, upon hearing 
the rumour of his coming, sends away the women and 
children to the ships, which he took care to be well 
guarded, and commands them to stay there, while he, 
with the rest that were able to bear arms, should go to 
meet the army. At last an assault being made, a bloody 
fight ensued ; in which after a great part of the day had 
been spent, Corineus was ashamed to see the Aquita- 
nians so bravely stand their ground, and the Trojans 
maintaining the fight without victory. He therefore 
takes fresh courage, and drawing off his men to the 
right wing, breaks in upon the very thickest of the ene- 



18 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

mies, where he made such slaughter on every side, that 
at last he broke the line and put them all to flight. In 
this encounter he lost his sword, but by good fortune 
met with a battle-axe, with which he clave down to the 
waist every one that stood in his way. Brutus and 
every body else, both friends and enemies, were amazed 
at his courage and strength, for he brandished about his 
battle-axe among the flying troops, and terrified them 
not a little with these insulting words. " Whither fly 
ye, cowards ? whither fly ye, base wretches ! stand your 
ground, that ye may encounter Corineus. What, for 
shame, do so many thousands of you fly one man ? How- 
ever, take this comfort for your flight, that you are pur- 
sued by one, before whom the Tyrrhenian giants could 
not stand their ground, but fell down slain in heaps toge- 
ther.'' 

CHAPTER Xin. 

GOFFARIUS ROUTED BY BRUTUS. 

At these words one of them, named Subardus, who 
was a consul, returns with three hundred men to assault 
him ; but Corineus with his shield wards off the blow, 
and lifting up his battle-axe gave him such a stroke upon 
the top of his helmet, that at once he clave him down to 
the waist ; and then rushing upon the rest he made ter- 
rible slaughter by wheeling about his battle-axe among 
them, and, running to and fro, seemed more anxious to 
inflict blows on the enemy than careful to avoid those 
which they aimed at him. Some had their hands and 
arms, some their very shoulders, some again their heads, 
and others their legs cut off by him. All fought with 
him only, and he alone seemed to fight with all. Brutus 
seeing him thus beset, out of regard to him, runs with 
a band of men to his assistance : at which the battle is 
again renewed with vigour and with loud shouts, and 
great numbers slain on both sides. But now the Tro- 



BRITISH HISTORY. 19 

jans presently gain the victory, and put Goferius with 
his Pictavians to flight. The king after a narrow escape 
went to several parts of Gaul, to procure succours among 
such princes as were related or known to him. At that 
time Gaul was subject to twelve princes, who with equal 
authority possessed the whole country. These receive 
him courteously, and promise with one consent to expel 
the foreigners from Aquitaine. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

BRUTUS, AFTER HIS VICTORY OVER GOFFARIUS, RAVAGES 
AQUITAINE WITH FIRE AND SWORD. 

Brutus, in joy for the victory, enriches his men with 
the spoils of the slain, and then, dividing them into seve- 
ral bodies, marches into the country with a design to lay 
it waste, and load his fleet with the spoil. With this 
view he sets the cities on fire, seizes the riches that were 
in them, destroys the fields, and makes dreadful slaugh- 
ter among the citizens and common people, being unwil- 
ling to leave so much as one aUve of that wretched 
nation. While he was making this destruction over all 
Aquitaine, he came to a place where the city of Tours 
now stands, which he afterwards built, as Homer tes- 
tifies. As soon as he had looked out a place convenient 
for the purpose, he pitched his camp there, for a place 
of safe retreat, when occasion should require. For he 
was afraid on account of Goffarius's approach with the 
kings and princes of Gaul, and a very great army, which 
was now come near the place, ready to give him battle. 
Having therefore finished his camp, he expected to 
engage with Goffitrius in two days'* time, placing the 
utmost confidence in the conduct and courage of the 
young men under his command. 



c2 



20 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER XV. 

GOFFARIUS'S FIGHT WITH BRUTUS. 

GoFFARius, being informed that the Trojans were in 
those parts, marched day and night, till he came within 
a close view of Brutus^s camp ; and then with a stem 
look and disdainful smile, broke out into these expres- 
sions. "Oh wretched fate! Have these base exiles 
made a camp also in my kingdom ? Arm, arm, soldiers, 
and march through their thickest ranks : we shall soon 
take these pitiful fellows like sheep, and disperse them 
throughout our kingdom for slaves.'" At these words 
they prepared their arms^ and advanced in twelve bodies 
towards the enemy. Brutus, on the other hand, with 
his forces drawn up in order, went forth boldly to meet 
them, and gave his men directions for their conduct, 
where they should assault and where they should be 
upon the defensive. At the beginning of the attack, the 
Trojans had the advantage, and made a rapid slaughter 
of the enemy, of whom there fell near two thousand, 
which so terrified the rest, that they were on the point 
of running away; But, as the victory generally falls to 
that side which has very much the superiority in num- 
bers, so the Gauls, being three to one in number, though 
overpowered at first, yet at last joining in a great body 
together, broke in upon the Trojans ; and forced them 
to retire to their camp with much slaughter. The vic- 
tory thus gained, they besieged them in their camp, with 
a design not to suffer them to stir out until they should 
either surrender themselves prisoners, or be cruelly 
starved to death with a long famine. 

In the mean time, Corineus the night following 
entered into consultation with Brutus, and proposed to 
go out that night by by-ways, -and conceal himself in 
an adjacent wood till break of day ; and while Brutus 
should sally forth upon the enemy in the morning 



BRITISH HISTORY. 21 

twilight, he with his company would surprise them from 
behind, and put them to slaughter. Brutus was pleased 
with this stratagem of Corineus, who according to his 
engagement got out cunningly with three thousand men, 
and put himself under the covert of the woods. As 
soon as it was day 3i*utus marshalled his men and 
opened the camp to go out to fight. The Oauls meet 
him and begin the engagement : many thousands fall on 
both sides, neither party giving quarter. There was 
present a Trojan, named Turonus, the nephew of Brutus, 
inferior to none but Corineus in courage and strength of 
body. He alone with his sword killed six hundred men, 
but at last was unfortunately slain himself by the num- 
ber of Gauls that rushed upon him. From him the city 
of Tours derived its name, because he was buried there. Tours. 
While both armies were thus warmly engaged, Corineus 
came upon them unawares, and fell fiercely upon the rear 
of the enemy, which put new courage into his friends 
on the other side, and made them exert themselves 
with increased vigour. The Gauls were astonished at 
the very shout of Corineus''s men, and thinking their 
number to be much greater than it really was, they 
hastily quitted the field ; but the Trojans pursued them, 
and killed them in the pursuit, nor did they desist till 
they had gained a complete victory. Brutus, though in 
joy for this great success, was yet afflicted to observe the 
number of his forces daily lessened, while that of' the 
enemy increased more and more. He was in suspense 
for some time, whether he had better continue the war 
or not, but at last he determined to return to his ships 
while the greater part of his followers was yet safe, and 
hitherto victorious, and to go in quest of the island 
which the goddess had told him of. So without further 
delay, with the consent of his company, he repaired to 
the fleet, and loading it with the riches and spoils he had 
taken, set sail with a fair wind towards the promised 
island, and arrived on the coast of Totness. 



22 OEOFFIIEY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

ALBION DIVIDED BETWEEN BUUTUS AND CORINEUS. 

Brutus* The island was then called Albion, and was inhabited 

Aibron." by none but a few giants. Notwithstanding this, the 
pleasant situation of the places, the plenty of rivers 
abounding with fish, and the engaging prospect of its 
woods, made Brutus and his company very desirous to 
fix their habitation in it. They therefore passed through 
all the provinces, forced the giants to fly into the caves 
of the mountains, and divided the country among them 
according to the directions of their commander. After 
this they began to till the ground and build houses, so 
that in a little time the country looked like a place that 
had been long inhabited. At last Brutus called the 
island after his own name Britain, and his companions 
Britons; for by these means he desired to perpetuate 
the memory of his name. From whence afterwards the 
language of the nation, which at first bore the name 
of Trojan, or rough Greek, was called British. But 
Corineus, in imitation of his leader, called that part of 

Cornwall, the islaud which fell to his share, Corinea, and his 
people Corineans, after his name ; and though he had his 
choice of the provinces before all the rest, yet he pre- 
ferred this country, which is now called in Latin Cor- 
nubia, either from its being in shape of a horn, (in Latin 
Comu,) or from the corruption of the said name. For 
it was a diversion to him. to encounter the giants, which 
were in greater numbers there than in all the other pro- 
vinces that fell to the share of his companions. Among 

Gocmagot. the rest was one detestable monster, named Goemagot, 
in stature twelve cubits, and of such prodigious strength, 
that at one shake he pulled up an oak^ as if it had been 
a hazel wand. On a certain day, when Brutus was hold- 
ing a solemn festival to the gods, in the port where they 



BRITISH HISTORY. 23 

at first landed, this giant with twenty more of his com- 
panions came in upon the Britons, among whom he 
made a dreadful slaughter. But the Britons at last 
assembling together in a body, put them to the rout, 
and killed them every one but Goemagot. Brutus had 
given orders to have him preserved alive, out of a desire 
to see a combat between him and Corineus, who took a 
great pleasure in such encounters. Corineus, overjoyed 
at this, prepared himself, and throwing aside his arms, 
challenged him to wrestle with him. At the beginning 
of the encounter, Corineus and the giant standing front 
to fJpont, held each other strongly in their arms, and 
panted aloud for breath ; but Ooemagot presently grasp- 
ing Corineus with all his might, broke three of his ribs, 
two on his right side and one on his left. At which 
Corineus, highly enraged, roused up his whole strength, 
and snatching him upon his shoulders, ran with him, as 
fast as the weight would allow him, to the next shore, 
and there getting upon the top of a high rock, hurled 
down the savage monster into the sea; where falling 
on the sides of craggy rocks, he was torn to pieces, and 
coloured the waves with his blood. The place where he 
fell, taking its name from the giant's fall, is called Lam The Haw, 
Goemagot, that is, Go'emagot's Leap, to this day. mouth. 



CHAPTER XVIL 

THE BUILDING OP NEW TROY BY BRUTUS, UPON THE 

RIVER THAMES. 

Brutus, having thus at last set eyes upon his king- 
dom, formed a design of building a city, and in order to 
it, travelled through the land to find out a convenient . 
situation, and coming to the River Thames, he walked 
along the shore, and at last pitched upon a place very 
fit for his purpose. Here, therefore, he built a city, London. 
which he called New Troy ; under which name it con- 



24 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

tinned a long time after, till at last, by the corruption of 
NowLon- the original word, it came to be called Trinovantum. 
But afterwards when Lud, the brother of Cassibellaun, 
who made war against Julius Csesar, obtained the go- 
vernment of the kingdom, he surrounded it with stately 
walls, and towers of admirable workmanship, and ordered 
it to be called after his name, Kaer-Lud, that is, the 
City of Lud. But this very thing became afterwards 
the occasion of a great quarrel between him and his 
brother Nennius, who took offence at his abolishing the 
name of Troy in this country. Of this quarrel Gildas 
the historian has given a full account ; for which reason 
I pass it over, for fear of debasing, by my account of it, 
what so great a writer has so eloquently related. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

NEW TROY BEING BUILT, AND LAWS MADE FOR THE GOVERN- 
MENT OF IT, IT IS GIVEN TO THE CITIZENS THAT WERE TO 
INHABIT IT. 

After Brutus had finished the building of the city, he 
made choice of the citizens that were to inhabit it, and 
prescribed them laws for their peaceable government. 
At this time Eli the priest governed in Judsea, and the 
ark of the covenant was taken by the Philistines. At 
the same time, also, the sons of Hector, after the expul- 
sion of the posterity of Antenor, reigned in Troy ; as in 
Italy did Sylvius ^Eneas, the son of ^Eneas, the uncle of 
Brutus, and the third king of the Latins. 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH'S 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



BOOK II. 



CHAPTER I. 



AFTER THE DEATH OP BRUTUS, HIS THREE SONS SUCCEED HIM 

IN THE KINGDOM. 

During these transactions, Brutus had by his wife 
Ignoge three famous sons, whose names were Locrin, 
Albanact, and Kamber. These, after their father's 
death, which happened in the twenty-fourth year after 
his arrival, buried him in the city which he had built, 
and then having divided the kingdom of Britain among 
them, retired each to his government. Locrin, the 
eldest, possessed the middle part of the island, called 
afterwards from his name, Loegria. Kamber had that 
part which lies beyond the river Severn, now called Cambria. 
Wales, but which was for a long time named Kambria ; 
and hence that people still call themselves in their 
British tongue Kambri. Albanact, the younger bro- Albania, or 
ther, possessed the country he called Albania, now Scot- 
land. After they had a long time reigned in peace 
together, Humber, King of the Huns, arrived in Alba- 
nia, and having killed Albanact in battle, forced his 
people to fly to Locrin for protection. 



26 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



ber. 



CHAPTER 11. 

LOCRIN, HAVING ROUTED HUMBER, FALLS IN LOVE WITH 

ESTRILDIS. 

Loc?RiN, at hearing this news, joined his brother 
Kamber, and went with the whole strength of the king- 
dom to meet the King of the Huns, near the river now 
The Hum. Called HumboF, where he gave him battle^ and put him 
to the rout. Humber made towards the river in his 
flight, and was drowned in it, on account of which it has 
since borne his name. Locrin, after the victory, be- 
stowed the plunder of the enemy upon his own men, 
reserving for himself the gold and silver which he found 
in the ships, together with three virgins of admirable 
beauty, whereof one was the daughter of a king in 
Germany, whom with the other two Humber had forcibly 
brought away with him, after he had ruined their coun- 
try. Her name was Estrildis, and her beauty such as 
was hardly to be matched. No ivory, or new-fallen 
snow, no lily could exceed the whiteness of her skin. 
Locrin, smitten with love, would have gladly married 
her, at which Corineus was extremely incensed, on 
account of the engagement which Locrin had entered 
into with him to marry his daughter. 



CHAPTER in. 

CORINEUS RESENTS THE AFFRONT PUT UPON HIS DAUGHTER. 

He went, therefore, to the king, and wielding a battle- 
axe in his right hand, vented his rage against him in these 
words : " Do you thus reward me, Locrin, for the many 
wounds which I have suflTered under your father's com- 
mand in his wars with strange nations, that you must 
slight my daughter, and debase yourself to marry a bar- 



BRITISH HISTORY. 27 

barian? While there is strength in this right hand, 
that has been destructive to so many giants upon the 
Tyrrhenian coasts, I will never put up with this affront."" 
And repeating this again and again with a loud voice, he 
shook his battle-axe as if he was going to strike him, till 
the friends of both interposed, and after they had ap- 
peased CorineuSy obliged Locrin to perform his agree- 
ment. 

• 
CHAPTER IV. 

LOCRIN AT LAST MARRIES GUENDOLOSNA, THE DAUGHTER 

OP CORINEUS. 

LocRiN therefore married Corineus's daughter, named 
Guendoloena, yet still retained his love for Estrildis, for 
whom he made apartments under ground, in which he 
entertained her, and caused her to be honourably at- 
tended. For he was resolved at least to carry on a 
private amour with her, since he could not live with her 
openly for fear of Corineus. In this manner he con- 
cealed her, and made frequent visits to her for seven 
years together, without the privity of any but his most 
intimate domestics ; and all under a pretence of per- 
forming some secret sacrifices to his gods, by which he 
imposed on the credulity of every body. In the mean 
time Estrildis became with child, and was delivered of a 
most beautiful daughter, whom she named Sabre. Guen- 
doloena was also with child, and brought forth a son, who 
was named Maddan, and put under the care of his grand* 
father Corineus to be educated. 



CHAPTER V. 

LOCRIN IS killed; ESTRILDIS AND SABRE ARE THROWN 

INTO A RIVER. 

But in process of time, when Corineus was dead, 
Locrin divorced Guendoloena, and advanced Estrildis to 



28 (;eoffrey of moxmouth. 

be Queen. Guendoloena, provoked beyond measure at 
this, retired into Cornwall, where she assembled together 
all the forces of that kingdom, and began to raise dis- 
turbances against Locrin. At last both armies joined 
battle near the river Sture, where Locrin was killed by 
the shot of an arrow. After his death, Guendoloena 
took upon her the government of the whole kingdom, 
retaining her father's furious spirit. For she com- 
maaded Estrildis and her daughter Sabre to be thrown 
The seyera. into the rfvcr uow Called the Severn, and published an 
edict through all Britain, that the river should bear the 
damseFs name, hoping by this to perpetuate her memory, 
and by that the infamy of her husband. So that to this 
day the river is called in the British tongue Sabren, 
which by the corruption of the name is in another lan- 
guage Sabrina. 

CHAPTER VI. 

GUENDOLCENA DELIVERS UP THE KINGDOM TO MADDAN, HER 
SON, AFTER WHOM SUCCEEDS MENPRICIUS. 

Guendoloena reigned fifteen years after the death of 
Locrin, who had reigned ten, and then advanced her 
son Maddan (whom she saw now at maturity) to the 
throne, contenting herself with the country of Cornwall 
for the remainder of her life. At this time Samuel the 
Prophet governed in Judsea, Sylvius iEneas was yet 
living, and Homer was esteemed a famous orator and 
poet. Maddan, now in possession of the crown, had by 
his wife two sons, Menpricius and Malim, and ruled the 
kingdom in peace and with care forty years. As soon 
as he was dead, the two brothers quarreled for the king- 
dom, each being ambitious of the sovereignty of the 
whole island. Menpricius, impatient to attain his ends, 
enters into treaty with Malim, under colour of making a 
composition with him, and, having formed a conspiracy, 
murdered him in the assembly where their ambassadors 



BKITIAH HlflTORY. 29 

were met. By these means he obtained the dominion of 
the whole island, over which he exercised such tyranny, 
that he left scarcely a nobleman alive in it, and either by 
violence or treachery oppressed every one that he appre- 
hended might be likely to succeed him, pursuing his 
hatred to his whole race. He also deserted his own 
wife, by whom he had a noble youth named Ebraucus, 
and addicted himself to sodomy, preferring unnatural 
lust to the pleasures of the conjugal state. At last, in 
the twentieth year of his reign, while he was hunting, 
he retired from his company into a valley, where he was b. c. kmo. 
surrounded by a great multitude of ravenous wolves, and 
devoured by them in a horrible manner. Then did Saul 
reign in Judaea, and Eurystheus in Lacedemonia. 



CHAPTER VII. 

EBRAUCUS, THE SUCCESSOR OF MENPRICIUS, CONQUERS THE 
GAULS, AND BUILDS THE TOWNS KAEREBRAUC, ETC. 

Menpricius being dead, Ebraucus, his son, a man of 
great stature and wonderful strength, took upon him 
the government of Britain, which he held forty years. 
He was the first after Brutus who invaded Gaul with a 
fleet, anddistressed its provinces by killing their men 
and laying waste their cities ; and having by these means 
enriched himself with an infinite quantity of gold and 
silver, he returned victorious. After this he built a 
city on the other side of the Humber, which, from his 
own name, he called Kaerebrauc, that is the city of 
Ebraucus, about the time that David reigned in Judaea, York. 
and Sylvius Latinus in Italy; and that Gad, Nathan, 
and Asaph prophesied in Israel. He also built the 
city of Alclud towards Albani, and the town of mount 
Agned, called at this time the Castle of Maidens, or 
the Mountain of Sorrow. 



30 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

EBRAUGUS*S TWENTY SONS GO TO GERMANY, AND HIS THIRTY 
DAUGHTERS TO SYLVIUS ALBA, IN ITALY. 

This prince had twenty sons and thirty daughters by 
twenty wives, and with great valour governed the 
kingdom of Britain sixty years. The names of his sons 
were, Brutus sumamed Greenshield, Margadud, Sisillius, 
Regin, Morivid, Bladud, Lagon, Bodloan, Eoncar, 
Spaden, Gaul, Darden, Eldad, Ivor, Gangu, Hector, 
Kerin, Rud, Assarach, Buel. The names of bis 
daughters were, Gloigni, Ignogni, Oudas, Guenliam, 
Gaudid, Angarad, Guendoloe, Tangustel, Gorgon, 
Median, Methahel, Ourar, Mature, Kambreda, Ragan, 
Gael, Ecub, Nest, Cheun, Stadud, Gladud, Ebren, 
Blagan, Aballac, Angaes, Galaes, (the most celebrated 
beauty at that time in Britain or Gaul,) Edra, Anaor, 
Stadial, Egron. All these daughters their father sent 
into Italy to Sylvius Alba, who reigned after Sylvius 
Latinus, where they were married among the Trojan 
nobility, the Latin and Sabine women refusing to asso- 
ciate with them. But the sons, under the conduct of 
their brother Assaracus, departed in a fleet to Germany, 
and having, with the assistance of Sylvius Alba, sub- 
dued the people there, obtained that kingdom. 



CHAPTER IX. 

AFTER EBRAUCUS REIGNS BRUTUS HIS SON, AFTER HIM LEIL, 

AND AFTER LEIL, HUDIBRAS. 

But Brutus, sumamed Greenshield, stayed with his 
father, whom he succeeded in the government, and 
reigned twelve years. After him reigned Leil, his son, 
a peaceable and just prince, who, enjoying a prosperous 



BRITISH HISTORY. 31 

reign, built in the north of Britain a city, called by his 
name, Kaerleil; at the same time that Solomon began carusie. 
to build the temple of Jerusalem, and the Queen of 
Sheba came to hear his wisdom; at which time also 
Sylvius Epitus succeeded his father Alba, in Italy. Leil 
reigned twenty-five years, but towards the latter end 
of his life grew more remiss in his government, so that 
his neglect of a&irs speedily occasioned a civil dissen- 
sion in the kingdom. After him reigned his son, 
Hudibras, thirty-nine years, and composed the civil 
dissension among his people. He built Kaerlem or canterbury. 
Canterbury, Kaerguen or Winchester, and the town winchetter. 
of Mount Paladur, now Shaftsbury. At this place an 
eagle spoke, while the wall of the town was being built ; 
and indeed I should have transmitted the speech to 
posterity had I thought it true, as the rest of the his- 
tory. At this time reigned Capys, the son of Epitus ; 
and Haggai, Amos, Joel, and Azariah, were prophets in 
Israel. 



CHAPTER X. 

BLADUD SUCCEEDS HUDIBRAS IN THE KINGDOM, AND PRACTISES 

MAGICAL OPERATIONS. 

Next succeeded Bladud, his son, and reigned twenty 
years. He built Kaerbadus, now Bath, and made hot Bath. 
baths in it for the benefit of the public, which he dedi- 
cated to the goddess Minerva ; in whose temple he kept 
fires that never went out nor consumed to ashes, but as 
soon as they began to decay were turned into balls of 
stone. About this time the prophet Elias prayed that it 
might not rain upon earth ; and it did not rain for three 
years and six months. This prince was a very ingenious 
man, and taught necromancy in his kingdom, nor did he 
leave off pursuing his magical operations, till he attempted 
to fly to the upper region of the air with wings which he 



32 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



King Lear. 



Leicester. 



Cordelia. 



had prepared, and fell down upon the temple of Apollo, 
in the city of Trinovantum, where he was dashed to 
pieces. 

CHAPTER XL 

LEIR, THE SON OF BLADUD, HAVING NO SON, DIVIDES HIS 

KINGDOM AMONG HIS DAUGHTERS. 

After this unhappy fate of Bladud, Leir, his son, was 
advanced to the throne, and nobly governed his country 
sixty years. He built upon the river Sore a city, called in 
the British tongue, Kaerieir, in the Saxon, Leircestre. He 
was without male issue, but had three daughters^ whose 
nameswereGonorilla, Regau,andCordeilla,of whom he was 
doatingly fond, but especially of his youngest, Cordeilla. 
When he began to grow old, he had thoughts of dividing 
his kingdom among them, and of bestowing them on such 
husbands as were fit to be advanced to the government 
with them. But to make trial who was worthy to have 
the best part of his kingdom, he went to each of them to 
ask, which of them loved him most. The question being 
proposed, Gonorilla, the eldest, made answer, " That she 
called heaven to witness, she loved him more than her 
own soul.^ The father replied, " Since you have pre- 
ferred my declining age before your own life, I will marry 
you, my dearest daughter, to whomsoever you shall make 
choice of, and give with you the third part of my king- 
dom.'* Then Regau, the second daughter, willing, after 
the example of her sister, to prevail upon her father's 
good nature, answered with an oath, " That she could 
not otherwise express her thoughts, but that she loved 
him above all creatures.'' The credulous father upon 
this made her the same promise that he did to her eldest 
sister, that is, the choice of a husband, with the third 
part of his kingdom. But Cordeilla, the youngest, un- 
derstanding how easily he was satisfied with the flattering 
expressions of her sisters, was desirous to make trial of 



BRITISH HISTORY. 33 

his affection after a different manner. " My father," 
said she, " Is there any daughter that can love her father 
more than duty requires ? In my opinion, whoever pre- 
tends to it, must disguise her real sentiments under the 
veil of flattery. I have always loved you as a father, 
nor do I yet depart from my purposed duty ; and if you 
insist to have something more extorted from me, hear 
now the greatness of my afiection, which I always bear 
you, and take this for a short answer to all your 
questions; look how much you have, so much is your 
value, and so much do I love you.** The father, 
supposing that she spoke this out of the abundance 
of her heart, was highly provoked, and inmiediately re- 
pliedy ** Since you have so far despised my old age, as 
not to think me worthy the love that your sisters express 
for me, you shall have from me the like regard, and shall 
be excluded from any share with your sisters in my 
kingdom. Notwithstanding, I do not say but that since 
you are my daughter, I will marry you to some foreigner, 
if fortune offers you any such husband ; but will never, I 
do assure you, make it my business to procure so honour- 
able a match for you as for your sisters ; because, though 
I have hitherto loved you more than them, you have in 
requital thought me less worthy of your affection than 
they.*" And, without ftirther delay, after consultation 
with his nobility, he bestowed his two other daughters 
upon the dukes of Cornwall and Albania, with half the 
island at present, but after his death, the inheritance of 
the whole monarchy of Britain. 

It happened after this, that Aganippus, king of the 
Franks, having heard of the fame of Cordeilla's beauty, 
forthwith sent his ambassadors to the king to demand 
her in marriage. The father, retaining yet his anger 
towards her, made answer ; " That he was very will- 
ing to bestow his daughter, but without either money 
or territories ; because he had already given away his 
kingdom with all his treasure, to his eldest daughters. 



34. GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

Gonorilla and Regau." When this was told Aganippus, 
he being very much in love with the lady, sent again to 
King Leir, to tell him, " That he had money and terri- 
tories enough, as he possessed the third part of Gaul, and 
desired no more than his daughter only, that he might 
have heirs by her.'' At last the match was concluded, 
and Cordeilla was sent to Gaul, and married to Aganippus. 

CHAPTER XII. 

LEIR, FINDING THE INGRATITUDE OF HIS TWO ELDEST 
DAUGHTERS, BETAKES HIMSELF TO HIS YOUNGEST, CORDEILLA, 
IN GAUL. 

A LONG time after this, when Leir came to be infirm 
through old age, the two dukes, on whom he had be- 
stowed Britain with his two daughters, fostered an insur- 
rection against him, and deprived him of his kingdom, 
and of all regal authority, which he had hitherto exer- 
cised with great power and glory. At length, by mu- 
tual agreement, Maglaunus, duke of Albania, one of his 
sons-in-law, was to allow him a maintenance at his own 
King Lear in housc, together with sixty soldiers, who were to be kept 
for state. After two years' stay with his son-in-law, his 
daughter Gonorilla grudged the number of his men, 
who began to upbraid the ministers of the court with 
their scanty allowance ; and having spoken to her hus- 
band about it, gave orders that the number of her fa- 
ther's followers should be reduced to thirty, and the rest 
discharged. The father, resenting this treatment, left 
Maglaunus, and went to Henuinus, duke of Cornwall, to 
whom he had married his daughter Regau. Here he 
met with an honourable reception, but before the year 
was at an end, a quarrel happened between the two 
families, which raised Regau s indignation ; so that she 
commanded her father to discharge all his attendants 
but five, and to be contented with their service. This 
second af&iction was insupportable to him, and made him 



BRITISH HISTORY. 35 

return again to his former daughter, with hopes that the 
misery of his condition might move in her some senti- 
ments of filial piety, and that he, with his family, might 
find a subsistence with her. But she, not forgetting her 
resentment, swore by the gods he should not stay with 
her, unless he would dismiss his retinue, and be contented 
with the attendance of one man; and with bitter re- 
proaches, told him how . ill his desire of vain-glorious 
pomp suited his age and poverty. When he found that 
she was by no means to be prevailed upon, he was at last 
forced to comply, and, dismissing the rest, to take up 
with one man only. But by this time he began to reflect 
more sensibly with himself upon the grandeur from which 
he had fallen, and the miserable state to which he was 
now reduced, and to enter upon thoughts of going beyond 
sea to his youngest daughter. Yet he doubted whether 
he should be able to move her commiseration, because 
(as was related above) he had treated her so unworthily. 
However, disdaining to bear any longer such base usage, 
he took ship for Gaul. In his passage, he observed he 
had only the third place given him among the princes 
that were with him in the ship, at which, with deep sighs 
and tears, he burst forth into the following complaint. 

" O irreversible decrees of the Fates, that never swerve 
from your stated course ! why did you ever advance me 
to an unstable feUcity, since the punishment of lost hap- 
piness is greater than the sense of present misery ! The 
remembrance of the time when vast numbers of men 
obsequiously attended me in the taking the cities and 
wasting the enemy's countries, more deeply pierces my 
heart, than the view of my present calamity, which has 
exposed me to the derision of those who were formerly 
prostrate at my feet. O ! the enmity of fortune ! Shall 
I ever again see the day when I may be able to reward 
those according to their deserts who have forsaken me in 
my distress ? How true was thy answer, Cordeilla, when 
I asked thee concerning thy love to me, ' As much as 

d2 



36 GEOFFREY OF MONMOrTH. 

you have, so much is your value, and so much do I love 
you/ While I had any thing to give they valued me, 
being friends not to me, but to my gifts : they loved me 
then, but they loved my gifts much more : when my gifts 
ceased, my friends vanished. But with what face shall 
I presume to see you, my dearest daughter, since in my 
anger I married you upon worse terms than your sisters, 
who, after all the mighty favours they have received 
from me, suffer me to be in banishment and poverty?" 

As he was lamenting his condition in these and the 
like expressions, he arrived at Karitia, where his daughter 
was, and waited before the city while he sent a messenger 
to inform her of the misery he was fallen into, and to 
desire her relief, for a father who suffered both hunger 
and nakedness. Cordeilla was startled at the news, and 
wept bitterly, and with tears asked how many men 
her father had with him. The messenger answered, he 
had none but one man, who had been his armour-bearer, 
and was staying with him without the town. Then she 
took what money she thought might be sufficient, and 
gave it to the messenger, with orders to carry her father 
to another city, and there give out that he was sick, and 
to provide for him bathing, clothes, and all other nourish- 
ment. She likewise gave orders that he should take 
into his service forty men, well clothed and accoutred, 
and that when all things were thus prepared he should 
notify his arrival to King Aganippus and his daughter. 
The messenger quickly returning, carried Leir to another 
city, and there kept him concealed, till he had done 
every thing that Cordeilla had commanded. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

HE IS VERY HONOURABLY RECEIVED BY CORDEILLA AND THE 

KING OF GAUL. 

As soon as he was provided with his royal apparel, 
ornaments and retinue, he sent word to Aganippus and 



BRITISH HISTORY. 37 

his daughter, that he was driven out of his kingdom of 
Britain by his sons-in-law, and was come to them to 
procure their assistance for recovering his dominions. 
Upon which they, attended with their chief (ministers of 
state and the nobility of the kingdom, went out to meet 
him, and received him honourably, and gave into his 
management the whole power of Gaul, till such time as 
he should be restored to his former dignity. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

LEIR, BEING RESTORED TO THE KINGDOM, BY THE HELP OP 
HIS SON-IN-LAW AND CORDEILLA, DIES. 

In the mean time Aganippus sent officers over all 
Gaul to raise an army, to restore his father-in-law to his 
kingdom of Britain. Which done, Leir returned to 
Britain with his son and daughter and the forces which 
they had raised, where he fought with his sons-in- 
law, and routed them. Having thus reduced the whole 
kingdom to his power, he died in the third year after. 
Aganippus also died ; and Cordeilla, obtaining the go- 
vernment of the kingdom, buried her father in a cer- 
tain vault, which she ordered to be made for him under 
the river Sore, in Leicester, and which had been built King Lear 
originally under the ground to the honour of the god SMteJ. 
Janus. And here all the workmen of the city, upon the 
anniversary solemnity of that festival, used to begin their 
yearly labours. 

CHAPTER XV. 

CORDEILLA, BEING IMPRISONED, KILLS HERSELF. MARGAN, 
ASPIRING TO THE WHOLE KINGDOM, IS KILLED BY CUNE- 
DAGIUS. 

After a peaceable possession of the government for 
five years, Cordeilla began to meet with disturbances 



38 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

from the two sons of her sisters, being both young men 
of great spirit, whereof one, named Margan, was bom to 
Maglaunus, and the other, named Cunedagius, to He- 
nuiniis. These, after the death of their fathers succeed- 
ing them in their dukedoms, were incensed to see Britain 
subject to a woman, and raised forces in order to raise 
a rebeUion against the queen; nor would they desist 
from hostilities, till, after a general waste of her coun- 
tries, and several battles fought, they at last took her 
and put her in prison ; where for grief at the loss of 

Death of her kingdom she killed herself. After this they divided 
the island between them ; of which the part that reaches 
from the north side of the Humber, to Cathness, fell to 
Margan ; the other part from the same river westward 
was Cunedagius's share. At the end of two years, some 
restless spirits that took pleasure in the troubles of the 
nation, had access to Margan, and inspired him with 
vain conceits, by representing to him how mean and dis- 
graceful it was for him not to govern the whole island, 
which was his due by right of birth. Stirred up with 
these and the like suggestions, he marched with an army 
through Cunedagius's country, and began to bum all 
before him. The war thus breaking out, he was met by 
Cunedagius with all his forces, who attacked Margan, 
killing no small number of his men, and putting him 
to flight, pursued him from one province to another, 
till at last he killed him in a town of Kambria, which 
since his death has been by the country people called 

Margan. Margau to this day. After the victory, Cunedagius 
gained the monarchy of the whole island, which he 
governed gloriously for three and thirty years. At this 
time flourished the prophets Isaiah and Hosea, and 

B. 0.763. Rome was built upon the eleventh of the Calends of 
May by the two brothers, Romulus and Remus. 



BRITISH HISTORY 39 



CHAPTER XVI. 

THE SUCCESSORS OF CUNEDAGIUS IN THE KINGDOM. FERREX 
IS KILLED BY HIS BROTHER PORREX, IN A DISPUTE FOR THE 
GOVERNMENT. 

At last Cunedagius dying, was succeeded by his son 
Rivallo, a fortunate youth, who diligently applied himself 
to the affairs of the government. In his time it rained 
blood three days together, and there fell vast swarms 
of flies, followed by a great mortality among the people. 
After him succeeded Gurgustius his son ; after him Si- 
sillius ; after him Jago, the nephew of Gurgustius ; after 
him Kinmarcus the son of Sisillius; after him Gorbo- 
gudo, who had two sons, Ferrex and Porrex. When Ferrex and 
their father grew old, they began to quarrel about the °"*** 
succession ; but Porrex, who was the most ambitious of 
the two, forms a design of killing his brother by trea- 
chery, which the other discovering escaped, and passed 
over into Gaul. There he procured aid from Suard king 
of the Franks, with which he returned and made war 
upon his brother ; coming to an engagement, Ferrex 
was killed and all his forces cut to pieces. When their 
mother, whose name was Widen, came to be informed 
of her son's death, she fell into a great rage, and con- 
ceived a mortal hatred against the survivor. For she 
had a greater affection for the deceased than for him, so 
that nothing less would appease her indignation for his 
death, than her revenging it upon her surviving son. 
She took therefore her opportunity when he was asleep, 
fell upon him, and with the assistance of her women tore 
him to pieces. From that time a long civil war op- 
pressed the people, and the island became divided under 
the power of five kings, who mutually harassed one 
another. 



40 GEOFFKEY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

DUNWALLO MOLMUTIUS GAINS THE SCEPTRE OF BRITAIN, FROM 
WHOM CAME THE MOLMUTINE LAWS. 

Dunwauo At length arose a youth of great spirit, named Dun- 
°™" "*' wallo Molmutius, who was the son of Cloten king of 
Cornwall, and excelled all the kings of Britain in valour 
and gracefulness of person. When his father was dead, 
he was no sooner possessed of the government of that 
country, than he made war against Ymner king of Loe- 
gria, and killed him in battle. Hereupon Rudaucus 
king of Kambria, and Staterius king of Albania, had a 
meeting, wherein they formed an alUance together, and 
marched thence with their armies into Dunwallo's coun- 
tiy to destroy all before them. Dunwallo met them with 
thirty thousand men, and gave them battle : and when a 
great part of the day was spent in the fight, and the 
victory yet dubious, he drew off six hundred of his 
bravest men, and commanded them to put on the armour 
of the enemies that were slain, as he himself also did, 
throwing aside his own. Thus accoutred he marched up 
with speed to the enemy's ranks, as if he was of their 
party, and approaching the very place where Rudaucus 
and Staterius were, conunanded his men to fall upon 
them. In this assault the two kings were killed and 
many others with them. But Dunwallo Molmutius, 
fearing lest in this disguise his own men might fall upon 
him, returned with his companions to put off the enemy's 
armour, and take his own again ; and then encouraged 
them to renew the assault, which they did with great 
vigour, and in a short time got the victory, by dispersing 
and putting to flight the enemy. From hence he 
marched into the enemy's countries, destroyed their 
towns and cities, and reduced the people under his obe- 
dience. When he had made an entire reduction of the 



BRITISH HISTORY. 41 

whole island, he prepared himself a crown of gold, and 
restored the kingdom to its ancient state. This prince 
established what the Britons call the Molmutine laws, Moimutioe 

IftWB 

which are famous among the English to this day. In 
these, among other things, of which St. Gildas wrote a 
long time after, he enacted, that the temples of the 
gods, as also cities, should have the privilege of giving 
sanctuary and protection to any fugitive or criminal, that 
should flee to them from his enemy. He likewise enacted, 
that the ways leading to those temples and cities, as also 
husbandmen's ploughs, should be allowed the same pri- 
vilege. So that in his day, the murders and cruelties 
committed by robbers were prevented, and every body 
passed safe without any violence offered him. At last, 
after a reign of forty years spent in these and other acts 
of government, he died, and was buried in the city of 
Trinovantum, near the temple of Concord, which he him- 
self built, when he first established his laws. 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH'S 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



BOOK III. 



CHAPTER I. 

BRENNIUS QUARRELS WITH BELINUS HIS BROTHER, AND IN 
ORDER TO MAKE WAR AGAINST HIM, MARRIES THE 
DAUGHTER OF THE KING OF THE NORWEGIANS. 

Beiinusand After this E violent quarrel happened between his 
Brennius. ^^^ ^^^ BeliHus and Brennius, who were both ambi- 
tious of succeeding to the kingdom. The dispute was, 
which of them should have the honour of wearing the 
crown. After a great many sharp conflicts that passed 
between them, the friends of both interposed, and 
brought them to agree on the division of the kingdom 
on these terms : that Belinus should enjoy the crown of 
the island, with the dominions of Loegria, Kambria, 
and Cornwall, because, according to the Trojan constitu- 
tion, the right of inheritance would come to him as the 
elder : and Brennius, as being the younger, should be 
subject to his brother, and have for his share Northum- 
berland, which extended from the river Humber to Cath- 
ness. The covenant therefore being confirmed upon 
these conditions, they ruled the country for five years in 
peace and justice. But such a state of prosperity could 
not long stand against the endeavours of faction. For 



DRCTISH HISTORY. 43 

some lying incendiaries gained access to Brennius, and 
addressed him in this manner :— 

" What sluggish spirit has possessed you, that you can 
bear subjection to Belinus, to whom by parentage and 
blood you are equal ; besides your experience in military 
afi&irs, which you have gained in several engagements, 
when you so often repulsed Cheulphus, general of the 
Morini, in his invasions of oiur country, and drove him 
out of your kingdom ? Be no longer bound by a treaty 
which is a reproach to you, but marry the daughter of 
Elsingius, king of the Norwegians, that with his assist- 
ance you may recover your lost dignity."" The young 
man, inflamed with these and the like specious sugges- 
tions, hearkened to them, and went to Norway, where he 
married the king^s daughter, as his flatterers had ad- 
vised him. 

CHAPTER 11. 

BRENNIUS'S SEA-FIGHT WITH GUICHTHLAC, KING OF THE 
DACIANS. GUICHTHLAC AND BRENNIUs'^S WIFE ARE DRIVEN 
ASHORE AND TAKEN BY BELINUS. 

In the mean time his brother, informed of this, was 
violently incensed, that without his leave he had pre- 
sumed to act thus against him. Whereupon he marched 
into Northumberland, and possessed himself of that 
country and the cities in it, which he garrisoned with 
his own men. Brennius, upon notice given him of what 
his brother had done, prepared a fleet to return to 
Britain with a great army of Norwegians. But while he 
was under sail with a fair wind, he was overtaken by 
Guichthlac, king of the Dacians, who had pursued him. «• «• the 
This prince had been deeply in love with the young lady 
that Brennius had married, and out of mere grief and 
vexation for the loss of her, had prepared a fleet to 
pursue Brennius with all expedition. In the sea-fight 
that happened on this occasion, he had the fortune to 



44 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

take the very ship in which the lady was, and brought 
her in among his companions. But during the engage- 
ment, contrary winds arose on a sudden, which brought 
on a storm, and dispersed the ships upon different 
shores : so that the king of the Dacians, being driven 
up and down, after a course of five days, arrived with the 
lady at Northumberland, under dreadful apprehensions, 
as not knowing upon what country this unforeseen casu- 
alty had thrown him. When this came to be known to 
the country people, they took them and carried them to 
Belinus, who was upon the sea-coast, expecting the 
arrival of his brother. There were with Guichthlac's 
ship three others, one of which had belonged to Bren- 
nius's fleet. As soon as they had declared to the king 
who they were, he was overjoyed at this happy accident, 
while he was endeavouring to revenge himself on his 
brother. 

CHAPTER III. 

BELINUS IN A BATTLE ROUTS BRENNIUS, WHO THEREUPON 

FLEES TO GAUL. 

A FEW days after appeared Brennius, with his fleet 
again got together, and arrived in Albania ; and having 
received information of the capture of his wife and 
others, and that his brother had seized the kingdom 
of Northumberland in his absence, he sent his ambassa- 
dors to him, to demand the restitution of his wife and 
kingdom ; and if he refused them, to declare that he 
would destroy the whole island from sea to sea, and kill 
his brother whenever he could come to an engagement 
with him. On the other hand, Belinus absolutely refused 
to comply with his demands, and assembling together 
the whole power of the island, went into Albania to give 
him battle. Brennius, upon advice that he had suffered 
a repulse, and that his brother was upon his march 
against him, advanced to meet him in a wood called 



BRITISH HISTORY. 45 

Calaterium, in order to attack him. When they were 
arrived on the field of battle, each of them divided his 
men into several bodies, and approaching one another, 
began the fight. A great part of the day was spent in 
it, because on both sides the bravest men were engaged ; 
and much blood was shed by reason of the fury with 
which they encountered each other. So great was the 
slaughter, that the wounded fell in heaps, like standing 
com cut down by reapers. At last the Britons prevail- 
ing, the Norwegians fled with their shattered troops to 
their ships, but were pursued by Belinus, and killed 
without mercy. Fifteen thousand men fell in the battle, 
nor were there a thousand of the rest that escaped un- 
hurt. Brennius with much diflSculty securing one ship, 
went as fortune drove him to the coasts of Gaul ; but 
the rest that attended him, were forced to sculk up and 
down wherever their misfortunes led them. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE KING OF DACIA, WITH BRENNIUs's WIFE, IS RELEASED 

OUT OF PRISON. 

Belinus, after this victory, called a council of his The Danes 
nobility, to advise with them what he should do with to BeHnSg. 
the king of the Dacians, who had sent a message to him 
out of prison, that he would submit himself and the 
kingdom of Dacia to him, and also pay a yearly tribute, 
if he might have leave to depart with his mistress. He 
offered likewise to confirm this covenant with an oath, 
and the giving of hostages. When this proposal was 
laid before the nobility, they unanimously gave their 
assent that Belinus should grant Guichthlac his petition 
upon the terms offered. Accordingly he did grant it, 
and Guichthlac was released from prison, and returned 
with his mistress into Dacia. 



46 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER V. 

BELINUS REVIVES AND CONFIRMS THE MOLMUTINE LAWS, 
ESPECIALLY ABOUT THE HIGHWAYS. 

Belinus now finding no body in the kingdom of Bri- 
tain able to make head against him, and being possessed 
of the sovereignty of the whole island from sea to sea, 
confirmed the laws his father had made, and gave com- 
mand for a settled execution of justice through his king- 
dom. But above all things he ordered that cities, and 
the roads leading to them, should enjoy the same privi- 
lege of peace that Dunwallo had established. But there 
arose a controversy about the roads, because the limits 
determining them were unknown. The king, therefore, 
willing to clear the law of all ambiguities, summoned all 
the workmen of the island together, and commanded 
them to pave a causeway of stone and mortar, which 
should run the whole length of the island, from the sea 
Great roads of Comwall, to the shorcs of Cathness, and lead directly 
to the cities that lay along that extent. He commanded 
another to be made over the breadth of the kingdom, 
leading from Menevia, that was situated upon the Deme- 
tian Sea, to Hamo's Port, and to pass through the inter- 
jacent cities. Other two he also made obliquely through 
the island, for a passage to the rest of the cities. He 
then confirmed to them all honours and privileges, and 
prescribed a law for the pimishment of any injury com- 
mitted upon them. But if any one is curious to know 
all that he decreed concerning them, let him read the 
Moimutine Molmutinc laws, which Gildas the historian translated 
lated by " from British into Latin, and King Alfred into English. 

King Alfred. ° ° 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



47 



CHAPTER VI. 

BRENNIUS, BEING MADE DUKE OF THE ALL0BR0GE8, 
RETURNS TO BRITAIN TO FIGHT WITH HIS BROTHER. 

While Belinus was thus reigning in peace and tran- 
quillity, his brother Brennius, who (as we said before) 
was driven upon the coasts of Gaul, suffered great tor- 
ments of mind. For it was a great affliction to him to 
be banished from his coimtry, and to have no power of 
returning to retrieve his loss. Being ignorant what 
course to take, he went among the princes of Gaul, 
accompanied only with twelve men ; and when he had 
related his misfortune to every one of them, but could 
procure assistance from none, he went at last to Seginus, seginus, 
Duke of the Allobroges, from whom he had an honour- Aiiobroges! 
able reception. During his stay here, he contracted land.) 
such an intimacy with the duke, that he became the 
greatest favourite in the court. For in all affairs, both 
of peace and war, he showed a great capacity, so that 
this prince loved him with a paternal affection. He was 
besides of a graceful aspect, tall and slender in stature, 
and expert in himting and fowling, as became his 
princely birth. So great was the friendship between 
them, that the duke resolved to give him his only 
daughter in marriage; and in case he himself should 
have no male issue, he appointed him and his daughter 
to succeed him in his dukedom of the Allobroges after 
his death. But if he should yet have a son, then he 
promised his assistance to advance him to the kingdom 
of Britain. Neither was this the desire of the duke 
only, but of all the nobility of his court, with whom he 
had very much ingratiated himself. So then without 
farther delay the marriage was solemnized, and the 
princes of the country paid their homage to him, as the 
successor to the throne. Scarcely was the year at an 



48 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

end before the duke died ; and then Brennius took his 
opportunity of engaging those princes of the country 
firmly in his interest, whom before he had obliged with 
his friendship. And this he did by bestowing generously 
upon them the duke's treasure, which had been hoarded 
up from the times of his ancestors. But that which the 
AUobroges most esteemed him for, was his sumptuous 
entertainments, and keeping an open house for all. 



CHAPTER VII. 

BELINUS AND BRENNIUS BEING MADE FRIENDS BY THE ME- 
DIATION OF THEIR MOTHER, PROPOSE TO SUBDUE GAUL. 

When he had thus gained universal affection, he began 
to consult with himself how he might take revenge upon 
his brother Belinus. And when he had signified his 
intentions concerning it to his subjects, they unanimously 
concurred with him, and expressed their readiness to 
attend him to whatever kingdom he pleased to conduct 
them. He therefore soon raised a vast army, and having 
entered into a treaty with the Gauls for a free passage 
through their country into Britain, fitted out a fleet 
Normandy, upou the coast of Ncustria, in which he set sail, and 
with a fair wind arrived at the island. Upon hearing 
the rumour of his coming, his brother Belinus, accom- 
panied with the whole strength of the kingdom, marched 
out to engage him. But when the two armies were 
drawn out in order of battle, and just ready to begin the 
attack, Conwenna, their mother, who was yet living, ran 
in great haste through the ranks. Impatient to see her 
son, whom she had not seen for a long time. As soon, 
therefore, as she had with trembling steps reached the 
place where he stood, she threw her arms about his 
neck, and in transports kissed him; then uncovering 
her bosom, she addressed herself to him, in words inter- 
rupted with sighs, to this effect : — 



BRITISH HISTORY. 49 

" My son, remember these breasts which gave you 
suck, and the womb wherein the Creator of all things 
formed you, and from whence he brought you forth into 
the world, while I endured the greatest anguish. By. 
the pains then which I suffered for you, I entreat you to 
hear my request: pardon your brother, and moderate 
your anger. You ought not to revenge yourself upon 
him who has done you no injury. As for what you com- 
plain of, — that you were banished your coimtry by him, — 
if you duly consider the result, in strictness can it be 
called injustice ? He did not banish you to make your 
condition worse, but forced you to quit a meaner, that 
you might attain a higher dignity. At first you enjoyed 
only a part of a kingdom, and that in subjection to your 
brother. As soon as you lost that, you became his 
equal, by gaining the kingdom of the AUobroges. What 
has he then done, but raised you from a vassal to be a 
king? Consider farther, that the difference betwixt 
you began not through him, but through yourself, who, 
with the assistance of the king of Norway, raised an in- 
surrection against him.**' 

Moved by these representations of his mother, he 
obeyed her with a composed mind, and putting off his 
helmet of his own accord, went straight with her to his 
brother. Belinus seeing him approach with a peaceable 
countenance, threw down his arms, and ran to embrace 
him; so that now, without more ado, they again be- 
came friends ; and disarming their forces, marched with 
them peaceably together to Trinovantum. And here, 
after consultation what enterprise to undertake, they 
prepared to conduct their confederate army in^o the 
provinces of Gaul, and to reduce that entire country 
to their subjection. 



£ 



50 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTIf. 



Gaul. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

BELINUS AND BRENNIUS, AFTER THE CONQUEST OF GAUL, 
MARCH WITH THEIR ARMY TO ROME. 

Conquest of They accordingly passed over into Gaul the year after, 
and began to lay waste that country. The news of 
which spreading through those several nations, all the 
petty kings of the Franks entered into a confederacy, and 
went out to fight against them. But the victory falling 
to Belinus and Brennius, the Franks fled with their 
broken forces ; and the Britons and AUobroges, elevated 
with their success, ceased not to pursue them till they 
had taken their kings, and reduced them to their 
power. Then fortifying the cities which they had taken, 
in less than a year they brought the whole kingdom 
into subjection. At last, after a reduction of all the 
provinces, they marched with their whole army towards 
Rome, and destroyed the cities and villages as they 
passed through Italy. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE ROMANS MAKE A COVENANT WITH BRENNIUS, BUT AFTER- 
WARDS BREAK IT, FOR WHICH REASON ROME IS BESIEGED 
AND TAKEN BY BRENNIUS. 

In those days the two consuls of Rome were Gabius 
and Porsena, to whose care the government of the country 
was committed. When they saw that no nation was able 
to withstand the power of Belinus and Brennius, they came 
with the consent of the senate to them, to desire peace 
and amity. They likewise offered large presents of gold 
SZtJ?**^ and silver, and to pay a yearly tribute, on condition that 
they might be suffered to enjoy their own in peace. The 
two kings therefore, taking hostages of them, yielded to 



BRITISH HISTORY. 51 

their petition, and drew back their forces into Germany. 
While they were employing their arms in harassing that 
people, the Romans repented of their agreement, and 
again taking courage, went to assist the Germans. This 
step highly enraged the kings against them, who con- 
certed measures how to carry on a war with both nations. 
For the greatness of the Italian army was a terror to 
them. The result of their council was, that Belinus 
with the Britons stayed in Germany, to engage with the 
enemy there ; while Brennius and his army marched to 
Rome, to revenge on the Romans their breach of treaty. 
As soon as the Italians perceived their design, they 
quitted the Germans, and hastened to get before Bren- 
nius, in his march to Rome. Belinus had intelligence 
of it, and speedily marched with his army the same 
night, and possessing himself of a valley through which 
the enemy was to pass, lay hid there in expectation of 
their coming. The next day the Italians came in full 
march to the place ; but when they saw the valley glit- 
tering with the enemy's armour, they were struck with 
confusion, thinking Brennius and the Galli Senones were 
there. At this favourable opportunity, Belinus on a 
sudden rushed forth, and fell furiously upon them : the 
Romans, on the other hand, thus taken by surprise, 
fled the field, since they neither were armed, nor 
marched in any order. But Belinus gave them no 
quarter, and was only prevented by night coming on, 
from making a total destruction of them. With this 
victory he went straight to Brennius, who had now be- 
sieged Rome three days. Then joining their armies, Rome be 

sie&red. 

they assaulted the city on every side, and endeavoured to 
level the walls : and to strike a greater terror into the 
besieged, erected gibbets before the gates of the city, 
and threatened to hang up the hostages whom they had 
given, unless they would surrender. But the Romans, 
nothing moved by the sufferings of their sons and rela- 
tions, continued inflexible, and resolute to defend them- 

E 2 



52 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

selves. They therefore sometimes broke the force of 
the enemy"'s engines, by other engines of their own, 
sometimes repulsed them from the walls with showers of 
darts. This so incensed the two brothers, that they 
commanded four and twenty of their noblest hostages 
to be hanged in the sight of their parents. The 
Romans, however, were only more hardened at the spec- 
tacle, and having received a message from Gabius and 
Porsena, their consuls, that they would come the next 
day to their assistance, they resolved to march out of 
the city^ and give the enemy battle. Accordingly, just 
as they were ranging their troops in order, the con- 
suls appeared with their re-assembled forces, marching 
up to the attack, and advancing in a close body, fell 
on the Britons and Allobroges by surprise, and 
being joined by the citizens that sallied forth, killed no 
small number. The brothers, in great grief to see such 
destruction made of their fellow soldiers, began to rally 
their men, and breaking in upon the enemy several 
times, forced them to retire. In the end, after the loss 
of many thousands of brave men on both sides, the bro- 
thers gained the day, and took the city, not however 
till Gabius was killed and Porsena taken prisoner. This 
done, they divided among their men all the hidden trea- 
sure of the city. 

CHAPTER X. 

BRENNIUS OPPRESSES ITALY IN A MOST TYRANNICAL MANNER. 

BELINUS RETURNS TO BRITAIN. 

After this complete victory, Brennius stayed in Italy, 
where he exercised imheard-of tyranny over the people. 
But the rest of his actions and his death, seeing that 
they are given in the Roman histories, I shall here pass 
over, to avoid prolixity and meddling with what others 
have treated of, which is foreign to my design. But 
Belinus returned to Britain, which he governed during 



BRITISH HISTORY. 53 

the remainder of his life in peace ; he repaired the cities 
that were falling to ruin, and built many new ones. 
Among the rest he built one upon the river Uske, near 
the sea of the Severn, which was for a long time called 
Caerosc, and was the metropolis of Demetia : but after Newport 
the invasion of the Romans it lost its first name, and 
was called the City of Legions, from the Roman legions 
which used to take up their winter quarters in it. He 
also made a gate of wonderful structure in Trinovantum, 
upon the bank of the Thames, which the citizens call 
after his name Belingsgate to this day. Over it he Biuingsgate. 
built a prodigiously large tower, and imder it a haven or 
quay for ships. He was a strict observer of justice, and 
re-established his father's laws everywhere throughout 
the kingdom. In his days there was so great an abun- 
dance of riches among the people, that no age before or 
after is said to have shown the like. At last, when he 
had finished his days, his body was burnt, and the ashes 
put up in a golden um, which they placed at Trinovan- 
tum with wonderful art on the top of the tower above* 
mentioned. 



■V 



CHAPTER XI. 

GURGIUNT BRABTRUC SUCCEEDING HIS FATHER BELINUS, RE- 
DUCES DACIA, WHICH WAS TRYING TO SHAKE OFF HIS YOKE. 

He was succeeded by Gurgiunt Brabtruc, his son, a 
sober prudent prince, who followed the example of his 
father in all his actions, and was a lover of peace and 
justice. When some neighbouring provinces rebelled 
against him, inheriting with them the bravery of his 
father, he repressed their insolence in several fierce bat- 
tles, and reduced them to a perfect subjection. Among 
many other things it happened, that the king of the 
Dacians, who paid tribute in his father s time, refused Denmark r&. 
not only tribute, but all manner of homage to him. 
This he seriously resented, and passed over in a fleet 



54 CKOFFKKY OF MOiN MOUTH. 

to Dacia, where he harassed the people with a most 
cruel war, slew their king, and reduced the country 
to its former dependance. 

CHAPTER XII. 

IRELAND IS GIVEN TO BE INHABITED BY THE BARCLENSES, 
WHO HAD BEEN BANISHED OUT OF SPAIN. 

At that time, as he was returning home from his con- 
orkney qucst througli the Omkey Islands, he found thirty ships 
full of men and women ; and upon his inquiring of them 
the occasion of their coming thither, their leader, named 
Partholoim, approached him in a respectful and submis- 
sive manner, and desired pardon and peace, telling him 
that he had been driven out of Spain, and was sailing 
round those seas in quest of a habitation. He also de- 
sired some small part of Britain to dwell in, that they 
might put an end to their tedious wanderings ; for it 
was now a year and half since he had been driven from 
his country, all of which time he and his company had 
been out at sea. When Gurgiunt Brabtruc understood 
that they came from Spain, and were called Barclenses, 
he granted their petition, and sent men with them to 
Ireland Ireland, which was then wholly uninhabited, and assigned 
it to them. There they grew up and increased in num- 
ber, and have possessed that island to this very day. 
Gurgiunt Brabtruc after this ended his days in peace, 
and was buried in the City of Legions, which after his 
father's death he ornamented with buildings and fortified 
with walls. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

GUITHELIN REIGNING AFTER GURGIUNT BRABTRUC, THE MAR- 
TIAN LAW IS INSTITUTED BY MARTIA, A NOBLE WOMAN. 

After him Guithelin wore the crown, which he en- 
joyed all his life, treating his subjects with mildness and 



BRITISH HISTORY. 55 

affection. He had for his wife a noble lady named Mar- 
tia, accomplished in all kinds of learning. Among many 
other admirable productions of her wit, she was the 
author of what the Britons call the Martian Law. This Martian Law 
also among other things King Alfred translated, and King Alfred. 
called it in the Saxon tongue Pa GDapchide Laje. 
Upon the death of Guithelin, the government of the 
kingdom remained in the hands of this queen and her 
son Sisilius, who was then but seven years old, and 
therefore unfit to take the government upon himself 
alone. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

GUITHELIN^S SUCCESSORS IN THE KINGDOM. 

For this reason the mother had the sole management 
of affairs committed to her, out of a regard to her great 
sense and judgment. But on her death, Sisilius took 
the crown and government. After him reigned Kimarus 
his son, to whom succeeded Danius his brother. After 
his death the crown came to Morvidus, whom he had by 
his concubine Tangustela. He would have been a prince 
of extraordinary worth, had he not been addicted to 
immoderate cruelty, so far that in his anger he spared 
nobody, if any weapon were at hand. He was of a grace- 
ful aspect, extremely liberal, and of such vast strength 
as not to have his match in the whole kingdom. 



CHAPTER XV. 

MORVIDUS, A MOST CRUEL TYRANT, AFTER THE CONQUEST OF 
THE KING OF THE MORINI, IS DEVOURED BY A MONSTER. 

In his time a certain king of the Morini arrived with 
a great force in Northumberland, and began to destroy 
the country. But Morvidus, with all the strength of the 
kingdom, marched out against him, and fought him. 



56 CiKOFFHKY OF MONMOUTH. 



O 



In this battle he alone did more than the grcatest part of 
his anny, and after the victory, suffered none of the enemy 
to escape ahve. For he commanded them to be brought 
to him one after another, that he might satisfy his cru- 
elty in seeing them killed : and when he grew tired of 
this, he gave orders that they should be flayed alive 
and burnt. During these and other monstrous acts of 
cruelty, an accident happened which put a period to his 
wickedness. There came from the coasts of the Irish 
sea^ a most cruel monster, that was continually devour- 
ing the people upon the sea-coasts. As soon as he heard 
of it, he ventured to go and encounter it alone; but 
when he had in vain spent all his darts upon it, the mon- 
ster rushed upon him, and with open jaws swallowed him 
up like a small fish. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

GOBBONIAN, A MOST JUST KING OF THE BRITONS. 

He had five sons, whereof the eldest, Gorbonian, 
ascended the throne. There was not in his time a 
greater lover of justice and equity, or a more careful 
ruler of the people. The performance of due worship to 
the gods, and doing justice to the conunon people, was 
his continual employment. Through all the cities of 
Britain, he repaired the temples of the gods, and built 
many new ones. In all his days, the island abounded 
with riches, more than all the neighbouring countries. 
For he gave great encouragement to husbandmen in their 
tillage, by protecting them against any injury or op- 
pression of their lords ; and the soldiers he amply re- 
warded with money, so that no one had occasion to do 
wrong to another. Amidst these and many other acts 
of his innate goodness, he paid the debt of nature, and 
was buried at Trinovantum. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 57 



CHAPTER XVII. 

ARTHGALLO IS DEPOSED BY THE BRITONS, AND IS SUCCEEDED 
BY ELIDURE, WHO RESTORES HIM AGAIN HIS KINGDOM. 

After him Arthgallo, his brother, was dignified with 
the crown^ and in all his actions he was the very reverse 
of his brother. He everywhere endeavoured to depress 
the nobility, and advance the baser sort of the people. 
He plundered the rich, and by those means amassed 
vast treasures. But the nobility, disdaining to bear his 
tyranny any longer, made an insurrection against him, 
and deposed him ; and then advanced Elidure, his brother, 
who was afterwards sumamed the pious, on account of 
his commiseration to Arthgallo in distress. For after 
five years' possession of the kingdom, as he happened to 
be hunting in the wood Calaterium, he met his brother 
that had been deposed. For he had travelled over 
several kingdoms, to desire assistance for the recovery of 
his lost dominions, but had procured none. And being 
now no longer able to bear the poverty to which he was 
reduced, he returned back to Britain, attended only by 
ten men, with a design to repair to those who had been 
formerly his friends. It was at this time, as he was pass- 
ing through the wood, his brother Elidure, who little ex- 
pected it, got sight of him, and forgetting all injuries, ran 
to him, and affectionately embraced him. Now as he had 
long lamented his brother's affliction, he carried him with 
him to the city Alclud, where he hid him in his bed- 
chamber. After this, he feigned himself sick, and sent 
messengers over the whole kingdom, to signify to all his 
prime nobility that they should come to visit him. Ac- 
cordingly, when they were all met together at the city 
where he lay, he gave orders that they should come into 
his chamber one by one, softly, and without noise : his 
pretence for which was, that their talk would be a dis- 



58 GKOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

turbance to his head, should they all crowd in together. 
Thus, in obedience to his commands, and without the least 
suspicion of any design, they entered his house one after 
another. But Elidure had given charge to his servants, 
who were set ready for the purpose, to take each of them 
as they entered, and cut off their heads, imless they 
would again submit themselves to Arthgallo his brother. 
Thus did he with every one of them apart, and compelled 
them, through fear, to be reconciled to Arthgallo. At 
last the agreement being ratified, Elidure conducted 
Arthgallo to York, where he took the crown from his 
own head, and put it on that of his brother. From this 
act of extraordinary affection to his brother, he obtained 
the surname of Pious. Arthgallo after this reigned ten 
years, and made amends for his former mal-administra- 
tion, by pursuing measures of an entirely opposite ten- 
dency, in depressing the baser sort, and advancing men 
of good birth ; in suffering every one to enjoy his own, 
and exercising strict justice towards all men. At last 
sickness seizing him, he died, and was buried in the 
city Kaerleir. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

ELIDURE IS IMPRISONED BY PEREDURE, AFTER WHOSE DEATH 
HE IS A THIRD TIME ADVANCED TO THE THRONE. 

Then Elidure was again advanced to the throne, and 
restored to his former dignity. But while in his govern- 
ment he followed the example of his eldest brother Gor- 
bonian, in performing all acts of grace ; his two remain- 
ing brothers, Vigenius and Peredure, raised an army, and 
made war against him, in which they proved victorious ; 
so that they took him prisoner, and shut him up in the 
Tower of towcr at Triuovautum, where they placed a guard over 
him. They then divided the kingdom betwixt them ; that 
part which is from the river Humber westward falling to 
Vigenius's share, and the remainder with all Albania to 



London. 



KR1TI8II I11S1X)RY. 59 

Peredure'^s. After seven years Vigenius died, and so 
the whole kingdom came to Peredure, who from that 
time governed the people with generosity and mildness, 
so that he even excelled liis other brothers who had pre- 
ceded him, nor was any mention now made of Elidure. 
But irresistible fate at last removed him suddenly, and 
so made way for Elidure's release from prison, and 
advancement to the throne the third time ; who finished 
the course of his life in just and virtuous actions, and 
after death left an example of piety to his successors. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THB NAMES OF ELIDURe'*S THIRTY-THREE SUCCESSORS. 

Elidure being dead, Gorbonian's son enjoyed the 
crown, and imitated his uncle's wise and prudent govern- 
ment. For he abhorred tyranny, and practised justice 
and mildness towards the people, nor did he ever swerve 
from the rule of equity. After him reigned Margan, the 
son of Arthgallo, who, being instructed by the examples 
of his immediate predecessors, held the government in 
peace. To him succeeded Enniaunus, his brother, who 
took a contrary course, and in the sixth year of his 
reign was deposed, for having preferred a tyrannical to a 
just and legal admhiistration. In his room was placed 
his kinsman Idwallo, the son of Vigenius, who, being 
admonished by Enniaunus's ill success, became a strict 
observer of justice and equity. To him succeeded llunno, 
the son of Peredure, whose successor was Geruntius, the 
son of Elidure. After him reigned Catellus, his son ; 
after Catellus, Coillus; after Coillus, Porrex; after 
Porrex, Cherin. This prince had three sons, Fulgenius, 
Eldadus, and Andragius, who all reigned one after 
another. Then succeeded Urianus, the son of Andra- 
gius; after whom reigned in order, Eliud, Clcdaucus, 
Cletonus, Gurgintius, Merianus, Bleduno, Cap, Oenus, 



60 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



Sisilius, Blegabred. This last prince, in singing and 
playing upon musical instruments, excelled all the mu- 
sicians that had been before him, so that he seemed 
worthy of the title of the God of Jesters. After him 
reigned Arthmail, his brother ; after Arthmail, Eldol ; 
to whom succeeded in order, Redion, Rederchius, Sa- 
muilpenissel, Pir, Capoir, and Cligueillus the son of 
Capoir, a man prudent and mild* in all his actions, 
and who above all things made it his business to exer- 
cise true justice among his people. 



CHAPTER XX. 



Lud, Casal- 
bellaun and 
Nennitu. 



London. 



IIELIS THREE SONS; THE FIRST OF WHOM, VIZ. LUD, GIVES 
NAME TO THE CITY OF LONDON. 

Next to him succeeded his son Heli, who reigned forty 
years. He had three sons, Lud, Cassibellaun, and Nen- 
nius ; of whom Lud, being the eldest, succeeded to the 
kingdom after his father's death. He became famous for 
the building of cities, and for rebuilding the walls of Tri- 
novantum, which he also surrounded with innumerable 
towers. He likewise commanded the citizens to build 
houses, and all other kinds of structures in it, so that no 
city in all foreign countries to a great distance round could 
show more beautiful palaces. He was withal a warlike 
man, and very magnificent in his feasts and public enter- 
tainments. And though he had many other cities, yet 
he loved this above them all, and resided in it the greater 
part of the year; for which reason it was afterwards 
called Kaerlud, and by the corruption of the word, Caer- 
london ; and again by change of languages, in process of 
time, London ; as also by foreigners who arrived here, 
and reduced this country under their subjection, it was 
called Londres. At last, when he was dead, his body 
was buried by the gate which to this time is called in 
the British tongue after his name, Parthlud, and in the 



BRITISH HISTORY. 61 

Saxon, Ludesgata. He had two sons, Androgens and Ludgate. 
Tenuantius, who were incapable of governing on account 
of their age : and therefore their uncle Cassibellaun was 
preferred to the kingdom in their room. As soon as he 
was crowned, he began to display his generosity and 
magnificence to such a degree, that his fame reached to 
distant kingdoms ; which was the reason that the mon- 
archy of the whole kingdom came to be invested in him, 
and not in his nephews. Notwithstanding Cassibellaun, 
firom an impulse of piety, would not suffer them to be 
without their share in the kingdom, but assigned a large 
part of it to them. For he bestowed the city of Trino- 
vantum, with the dukedom of Kent, on Androgens ; and 
the dukedom of Cornwall on Tenuantius. But he himself, 
as possessing the crown, had the sovereignty over them, 
and all the other princes of the island. 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH'S 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



BOOK IV. 
CHAPTER I. 

JULIUS C^SAR INVADES BRITAIN. 



Roman inva. About this time it happened, (as is found in the 
casafr Roman histories,) that Julius Csesar, having subdued 
Gaul, came to the shore of the Ruteni. And when from 
thence he had got a prospect of the island of Britain, he 
inquired of those about him what country it was, and 
what people inhabited it. Then fixing his eyes upon the 
ocean, as soon as he was informed of the name of the 
kingdom and the people, he said : " In truth we Romans 
and the Britons have the same origin, since both are 
descended from the Trojan race. Our first father, after 
the destruction of Troy, was ^Eneas ; theirs, Brutus, 
whose father was Sylvius, the son of Ascanius, the son of 
^neas. But I am deceived, if they are not very much 
degenerated from us, and know nothing of the art of war, 
since they live separated by the ocean from the whole 
world. They may be easily forced to become our tribu- 
taries, and subjects to the Roman state. But before the 
Romans offer to invade or assault them, we must send 
them word that they pay tribute as other nations do, 
add submit themselves to the senate ; for fear we should 



BRITISH HISTORY. ().'] 

violate the ancient nobility of our father Priamus, by 
shedding the blood of our kinsmen." All which he 
accordingly took care to signify, by writing to Cassibel- 
laun ; who in great indignation returned him an answer 
in the following letter. 



CHAPTER 11. 

CASSIBELLAUNUS*'s LETTER TO JULIUS CESAR. 

" Cassibellaun, king of the Britons, to Caius Julius 
Caesar. We cannot but wonder, Caesar, at the avarice 
of the Roman people, since their insatiable thirst for 
money cannot let us alone, though the dangers of the 
ocean have placed us in a manner out of the world ; but 
they must have the presumption to covet our substance, 
which we have hitherto enjoyed in quiet. Neither is this 
indeed sufficient: we must also choose subjection and 
slavery to them, before the enjoyment of our native 
liberty. Your demand, therefore, Caesar, is scandalous, 
since the same vein of nobility flows from ^Eneas in both 
Britons and Romans, and one and the same chain of con- 
sanguinity unites us : which ought to be a band of firm 
union and friendship. It was that, which you should 
have demanded of us, and not slavery : we have learned 
to admit of the one, but never to bear the other. And 
so much have we been accustomed to liberty, that we 
are perfectly ignorant what it is to submit to slavery. 
And if even the gods themselves should attempt to 
deprive us of our liberty, we would, to the utmost of our 
power, resist them in defence of it. Know then, Caesar, 
that we are ready to fight for that and our kingdom, if, 
as you threaten, you shall attempt to invade Britain.**** 



64 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER III. 

CiESAR IS ROUTED BY CASSIBELLAUN. 

On receiving this answer, Csesar made ready his fleet, 
and waited for a fair wind to execute his threats against 
Cassibellaun. As soon as the wind stood fair, he hoisted 
his sails, and arrived with his army at the mouth of the 
river Thames. The ships were now just come close to 
land, when Cassibellaun with all his forces appeared on 
his march against them, and coming to the town of 
Dover. Dorobellum, he consulted with his nobility how to drive 
out the enemy. There was present with him Belinus, 
general of his army, by whose counsel the whole kingdom 
was governed. There were also his two nephews. Andro- 
gens, Duke of Trinovantum, and Tenuantius, Duke of 
Cornwall, together with three inferior kings, Cridious, 
king of Albania, Guerthaeth of Venedotia, and Britael of 
Demetia, who, as they had encouraged the rest to fight 
the enemy, gave their advice to march directly to Csesar'^s 
camp, and drive them out of the country before they 
could take any city or town. For if he should possess 
himself of any fortified places, they said it would be more 
difficult to force him out, because he would then know 
whither to make a retreat with his men. To this pro- 
posal they all agreed, and advanced towards the shore 
where Julius Caesar had pitched his camp. And now 
both armies drew out in order of battle, and began the 
fight, wherein both bows and swords were employed. 
Immediately the wounded fell in heaps on each side, and 
the ground was drenched with the blood of the slain, as 

much as if it had been washed with the sudden return 

> 

of the tide. While the armies were thus engaged, it 

happened that Nennius and Androgens, with the citizens 

Canterbury of Canterbury and Trinovantum, whom they commanded, 

' had the fortune to meet with the troop in which the 



BRITISH HISTORY. 65 

Caesar himself was present. And upon an assault 
made, the generaPs cohort was very nearly routed by 
the Britons falling upon them in a close body. During 
this action, fortune gave Nennius an opportunity of 
encountAing Caesar. Nennius therefore boldly made 
up to him, and was in great joy that he could but give 
so much as one blow to so great a man. On the other 
hand, CaBsar being aware of his design, stretched out 
his shield to receive him, and with all his might struck 
him upon the helmet with his drawn sword, which he 
lifted up again with an intention to finish his first blow, 
and make it mortal; but Nennius carefully prevented 
him with his shield, upon which Caesar's sword glancing 
with great force from the helmet, became so firmly . 
fastened therein, that when l^ the intervention of the 
troops they could no longer continue the encounter, the 
general was not able to draw it out aglEiin. Nennius, 
thus becoming master of Caesar's sword, threw away his 
own, and pulling the other out, made haste to employ it 
against the enemy. Whomsoever he struck with it, he 
either cut off his head, or left him wounded without 
hopes of recovery. While he was thus exerting himself, 
he was met by Labienus, a tribune, whom he killed in 
the very beginning of the encounter. At last, after the 
greatest part of the day was spent, the Britons poured 
in so fast, and made such vigorous efforts, that by the 
blessing of God they obtained the victory, and Caesar, Etefeat of 
with his broken forces, retired to his camp and fleet. 
The very same night, as soon as he had got his men 
together again, he went on board his fleet, rejoicing that 
he had the sea for his camp. And upon his companions 
dissuading him from continuing the war any longer, he 
acquiesced in their advice, and returned back to Gaul. 




66 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER IV. 

NENNIUS, THE BROTHER OP CASSIBELLAUN, REING \VOUNI)ED 

IN RATTLE BY C^SAR, DIES. 

Cassibellaun, in joy for this triumph, returned solemn 
thanks to God ; and calling the companions of his vic- 
tory together, amply rewarded every one of them, ac- 
cording as they had distinguished themselves. On the 
other hand, he was very much oppressed with grief for 
his brother Nennius, who lay mortally wounded, and at 
the very point of death. For Csesar had wounded him 
in the encounter, and the blow which he had given 
him proved incurable ; so that fifteen days after the 
battle he died, and was bm*icd at Trinovantum, by the 
North Gate. His funeral exsequies were performed with 
regal pomp, and Csesar*s sword put into the tomb with 
him, which he had kept possession of, when struck into 
his shield in the combat. The name of the sword was 
Crocea Mors (Yellow-Death), as being mortal to every 
body that was wounded with it. 



CHAPTER V. 

CiESAR's INGLORIOUS RETURN TO GAUL. 

After this flight of Caesar, and his arrival on the 
Gallic coast, the Gauls attempted to rebel and throw off 
his yoke. For they thought he was so much weakened, 
that his forces could be no longer a terror to them. 
Besides, a general report was spread among them, that 
Cassibellaun was now out at sea with a vast fleet to 
pursue him in his flight ; on which account the Gauls, 
growing still more bold, began to think of driving him 
from their coasts. Caesar, aware of their designs, was 
not willing to engage in a doubtful war with a fierce 



BRITISH HISTORY. 67 

people, but rather chose to go to all their first nobility 
with open treasures, and reconcile them with presents. 
To the common people he promised liberty, to the dis- 
possessed the restitution of their estates, and to the 
slaves their freedom. Thus he that had insulted them 
before with the fierceness of a lion, and plundered them 
of aU, now, with the mildness of a lamb, fawns on them 
with submissive abject speeches, and is glad to restore all 
again. To these acts of meanness he was forced to con- 
descend till he had pacified them, and was able to regain 
his lost power. In the mean time not a day passed 
without his reflecting upon his flight, and the victory of 
the Britons. 

CHAPTER VI. 

cassibellaun forms a stratagem for sinking 

Cesar's ships. 

After two years were expired, he prepared to cross 
the sea again, and revenge himself on Cassibellaun, who 
having intelligence of his design, everywhere fortified 
his cities, repaired the ruined walls, and placed armed 
men at all the ports. In the river Thames, on which 
Caesar intended to sail up to Trinovantum, he caused 
iron and leaden stakes, each as thick as a man's thigh, 
to be fixed under the surface of the water, that Caesar's 
ships might founder. He then assembled all the forces 
of the island, and took up his quarters with them near 
the sea-coasts, in expectation of the enemy's coming. 



CHAPTER VII. 

C^SAR a second time vanquished by the BRITONS. 

After he had furnished himself with all necessaries, 
the Roman general embarked with a vast army, eager 
to revenge himself on a people that had defeated him ; 
in which he undoubtedly would have succeeded, if he 

f2 



68 OFX)FFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

could but have brought his fleet safe to land ; but this 
he was not able to do. For in sailing up the Thames to 
Trinovantum, the ships struck against the stakes, which 
so endangered them all on a sudden, that many thou- 
sands of the men were drowned, while the ships being 
pierced sunk into the river. Csesar, upon this, employed 
all his force to shift his sails, and hastened to get back 
again to land. And so those that remained, after a nar- 
row escape, went on shore with him. Cassibellaun, who 
was present upon the bank, with joy observed the disas- 
ter of the drowned, but grieved at the escape of the 
rest ; and upon his giving a signal to his men, made an 
attack upon the Romans, who, notwithstanding the dan- 
ger they had sufiered in the river, when landed, bravely 
withstood the Britons; and having no other fence to 
trust to but their own courage, they made no small 
slaughter ; but yet suffered a greater loss themselves, 
than that which they were able to give the enemy. For 
their number was considerably diminished by their loss 
in the river ; whereas the Britons being hourly increased 
with new recruits, were three times their number, and 
by that advantage defeated them. Csesar, seeing he 
could no longer maintain his ground, fled with a small 
body of men to his ships, and made the sea his safe 
retreat ; and as the wind stood fair, he hoisted his sails, 
and steered to the shore of the Morini. From thence 
he repaired to a certain tower, which he had built at a 
place called Odnea, before this second expedition into 
Britain. For he durst not trust the fickleness of the 
Gauls, who he feared would fall upon him a second time, 
as we have said already they did before, after the firet 
flight he was forced to make before the Britons. And 
on that account he had built this tower for a refuge to 
himself, that he might be able to maintain his ground 
against a rebellious people, if they should make insur- 
rection against him. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 69 



CHAPTER VIII. 

EVELINUS KILLS HIRELGLAS. ANDROGEUS DESIRES C^BSAR*S 
ASSISTANCE AGAINST CASSIBELLAUN. 

Cassibellaun, elevated with joy for this second victory, 
published a decree, to summon all the nobility of Britain 
with their wives to Trinovantum, in order to perform 
solemn sacrifices to their tutelary gods, who had given 
them the victory over so great a commander. Accord- 
ingly, they all appeared, and prepared a variety of sacri- 
fices, for which there was a great slaughter of cattle. 
At this solemnity they offered forty thousand cows, and 
a hundred thousand sheep, and also fowls of several 
kinds, without number, besides thirty thousand wild 
beasts of several kinds. As soon as they had performed 
these solemn honours to their gods, they feasted them- 
selves on the remainder, as was usual at such sacrifices, 
and spent the rest of the day and night in various plays 
and sports. Amidst these diversions, it happened that 
two noble youths, whereof one was nephew to the king, 
the other to Duke Androgens, wrestled together, and 
afterwards had a dispute about the victory. The name 
of the king''s nephew was Hirelglas, the other's Eveli- 
nus. As they were reproaching each other, Evelinus 
snatched up his sword and cut off the head of his rival. 
This sudden disaster put the whole court into a con- 
sternation, upon which the king ordered Evelinus to be 
brought before him, that he might be ready to undergo 
such punishment as the nobility should determine, and 
that the death of Hirelglas might be revenged upon him, 
if he were unjustly killed. Androgens, suspecting the 
king'*s intentions, made answer, that he had a court of 
his own, and that whatever should be alleged against his 
own men, ought to be determined there. If, therefore, 
he were resolved to demand justice of Evelinus, he might 



70 GEOFFRKY OF MONMOUTH. 

have it at Trinovantum, according to ancient custom. 
Cassibellaun, finding he could not attain his ends, 
threatened Androgeus to destroy his country with fire 
and sword, if he would not comply with his demands. 
But Androgeus, now incensed, scorned all compliance 
with him. On the other hand, Cassibellaun, in a great 
rage, hastened to make good his threats, and ravage 
the country. This forced Androgeus to make use of 
daily solicitations to the king, by means of such as 
were related to him, or intimate with him, to divert his 
rage. But when he found these methods ineffectual, 
he began in earnest to consider how to oppose him. At 
last, when all other hopes failed, he resolved to request 
assistance from Csesar, and wrote a letter to him to this 
effect : — 

" Androgeus, Duke of Trinovantum, to Caius Julius 
Csesar, instead of wishing death as formerly, now wishes 
health. I repent that ever I acted against you, when 
you made war against the king. Had I never been 
guilty of such exploits, you would have vanquished Cas- 
sibellaun, who is so swollen with pride since his victory, 
that he is endeavouring to drive me out of his coasts, 
who procured him that triumph. Is this a fit reward for 
my services ? I have settled him in an inheritance ; and 
he endeavours to disinherit me. I have a second time 
restored him to the kingdom : and he endeavours to de- 
stroy me. All this have I done for him in fighting 
against you. I call the gods to witness I have not de- 
served his anger, unless I can be said to deserve it for 
refusing to deliver up my nephew, whom he would have 
condemned to die unjustly. Of which, that you may be 
better able to judge, hear this account of the matter. 
It happened that for joy of the victory we performed 
solemn honours to our tutelary gods, in which after we 
had finished our sacrifices, our youth began to divert 
themselves with sports. Among the rest our two 
nephews, encouraged by the example of the others. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



71 



entered the lists; and when mine had got the better, 
the other without any cause was incensed, and just 
going to strike him ; but he avoided the blow, and taking 
him by the hand that held the sword, strove to wrest it 
from him. In this struggle the king's nephew happened 
to fall upon the sword's point, and died upon the spot. 
When the king was informed of it, he commanded me 
to deliver up the youth, that he might be punished for 
murder, I refused to do it ; whereupon he invaded my 
provinces with all his forces, and has given me very great 
disturbance ; flying, therefore, to your clemency, I desire 
your assistance, that by you I may be restored to my 
dignity, and by me you may gain possession of Britain. 
Let no doubts or suspicion of treachery in this matter 
detain you. Be influenced by the common motive of 
mankind ; let past enmities beget a desire of friendship ; 
and after defeat make you more eager for victory." 



CHAPTER IX. 

CASSIBELLAUN, BEING PUT TO FLIGHT, AND BESIEGED 
BY CiESAR, DESIRES PEACE. 

C^SAR, having read the letter, was advised by his 
friends not to go into Britain upon a bare verbal invita- 
tion of the duke, unless he would send such hostages 
as might be for his security. Without delay, there- 
fore. Androgens sent his son Scseva with thirty young 
noblemen nearly related to him. Upon dehvery of the 
hostages, Csesar, relieved from his suspicion, reassembled 
his forces, and with a fair wind arrived at the port of 
Rutupi. In the meantime Cassibellaun had begun to Richbo 
besiege Trinovantum and ravage the country towns ; but ^^^^ ' 
finding that Caesar was arrived, he raised the siege and 
hastened to meet him. As soon as he entered a valley 
near Dorobernia, he saw the Roman army preparing Dover, 
their camp : for Androgens had conducted them to this 



72 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

place, for the convenience of making a sudden assault 
upon the city. The Romans, seeing the Britons advan- 
cing towards them, quickly flew to their arms, and ranged 
themselves in several bodies. The Britons also put on 
their arms, and placed themselves in their ranks. But 
Androgeus with five thousand men lay hid in a wood 
hard by, to be ready to assist Csesar, and spring forth 
on a sudden upon Cassibellaun and his party. Both 
armies now approached to begin the fight, some with 
bows and arrows, some with swords, so that much 
blood was shed on both sides, and the wounded fell 
down like leaves in autunm. While they were thus 
engaged, Androgeus sallied forth from the wood, and fell 
upon the rear of Cassibellaun s army, upon which the 
hopes of the battle entirely depended. And now, what 
with the breach which the Romans had made through 
them just before, what with the furious irruption of their 
own countrymen, they were no longer able to stand 
their ground, but were obliged with their broken forces to 
quit the field. Near the place stood a rocky mountain, 
on the top of which was a thick hazel wood. Hither 
Cassibellaun fled with his men after he found himself 
worsted ; and having climbed up to the top of the moun- 
tain, bravely defended himself and killed the pursuing 
enemy. For the Roman forces with those of Androgeus 
pursued him to disperse his flying troops, and climbing 
up the mountain after them made many assaults, but all 
to little purpose; for the rockiness of the mountain 
and great height of its top was a defence to the Britons, 
and the advantage of higher ground gave them an 
opportunity of killing great numbers of the enemy. 
Csesar hereupon besieged the mountain that whole 
night, which had now overtaken them, and shut up all 
the avenues to it ; intending to reduce the king by 
famine, since he could not do it by force of arms. Such 
was the wonderful valour of the British nation in those 
times, that they were able to put the conqueror of the 



BRITISH HISTORY. 73 

world twice to flight ; and being ready to die for the 
defence of their country and liberty, they, even though 
defeated, withstood him whom the jvhole world could not 
withstand. Hence Lucan in their praise says of Csesar, lucbo. 

" Territa qusesitis ostendit terga Britannis." 

With pride he sought the Britons, but when found. 
Dreaded their force, and fled the hostile ground. 

Two days were now passed, when Cassibellaun having 
consumed all his provision, feared famine would oblige 
him to surrender himself prisoner to Csesar. For this 
reason he sent a message to Androgens to make his 
peace with Julius, lest the honour of the nation might 
suffer by his being taken prisoner. He likewise repre- 
sented to him, that he did not deserve to be pursued to 
death for the annoyance which he had given him. As soon 
as the messengers had told this to Androgens, he made 
answer : — " That prince deserves not to be loved, who in 
war is mild as a lamb, but in peace cruel as a lion. Ye 
gods of heaven and earth ! Does my Lord then con- 
descend to entreat me now, whom before he took upon 
him to command i Does he desire to be reconciled and 
make his submission to Csesar, of whom Csesar himself 
had before desired peace ? He ought therefore to have 
considered, that he who was able to drive so great a 
commander out of the kingdom, was able also to bring 
him back again. I ought not to have been so unjustly 
treated, who had then done him so much service, as well 
as now so much injury. He must be mad who either 
injures or reproaches his fellow-soldiers by whom he 
defeats the enemy. The victory is not the commander^ 
but theirs who lose their blood in fighting for him. How- 
ever, I will procure him peace if I can, for the injury 
which he has done me is sufficiently revenged upon him, 
since he sues for mercy to me.^' 



74 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER X. 

ANDROGEUS'S SPEECH TO C^»AR. 

Androgeus after this went to Caosar, and after a re- 
spectful salutation addressed him in this manner: — 
" You have sufficiently revenged yourself upon Cassibel- 
laun; and now let clemency take place of vengeance. 
What more is there to be done than that he make his 
submission and pay tribute to the Roman state !^ To 
this Csesar returned him no answer : upon which Andro- 
geus said again ; '^ My whole engagement with you, 
Csesar, was only to reduce Britain under your power, by 
the submission of Cassibellaun. Behold! Cassibellaun 
is now vanquished, and Britain by my assistance become 
subject to you. What further service do I owe you? 
God forbid that I should suffer my sovereign, who sues 
to me for peace, and makes me satisfaction for the 
injury which he has done me, to be in prison or in chains. 
It is no easy matter to put Cassibellaun to death while I 
have life ; and if you do not comply with my demand, I 
shall not be ashamed to give him my assistance/^ Csesar, 
alarmed at these menaces of Androgens, was forced to 
Cassibellaun complv, and entered into peace with Cassibellaun, on 

pays tribute m. y ' m. i.ii»i 

tocajsar. couditiou that he should pay a yearly tribute of three 
thousand pounds of silver. So then Julius and Cassibel- 
laun fi*om this time became friends, and made presents 
to each other. After this, Csesar wintered in Britain, 
and the following spring returned into Gaul. At length 
he assembled all his forces, and marched towards Rome 
against Pompey. 

CHAPTER XI. 

TENUANTIU8 IS MADE KING OF BRITAIN AFTER CASSIBELLAUN. 

Cassibellaun After scvcn ycars had expired, Cassibellaun died and 
York. * was buried at York. He was succeeded by Tenuantius, 



BRITISH HISTORY. 75 

duke of Cornwall^ and brother of Androgens: for An- 
drogens was gone to Rome with Csesar. Tenuantius 
therefore, now wearing the crown, governed the kingdom 
with diligence. He was a warhke man, and a strict ob- 
server of justice. After him Kymbelinus his son was cymbeuae. 
advanced to the throne, being a great soldier, and brought 
up by Augustus Caesar. He had contracted so great a 
friendship with the Romans, that he freely paid them 
tribute when he might have very weU refused it. In his 
days was bom our Lord Jesus Christ, by whose precious Birth of our 
blood mankind was redeemed from the devil, under which 
they had been before enslaved. 

CHAPTER XII. 

UPON GUIDERIUS'*S REFUSING TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE 
ROMANS, CLAUDIUS C^SAR INVADES BRITAIN. 

Kymbelinus, when he had governed Britain ten years, ciaudiua 
begat two sons, the elder named Guiderius, the other ^'2^8^. 
Arviragus. After his death the government fell to**^* 
Guiderius. This prince refused to pay tribute to the 
Romans ; for which reason Claudius, who was now emperor, 
inarched against him. He was attended in this expedi- 
tion by the commander of his army, who was called in 
the British tongue, Leuis Hamo, by whose advice the Hamo. 
following war was to be carried on. This man, there- 
fore, arriving at the city of Portcestre, began to block up portcherter. 
the gates with a wall, and denied the citizens all liberty 
of passing out. For his design was either to reduce them 
to subjection by famine, or kill them without mercy. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

LEUIS HAMO, A ROMAN, BY WICKED TREACHERY 

KILLS GUIDERIUS. 

Guiderius, upon the news of Claudius's coming, assem- 
bled all the soldiery of the kingdom, and went to meet 



76 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



the Roman army. In the battle that ensued, he began 
the assault with great eagerness, and did more execution 
with his own sword than the greater part of his army. 
Claudius was now on the point of retreating to his ships, 
and the Romans very nearly routed, when the crafty 
Hamo, throwing aside his own armour, put on that of the 
Britons, and as a Briton fought against his own men. 
Then he exhorted the Britons to a vigorous assault, 
promising them a speedy victory. For he had learned 
their language and manners, having been educated among 
the British hostages at Rome. By these means he ap- 
proached by little and little to the king, and seizing an 
opportunity to approach, stabbed him while imder no 
apprehension of danger, and then escaped through the 
enemy's ranks to return to his men with the news of his 
ArviragiM. detestable exploit. But Arviragus, his brother, seeing 
him killed, forthwith put off his own and put on his 
brother's habiliments, and as if he had been Guiderius 
himself, encouraged the Britons to stand their ground. 
Accordingly, as they knew nothing of the king's disaster, 
they made a vigorous resistance, fought courageously, and 
killed no small number of the enemy. At last the 
Romans gave ground, and dividing themselves into two 
bodies, basely quitted the field. Caesar with one part, 
to secure himself, retired to his ships ; but Hamo fled to 
the woods, because he had not time to get to the ships. 
Arviragus, therefore, thinking that Claudius fled along 
with him, pursued him with all speed, and did not leave 
off harassing him from place to place, till he overtook him 
upon a part of the sea-coast, which, from the name of 
Hamo, is now called Southampton. There was at the 
same place a convenient haven for ships, and some mer- 
chant-ships at anchor. And just as Hamo was attempt- 
ing to get on board them, Arviragus came upon him 
unawares, and forthwith killed him. And ever since that 
time the haven has been called Hamo's port. 



Southamp 
ton. 



imiTISH HISTORY. 77 



CHAPTER XIV. 

AllVIRAGUS, KING OP BRITAIN, MAKES HIS SUBMISSION TO 
CLAUDIUS, WHO WITH HIS ASSISTANCE CONQUERS THE 
ORKNEY ISLANDS. 

In the mean time, Claudius, with his remaining forces, 
assaulted the city above-mentioned, which was then 
called Kaerperis, now Portcestre, and presently level- 
led the walls, and having reduced the citizens to 
subjection, went after Arviragus, who had entered 
Winchester. Afterwards he besieged that city, and winchwter. 
employed a variety of engines against it. Arviragus, 
seeing himself in these straits, called his troops together, 
and opened the gates, to march out and give him battle. 
But just as he was ready to begin the attack, Claudius, 
who feared the boldness of the king, and the bravery of 
the Britons, sent a message to him with a proposal of 
peace ; choosing rather to reduce them by wisdom and 
policy, than run the hazard of a battle. To this purpose 
he offered a reconciliation with him, and promised to 
give him his daughter, if he would only acknowledge 
the kingdom of Britain subject to the Roman state. The 
nobility hereupon persuaded him to lay aside thoughts of 
war, and be content with Claudius's promise ; represent- 
ing to him at the same time, that it was no disgrace to 
be subject to the Romans, who enjoyed the empire of 
the whole world. By these and many other arguments 
he was prevailed upon to hearken to their advice, and 
make his submission to Caesar. After which Claudius 
sent to Rome for his daughter, and then, with the assist- 
ance of Arviraffus,' reduced the Orkney and the provin- Orkney 
cial islands to his power. 



78 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER XV. 



CLAUDIUS GIVES HIS DAUGHTER GENUISSA FOR A WIFE 
TO ARVIRAGUS, AND RETURNS TO ROME. 

Arviragus As sooH as the winter was over, those that were sent 
diughter of for Claudius's daughter returned with her, and presented 
her to her father. The damsel's name was Genuissa, 
and so great was her beauty, that it raised the admi- 
ration of all that saw her. After her marriage with the 
king, she gained so great an ascendant over his affec- 
tions, that he in a manner valued nothing but her alone : 
insomuch that he was desirous to have the place ho- 
noured where the nuptials were solemnized, and moved 
Claudius to build a city upon it, for a monument to pos- 
terity of so great and happy a marriage. Claudius con- 
sented to it, and commanded a city to be built, which 
after his name is called Kaerglou, that is Gloucester, to 
this day, and is situated on the confines of Demetia and 
Loegria, upon the banks of the Severn. But some say 
that it derived its name from Duke Gloius, a son that 
was bom to Claudius there, and to whom, after the 
death of Arviragus, fell the dukedom of Demetia. The 
city being finished, and the island now enjoying peace, 
Claudius returned to Rome, leaving to Arviragus the 
government of the British islands. At the same time 
the Apostle Peter founded the Church of Antioch ; and 
afterwards coming to Rome, was bishop there, and sent 
Mark, the Evangelist, into Egypt to preach the Gospel 
which he had written. 



Gloucester 
built. 



CHAPTER XVI. 



ARVIRAGUS REVOLTING FROM THE ROMANS, VESPASIAN 

IS SENT INTO BRITAIN. 

After the departure of Claudius, Arviragus began to 
show his wisdom and courage, to rebuild cities and towns, 



BRITISH HISTORY. 79 

and to exercise so great authority over his own people, 
that he became a terror to the kings of remote countries. 
But this so elevated him with pride that he despised the 
Roman power, disdained any longer subjection to the 
senate, and assumed to himself the sole authority in 
every thing. Upon this news Vespasian was sent by 
Claudius to procure a reconciliation with Arviragus, or to 
reduce him to the subjection of the Romans. When, 
therefore, Vespasian arrived at the haven of Rutupi, Richbo. 
Arviragus met him, and prevented his entering the 
port. For he brought so great an army along with him, 
that the Romans, for fear of his falling upon them, durst 
not come ashore. Vespasian upon this withdrew from 
that port, and shifting his sails arrived at the shore of 
Totness. As soon as he was landed, he marched directly Totnew. 
to besiege Kaerpenhuelgoit, now Exeter ; and after lying Exeter, 
before it seven days, was overtaken by Arviragus and his 
army, who gave him battle. That day great destruction 
was made in both armies, but neither got the victory. 
The next morning, by the mediation of Queen Oenuissa, 
the two leaders were made friends, and sent their men 
over to Ireland. As soon as winter was over, Vespasian 
returned to Rome, but Arviragus continued still in 
Britain. Afterwards, when he grew old, he began to 
show much respect to the senate, and to govern his 
kingdom in peace and tranquillity. He confirmed the 
old laws of his ancestors, and enacted some new ones, 
and made very ample presents to all persons of merit. 
So that his fame spread over all Europe, and he was both 
loved and feared by the Romans, and became the subject 
of their discourse more than any king in his time. Hence 
Juvenal relates how a certain blind man, speaking of a 
turbot that was taken, said : — 

" Regem aliquem capies aut de temone Briianno Juven. Sat. 

Decidet Arviragus." 

Arviragus shall from his chariot fall. 

Or thee his lord some captive king shall call. 



Arviragui 
buried at 
Gloucester. 



80 



GEOFFKEY OF MONMOUTH. 



In war none was more fierce than he, in peace none 
more mild, none more pleasing, or in his presents more 
magnificent. When he had finished his course of life, he 
was buried at Gloucester, in a certain temple which he 
had built and dedicated to the honour of Claudius. 



CHAPTER XVII. 



Westmore- 
land. 



Caithness. 



RODRIC, LEADER OF THE PICTS, IS VANQUISHED BY MARIUS. 

His son Marius, a man of admirable prudence and 
wisdom, succeeded him in the kingdom. In his reign a 
certain king of the Picts, named Rodric, came from 
Scythia with a great fleet, and arrived in the north part 
of Britain, which is called Albania, and began to ravage 
that country. Marius therefore raising an army went 
in quest of him, and killed him in battle, and gained the 
victory ; for a monument of which he set up a stone in 
the province, which from his name was afterwards called 
Westmoreland, where there is an inscription retaining 
his memory to this day. He gave the conquered people 
that came with Rodric liberty to inhabit that part of 
Albania which is called Cathness, that had been a long 
time desert and uncultivated. And as they had no 
wives, they desired to have the daughters and kins- 
women of the Britons. But the Britons refused, dis- 
daining to unite with such a people. Having suffered 
a repulse here, they sailed over into Ireland, and mar- 
ried the women of that country," and by their ofispring 
increased their number. But let thus much sufiice 
concerning them, since I do not propose to write the 
history of this people, or of the Scots, who derived their 
original from them and the Irish. Marius, after he 
had settled the island in perfect peace, began to love 
the Roman people, paying the tribute that was demanded 
of him ; and in imitation of his father*s example prac- 



BRITISH HISTORY. 81 

tised justice, law, peace, and every thing that was 
honourable in his kingdom. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

MAKIUS DYING, IS SUCCEEDED BY COILLUS. 

As soon as he had ended his days, his son Coillus took 
upon him the government of the kingdom. He had 
been brought up from his infancy at Rome, and having 
been taught the Roman manners, had contracted a most 
strict amity with them. He likewise paid them tribute, 
and declined making them any opposition, because he 
saw the whole world subject to them, and that no town 
or country was out of the limits of their power. By 
paying therefore what was required of him, he enjoyed 
his kingdom in peace : and no king ever showed greater 
respect to his nobility, not only permitting them to enjoy 
their own with quiet, but also binding them to him by 
his continual bounty and munificence. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

LUCIUS IS THE FIRST BRITISH KING THAT EMBRACES THE 
CHRISTIAN FAITH, TOGETHER WITH HIS PEOPLE. 

Coillus had but one son, named Lucius, who obtaining 
the crown after his father's decease, imitated all his acts 
of goodness, and seemed to his people to be no other 
than Coillus himself revived. As he had made so good 
a beginning, he was willing to make a better end : for 
which purpose he sent letters to Pope Eleutherius, de- 
siring to be instructed by him in the Christian religion. 
For the miracles which Christ's disciples performed in 
several nations, wrought a conviction in his mind; so 
that being inflamed with an ardent love of the true faith, 
he obtained the accomplishment of his pious request. 



82 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

For that holy pope, upon receipt of this devout petition, 
sent to him two most religious doctors, Faganus and 
Duvanus, who, after they had preached concerning the 
incarnation of the word of God, administered baptism 
to him, and made him a proselyte to the Christian 
faith. Immediately upon this, people from all countries, 
assembling together, followed the king's example, and 
being washed in the same holy laver, were made par- 
takers of the kingdom of Heaven. The holy doctors, 
after they had almost extinguished paganism over the 
whole island, dedicated the temples, that had been 
founded in honour of many gods, to the one only Ood 
and his saints, and filled them with congregations of 
Christians. There were then in Britain eight and 
twenty flamens, as also three arehflamens, to whose 
jurisdiction the other judges and enthusiasts were sub- 
ject. These also, according to the apostolic command, 
they delivered from idolatry, and where they were 
flamens made them bishops, where arehflamens, arch- 
bishops. The seats of the arehflamens were at the 
three noblest cities, viz. London, York, and the City of 
Legions, which its old walls and buildings show to have 
been situated upon the river Uske in Glamorganshire. 
To these three, now purified from superstition, were 
made subject twenty-eight bishops with their dioceses. 
To the metropolitan of York were subject Deira and 
Albania, which the great river Humber divides from 
Loegria. To the metropolitan of London were subject 
Loegria and Cornwall. These two provinces the Severn 
divides from Kambria or Wales, which was subject to 
the City of Legions. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 83 



CHAPTER XX. 

FAGANUS AND DUVANUS GIVE AN ACCOUNT AT ROME, OP 
WHAT THEY HAD DONE IN BRITAIN. 

At last, when they had made an entire reformation 
here, the two prelates returned to Rome, and desired 
the pope to confirm what they had done. As soon as 
they had obtained a confirmation, they returned again to 
Britain, accompanied with many others, by whose doc- 
trine the British nation was in a short time strengthened 
in the faith. Their names and acts are recorded in a 
book which Gildas wrote concerning the victory of 
Aurelius Ambrosius ; and what is delivered in so bright 
a treatise, needs not to be repeated here in a meaner 
style. 



o2 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH'S 



BRITISH HISTORY, 



BOOK V. 



CHAPTER I. 

LUCIUS DIES WITHOUT ISSUE, AND IS A BENEFACTOR 

TO THE CHURCHES. 

In the mean time, the glorious King Lucius highly re- 
joiced at the great progress which the true faith and 
worship had made in his kingdom, and permitted the 
possessions and territories which formerly belonged to 
the temples of the gods, to be converted to a better use, 
and appropriated to Christian churches. And because a 
greater honour was due to them than to the others, he 
made large additions of lands and manor-houses, and all 
kinds of privileges to them. Amidst these and other 
acts of his great piety, he departed this Hfe in the city 
King Lucius of Gloucestcr, and was honourably buried in the cathe- 
Gioucester. dral church, in the hundred and fifty-sixth year after 
our Lord^s incarnation. He had no issue to succeed 
him, so that after his decease there arose a dissension 
among the Britons, and the Roman power was much 
weakened. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 85 



CHAPTER 11. 

SEVERUS, A SENATOR, SUBDUES PART OF BRITAIN : HIS 

WAR WITH FULGENIUS. 

When this news was brought to Rome, the senate sevems. 
dispatched Severus, a senator, with two legions, to reduce 
the country to subjection. As soon as he was arrived, 
he came to a battle with the Britons, part of whom he 
obliged to submit to him, and the other part which he 
could not subdue he endeavoured to distress in several 
cruel engagements, and forced them to fly beyond Deira 
into Albania. Notwithstanding which they opposed him 
with all their might under the conduct of Fulgenius, 
and often made great slaughter both of their own coun- 
trymen and of the Romans. For Fulgenius brought to 
his assistance all the people of the islands that he could 
find, and so frequently gained the victory. The emperor, 
not being able to resist the irruptions which he made, 
commanded a wall to be built between Deira and Alba- 
nia, to hinder his excursions upon them ; they accord- 
ingly made one at the common charge from sea to sea, 
which for a long time hindered the approach of the 
enemy. But Fulgenius, when he was unable to make 
any longer resistance^ made a voyage into Scythia, to 
desire the assistance of the Picts towards his restoration. 
And when he had got together all the forces of that 
country, he returned with a great fleet into Britain, and 
besieged York. Upon this news being spread through 
the country, the greatest part of the Britons deserted 
Severus, and went over to Fulgenius. However this did 
not make Severus desist from his enterprise : but calling 
together the Romans, and the rest of the Britons that 
adhered to him, he marched to the siege, and fought with 
Fulgenius; but the engagement proving very sharp, he 
was killed with many of his followers : Fulgenius also 
was mortally wounded. Afterwards Severus was buried 
at York, which city was taken by his legions. He left 



calla. 



86 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

two sons, Bassianus and Geta, whereof Geta had a 
Bassianus, Roman for his mother, but Bassianus a Briton. There- 

otherwise 

called Can- foro upon the death of their father the Romans made 
Geta king, favouring him on account of his being a 
Roman by both his parents: but the Britons rejected 
him, and advanced Bassianus, as being their countryman 
by his mother's side. This proved the occasion of a 
battle between the two brothers, in which Geta was 
killed ; and so Bassianus obtained the sovereignty. 



CHAPTER III. 

CARAUS1U8 ADVANCED TO BE KING OF BRITAIN. 

carauaius. At that time there was in Britain one Carausius, a 
young man of mean birth, who, having given proof of 
his bravery in many engagements, went to Rome, and 
solicited the senate for leave to defend with a fleet the 
maritime coasts of Britain, from the incursions of bar- 
barians ; which if they would grant him, he promised to 
do more for the honour and service of the Common- 
wealth, than by delivering up to them the kingdom of 
Britain. The senate, deluded by his specious promises, 
granted him his request, and so with his conmussion 
sealed, he returned to Britain. Then by wicked prac- 
tices getting a fleet together, he enlisted into his ser- 
vice a body of the bravest youths, and putting out 
to sea^ sailed round the whole kingdom, causing very 
great disturbance among the people. In the mean time 
he invaded the adjacent islands, where he destroyed all 
before him, countries, cities, and towns, and plundered 
the inhabitants of all they had. By this conduct he 
encouraged all manner of dissolute fellows to flock to 
him in hope of plunder, and in a very short time was 
attended by an army which no neighbouring prince was 
able to oppose. This made him begin to swell with pride, 
and to propose to the Britons, that they should make 
him their king ; for which consideration he promised to 



BRITISH HISTORY. 87 

kill and banish the Romans, and free the whole island 
from the invasions of barbarous nations. Accordingly 
obtaining his request, he fell upon Baasianus and killed 
him, and then took upon him the government of the 
kingdom. For Bassianus was betrayed by the Picts, 
whom Fulgenius his mother^s brother had brought with 
him into Britain, and who, being corrupted by the pro- 
mises and presents of Carausius, instead of assisting 
Bassianus, deserted him in the very battle, and fell upon 
his men ; so that the rest were put into a consternation, 
and not knowing their friends from their foes, quickly 
gave ground, and left the victory to Carausius. Then 
he, to reward the Picts for this success, gave them a 
habitation in Albania, where they continued afterwards 
mixed with the Briton»» 



CHAPTER IV. 

ALLECTUS KILLS CARAUSIUS, BUT IS AFTERWARDS HIMSELF 
SLAIN IN FLIGHT BY ASCLEPIODOTUS. 

When the news of these proceedings of Carausius 
arrived at Rome, the senate commissioned Allectus, AUectua. 
with three legions, to kill the tyrant, and restore the 
kingdom of Britain to the Roman power. No sooner 
was he arrived, than he fought with Carausius, killed him, 
and took upon himself the government. After which he 
miserably oppressed the Britons, for having deserted the 
commonwealth, and adhered to Carausius. But the 
Britons, not enduring this, advanced Asclepiodotus, 
duke of Cornwall, to be their king, and then unanimously 
inarched against Allectus^ and challenged him to battle. 
He was then at London, celebrating a feast to his tute- 
lary gods ; but being informed of the coming of Ascle- 
piodotus, he quitted the sacrifice, and went out with all 
his forces to meet him, and engaged with him in a sharp 
fight. But Asclepiodotus had the advantage, and dis< 



88 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

persed and put to flight AUectus's troops, and in the 
pursuit killed many thousands, as also King Allectus 
himself. After this victory, Livius Gallus, the colleague 
of Allectus, assembled the rest of the Romans, shut the 
gates of the city, and placed his men in the towers and 
other fortifications, thinking by these means either to make 
a stand against Asclepiodotus, or at least to avoid immi- 
nent death. But Asclepiodotus seeing this laid siege to 
the city, and sent word to all the dukes of Britain, that 
he had killed Allectus with a great number of his men, 
and was besieging Gallus and the rest of the Romans 
in London ; and therefore earnestly entreated them to 
hasten to his assistance, representing to them withal, 
how easy it was to extirpate the whole race of the 
Romans out of Britain, provided they would all join 
their forces against the besieged. At this sununons 
came the Demetians, Venedotians, Deirans, Albanians, 
and all others of the British race. As soon as they 
appeared before the duke, he commanded vast numbers 
of engines to be made, to beat down the walls of the 
city. Accordingly every one readily executed his orders 
with great bravery, and made a violent assault upon the 
city, the walls of which were in a very short time battered 
down, and a passage made into it. Affcer these prepara- 
tions, they began a bloody assault upon the Romans, who, 
seeing their fellow soldiers falling before them without 
intermission, persuaded Gallus to offer a surrender on 
the terms of having quarter granted them, and leave to 
depart : for they were now all killed except one legion, 
which still held out. Gallus consented to the proposal, 
and accordingly surrendered himself and his men to 
Asclepiodotus, who was disposed to give them quarter ; 
but he was prevented by a body of Venedotians, who, 
rushed upon them, and the same day cut off all their 
heads upon a brook within the city, which from the name 
of the commander was afterwarda called in the British 
tongue Nautgallim, and in the Saxon Gallembome. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 89 



CHAPTER V. 

ASCLEPIODOTUS OBTAINS THE CROWN. DIOOLESIAn'^S 
MASSACRE OF THE CHRISTIANS IN BRITAIN. 

The Romans being thus defeated, Aselepiodotus, with 
the consent of the people, placed the crown upon his own 
head, and governed the country in justice and peace ten 
years, and curbed the insolence and outrages committed 
by plunderers and robbers. In his days began the per- 
secution of the Emperor Dioclesian ; and Christianity, Diociesian's 
which from the time of King Lucius had continued fixed 
and undisturbed, was almost abolished over the whole 
island. This was principally owing to Maximianus Her- Maximian. 
culius, general of that tyrant^s army, by whose command 
all the churches were pulled down, and all the copies of 
the Holy Scriptures that could be found, were burnt in 
the public markets. The priests also, with the believers 
under their care, were put to death, and with emulation 
pressed in crowds together for a speedy passage to the 
joys of heaven, as their proper dwelling place. God 
therefore magnified his goodness to us, forasmuch as he 
did, in that time of persecution, of his mere grace, light 
up the bright lamps of the Holy Martyrs, to prevent the 
spreading of gross darkness over the people of Britain ; 
whose sepulchres and places of suffering might have been 
a means of inflaming our minds with the greatest fer- 
vency of divine love, had not the deplorable impiety of 
barbarians deprived us of them. Among others of both First Eng- 
sexes who continued firm in the army of Christ, and 
suffered, were Alban of Verulam, and Julius and Aaron, 
both of the City of Legions. Of these, Alban, out of the Sec sede** 
fervour of his charity, when his confessor, Amphibalus, i. 7.* 
was pursued by the persecutors, and just ready to be 
apprehended, first hid him in his house, and then offered 
himself to die for him ; imitating in this Christ himself. 



90 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

who laid down his life for his sheep. The other two, 
after being torn limb from limb, in a manner unheard of, 
received the crown of martyrdom, and were elevated up 
to the gates of the heavenly Jerusalem. 



CHAPTER VI. 

AN INSURRECTION AGAINST ASCLEPIODOTUS, BY COEL, WHOSE 
DAUGHTER HELENA CONSTANTIUS MARRIES. 

coei,dukeof In the meantime Coel, duke of Kaercolvin or Colches- 
ter, made an insurrection against King Asclepiodotus, 
and in a pitched battle killed him, and took possession 
of his crown. The senate, hearing this, rejoiced at the 
king's death, who had given such disturbance to the 
Roman power : and reflecting on the damage which they 
had sustained by the loss of this kingdom, they sent 
Constantius the senator, a man of prudence and courage, 
who had reduced Spain under their subjection, and who 
was above all the rest industrious to promote the good 
of the commonwealth. Coel, having information of his 
coming, was afraid to engage him in battle, on account 
of a report, that no king was able to stand before him. 
Therefore, as soon as Constantius was arrived at the 
island, Coel sent ambassadors to him with offers of peace 
and submission, on condition that he should enjoy the 
kingdom of Britain, and pay no more than the usual 
tribute to the Roman state. Constantius consented to 
this proposal, and so, upon their giving hostages, peace 
was confirmed between them. The month after Coel 
was seized with a very great sickness, of which he died 

Constantius withiu eight days. After his decease, Constantius him- 
self was crowned, and married the daughter of Coel, 
whose name was Helena. She surpassed all the ladies of 
the country in beauty, as she did all others of the time in 
her skill in music and the liberal arts. Her father had 
no other issue to succeed him on the throne ; for which 



BRITISH HISTORY. 91 

reason he was very careful about her education, that she 
might be better qualified to govern the kingdom. Con- 
stantius, therefore, having made her partner of his bed, 
had a son by her called Constantine. After eleven years coDBtaDtine. 
were expired, he died at York, and bestowed the king- 
dom upon his son, who, within a few years after he was 
raised to this dignity, began to give proofs of heroic 
virtue, undaunted courage, and strict observance of 
justice towards his people. He put a stop to the depre- 
dations of robbers, suppressed the insolence of tyrants, 
and endeavoured everywhere to restore peace. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE ROMANS DESIRE CONST ANTINe''s ASSISTANCE AGAINST 
THE CRUELTY OF MAXENTIUS. 

At that time there was a tyrant at Rome, named Maxentius. 
Maxentius, who made it his endeavour to confiscate 
the estates of all the best of the nobility, and op- 
pressed the commonwealth with his grievous tyranny. 
Whilst he, therefore, was proceeding in his cruelty, those 
that were banished fled to Constantine in Britain, and 
were honourably entertained by him. At last, when a 
great many such had resorted to him, they endeavoured 
to raise in him an abhorrence of the tyrant, and fre- 
quently expostulated with him after this manner: — 
" How long, Constantine, will you suffer our distress 
and banishment ? Why do you delay to restore us to 
our native country ? You are the only person of our 
nation that can restore to us what we have lost, by 
driving out Maxentius. For what prince is to be com- 
pared with the king of Britain, either for brave and 
gallant soldiers, or for large treasures? We entreat 
you to restore us to our estates, wives, and children, by 
conducting us with an army to Rome." 



92 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

CONSTANTINE, HAVING REDUCED ROME, OBTAINS THE EMPIRE 
OF THE WORLD. OCTAVIUS, DUKE OF THE WISSEANS, IS 
PUT TO FLIGHT BY THAHERN. 

CoNSTANTiNE, moved with these and the like speeches, 
made an expedition to Rome, and reduced it under his 
power, and afterwards obtained the empire of the whole 
world. In this expedition he carried along with him 
three uncles of Helena, viz. Leolin, Trahem, and Ma- 
rius, and advanced them to the degree of senators. In 
the mean time Octavius, duke of the Wisseans, rebelled 
against the Roman proconsuls, to whom the government 
of the island had been committed, and having killed 
them, took possession of the throne. Constantine, upon 
information of this, sent Trahem, the uncle of Helena, 
with three legions to reduce the island. Trahem came 
to shore near the city, which in the British tongue is 
called Kaerperis, and having assailed it, took it in two 
days. This news spreading over the whole country, King 
Octavius assembled all the forces of the land, and went 
to meet him not far from Winchester, in a field called 
in the British tongue Maisuriam, where he engaged with 
him in battle, and routed him. Trahem, upon this loss, 
betook himself with his broken forces to his ships, and 
in them made a voyage to Albania, in the provinces of 
which he made great destruction. When Octavius re- 
ceived intelligence of this, he followed him with his 
forces, and encountered him in Westmorland, but fled, 
having lost the victory. On the other hand, Trahem, 
when he found the day was his own, pursued Octavius, 
nor ever suffered him to be at rest till he had dispos- 
sessed him both of his cities and crown. Octavius, in 
great grief for the loss of his kingdom, went with his 
fleet to Norway, to obtain assistance from King Gom- 



BRITI8H HISTORY. 93 

bert. In the mean time he had given orders to his most 
intimate adherents to watch carefully all opportunities 
of killing Trahem, which accordingly was not long after 
done by the magistrate of a certain privileged town, who 
had a more than ordinary love for him. For as Trahem 
was one day upon a journey from London, he lay hid 
with a hundred men in the vale of a wood, through 
which he was to pass, and there fell upon him unawares, 
and killed him in the midst of his men. This news 
being brought to Octavius, he returned back to Britain, 
where he dispersed the Romans, and recovered the 
throne. In a short time after this, he arrived to such 
greatness and wealth that he feared nobody, and pos- 
sessed the kingdom until the reign of Gratian and Va- 
lentinian. 

CHAPTER IX. 

MAXIMIAN IS DESIRED FOR A KINO OF BRITAIN. 

At last, in his old age, being willing to settle the 
government, he asked his council which of his family 
they desired to have for their king after his decease. 
For he had no son, and only one daughter, to whom he 
could leave the crown. Some, therefore, advised him to 
bestow his daughter with the kingdom upon some noble 
Roman, to the end that they might enjoy a firmer peace. 
Others were of opinion that Conan Meriadoc, his ne- 
phew, ought to be preferred to the throne, and the 
daughter married to some prince of another kingdom 
with a dowry in money. While these things were in 
agitation among them, there came Caradoc, duke of caradoc. 
Cornwall, and gave his advice to invite over Maximian 
the senator, and to bestow the lady with the kingdom 
upon him, which would be a means of securing to them 
a lasting peace. For his father Leolin, the uncle of 
Constantino, whom we mentioned before, was a Briton, 
but by his mother and place of birth he was a Roman, 



94 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

and by both parents he was descended of royal blood. 
And there was a sure prospect of a firm and secure 
peace under him, on account of the right which he had 
to Britain by his descent from the emperors, and also 
from the British blood. But the duke of Cornwall, by 
delivering this advice, brought upon himself the dis- 
pleasure of Conan, the king's nephew, who was very 
ambitious of succeeding to the kingdom, and put the 
whole court into confusion about it. However, Caradoc, 
being unwilling to recede from his proposal, sent his son 
Mauricius to Rome to acquaint Maximian with what 
had passed. Mauricius was a person of large and well- 
proportioned stature, as well as great courage and bold- 
ness, and could not bear to have his judgment contra- 
dicted without a recourse to arms and duelling. On 
presenting himself before Maximian, he met with a re- 
ception suitable to his quaUty, and had the greatest 
honours paid him of any that were about him. There 
happened to be at that time a great contest between 
Maximian. Maximiaii and the two emperors, Gratian and Valenti- 
vaienuniim. Diau, ou accouut of his boiug rcfusod the third part of 
the empire, which he demanded. When, therefore, 
Mauricius saw Maximian ill-treated by the emperors, 
he took occasion from thence to address him in this 
manner. " Why need you, Maximian, stand in fear of 
Gratian, when you have so fair an opportunity of wrest- 
ing the empire from him i Come with me into Britain, 
and you shall take possession of that crown. For King 
Octavius, being now grown old and infirm, desires nothing 
more than to find some such proper person, to bestow 
his kingdom and daughter upon. He has no male issue, 
and therefore has asked the advice of his nobility, to 
whom he should marry his daughter with the kingdom ; 
and they to his satisfaction have passed a decree, that 
the kingdom and lady be given to you, and have sent 
me to acquaint you with it. So that if you go with me, 
and accomplish this affair, you may with the treasure 



BRITISH HISTORY. 95 

and forces of Britain be able to return back to Rome, 
drive out the emperors, and gain the empire to yourself. 
For in this manner did your kinsman Constantius, and 
several others of our kings who raised themselves to the 
empire.*^ 

CHAPTER X. 

MAXIM IAN, COMING INTO BRITAIN, ARTFULLY DECLINES 

FIGHTING WITH CONAN. 

Maximian was pleased with the offer, and took his 
journey to Britain; but in his way subdued the cities 
of the Franks, by which he amassed a great treasure 
of gold and silver, and raised men for his service in all 
parts. Afterwards he set saU with a fair wind, and ar- 
rived at Hamo's Port ; the news of which struck the 
king with fear and astonishment, who took this to be 
a hostile invasion. Whereupon he called to him his ne- 
phew Conan, and commanded him to raise all the forces 
of the kingdom, and go to meet the enemy. Conan, 
having made the necessary preparations, marched ac- 
cordingly to Hamo'^s Port, where Maximian had pitched 
his tents ; who, upon seeing the approach of so numerous 
an army, was under the greatest perplexities what course 
to take. For as he was attended with a smaller body of 
men, and had no hopes of being entertained peaceably, 
he dreaded both the number and courage of the enemy. 
Under these difficulties he called a council of the oldest 
men, together with Mauricius, to ask their advice what 
was to be done at this critical juncture. ^^ It is not for 
us^" said Mauricius, '' to hazard a battle with such a 
numerous and powerful army : neither was the reduction 
of Britain by arms the end of our coming. Our busi- 
ness must be to desire peace and a hospitable treatment, 
till we can learn the king^s mind. Let us say that we 
are sent by the emperors upon an embassy to Octavius, 
and let us with artful speeches pacify the people." 



96 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

When all had shown themselves pleased with this advice, 
he took with him twelve aged men with gray hairs, emi- 
nent beyond the rest for their quality and wisdom, and 
bearing olive-branches in their right hands, and went to 
meet Conan. The Britons, seeing they were men of a 
venerable age, and that they bore olive-branches as a 
token of peace, rose up before them in a respectful man- 
ner, and opened a way for their free access to their com- 
mander. Then presenting themselves before Conan 
Meriadoc, they saluted him in the name of the emperors 
and the senate, and told him, that Maximian was sent 
to Octavius upon an embassy from Gratian and Valen- 
tinian. Conan made answer ; " Why is he then attendied 
with so great a multitude ? This does not look like the 
appearance of ambassadors, but the invasion of enemies.*" 
To which Mauricius replied ; " It did not become so 
great a man to appear abroad in a mean figure, or with- 
out soldiers for his guard; especially considering, that 
by reason of the Roman power, and the actions of his 
ancestors, he is become obnoxious to many kings. If he 
had but a small retinue, he might perhaps have been 
killed by the enemies of the conunonwealth. He is 
come in peace, and it is peace which he desires. For 
from the time of our arrival, our behaviour has been 
such as to give no offence to any body. We have bought 
necessaries at our own expenses, as peaceable people do, 
and have taken nothing from any by violence." While 
Conan was in suspense, whether to give them peace, or 
begin the battle, Caradoc, duke of Cornwall, with others 
of the nobility, came to him, and dissuaded him from 
proceeding in the war after this representation ; where- 
upon, though much against his will, he laid down his 
arms, and granted them peace. Then he conducted 
Maximian to London, where he gave the king an account 
of the whole proceeding. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 97 



CHAPTER XL 

THE KINGDOM OF BRITAIN IS BESTOWED ON MAXIMIAN. 

Caradoc, after this, taking along with him his son 
Mauricius, commanded every body to withdraw from the 
king's presence, and then addressed him in these words. 
" Behold, that which your more faithful and loyal sub- 
jects have long wished for, is now by the good providence 
of God brought about. You commanded your nobility 
to give their advice, how to dispose of your daughter 
and kingdom, as being willing to hold the government 
no longer on account of your great age. Some there- 
fore were for having the kingdom delivered up to Conan 
your nephew, and a suitable match procured for your 
daughter elsewhere ; as fearing the ruin of our people, 
if any prince that is a stranger to our language should 
be set over us. Others were for granting the kingdom 
to your daughter, and some nobleman of our own coun- 
try, who should succeed you after your death. But the 
greater number recommended some person descended 
of the family of the emperors, on whom you should 
bestow your daughter and crown. For they promised 
themselves a firm and lasting peace, as the consequence 
of such a marriage, since they would be under the pro- 
tection of the Roman state. See then ! God has vouch- 
safed to bring to you a young man, who is both a Roman, 
and also of the royal family of Britain ; and to whom, 
if you follow my advice, you will not delay to marry your 
daughter. And indeed, should you refuse him, what 
right could you plead to the crown of Britain against 
him. For he is the cousin of Constantino, and the 
nephew of king Coel, whose daughter Helena possessed 
the crown by an undeniable hereditary right." When 
Caradoc had represented these things to him, Octavius 
acquiesced, and with the general consent of his people 

H 



98 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

bestowed the kingdom and his daughter upon him. 
Conan Meriadoc, finding how things went, was beyond 
expression incensed, and retiring into Albania, used all 
his interest to raise an army, that he might give dis- 
turbance to Maxhnian. And when he had got a great 
body of men together, he passed the Humber, and wasted 
the provinces on each side of it. At the news whereof, 
Maximian hastened to assemble his forces against him, 
and then gave him battle, and returned with victory. But 
this proved no decisive blow to Conan, who with his re- 
assembled troops still continued to ravage the provinces, 
and provoked Maximian to return again and renew the 
war, in which he had various success, being sometimes 
victorious, sometimes defeated. At last, after great 
damages done on both sides, they were brought by the 
mediation of friends to a reconciliation. 



CHAPTER XII. 

MAXIMIAN OVERTHROWS THE ABMORICANS : HIS SPEECH 

TO CONAN. 

Five years after this, Maximian, proud of the vast trea- 
sures that daily flowed in upon him, fitted out a great 
fleet, and assembled together all the forces in Britain. 
For this kingdom was now not sufficient for him ; he 
was ambitious of adding Gaul also to it. With this 
view he set sail, and arrived first at the kingdom of Ar- 
morica, now called Bretagne, and began hostilities upon 
the Gallic people that inhabited it. But the Gauls, 
under the command of Inbaltus, met him, and engaged 
him in battle, in which the greater part being in dan* 
ger, they were forced to fly, and leave Inbaltus with 
fifteen thousand men killed, all of them Armoricans. 
This severe overthrow was matter of the greatest joy 
to Maximian, who knew the reduction of that country 
would be very easy, after the loss of so many men. 



BRITISH HIS1X)RY. 99 

Upon this occasion he called Conan aside from the anny, 
and smiling said : — ^' See, we have already conquered 
one of the best kingdoms in Gaul : we may now have 
hopes of gaining all the rest. Let us make haste to 
take the cities and towns, before the rumour of their 
danger spread to the remoter parts of Gaul, and raise all 
the people up in arms. For if we can but get pos- 
session of this kingdom, I make no doubt of reducing 
all Gaul under our power. Be not therefore concerned 
that you have yielded up the island of Britain to me, 
notwithstanding the hopes you once had of succeeding 
to it ; because whatever you have lost in it, I will re- 
store to you m this country. For my design is to 
advance you to the throne of this kingdom ; and this 
shall be another Britain, which we will people with our 
own countrymen, and drive out the old inhabitants. 
The land is fruitful in com, the rivers abound with fish, 
the woods afford a beautiful prospect, and the forests 
are everywhere pleasant : nor is there in my opinion any- 
where a more delightful country." Upon this Conan, 
with a submissive bow, gave him his thanks, and pro- 
mised to continue loyal to him as long as he lived. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

REDONUM TAKEN BY MAXIMIAN. 

After this they marched with their forces to Redo- 
num, and took it the same day. For the citizens, hear- 
ing of the bravery of the Britons, and what slaughter 
they had made, fled away with haste, leaving their wives 
and children behind them. And the rest of the cities 
and towns soon followed their example ; so that there was 
an easy entrance into them for the Britons, who wherever 
they entered killed all they found left of the male sex, 
and spared only the women. At last, when they had 
wholly extirpated the inhabitants of all those provinces, 

h2 



100 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

they garrisoned the cities and towns with British sol- 
diers, and made fortifications in several places. The 
fame of Maximian^s exploits spreading over the rest of 
the provinces of Gaul, all their dukes and princes were 
in a dreadful consternation, and had no other hopes left 
but in their prayers to their gods. They fled everywhere 
from the villages into the cities and towns, and other 
places of strength and safety. Maximian, finding that 
he had struck terror into them, began to think of still 
bolder attempts, and by profusely distributing presents 
augmented his army. For all persons that he knew to 
be eager for plunder, he enlisted into his service, and by 
plentifully bestowing his money and other valuable things 
among them, kept them firm to his interest. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

MAXIMIAN, AFTER THE CONQUEST OF GAUL AND GERMANY, 
MAKES TRIERS THE SEAT OF HIS EMPIRE. 

By these means he raised such a numerous army, as 
he thought would be sufficient for the conquest of all 
Gaul. Notwithstanding which he suspended his arms for 
a time, till he had settled the kingdom which he had 
taken, and peopled it with Britons. To this end he 
published a decree, for the assembling together of a 
himdred thousand of the common people of Britain, who 
were to come over to settle in the country ; besides 
thirty thousand soldiers, to defend them from hostile 
Bretagne attack. As soon as the people were arrived according 

peopled by , *■ ~ 

British sub. to his orders, he distributed them through all the coun- 

Jects* . /» » . 

tries of Armonca, and made another Britain of it, and 
then bestowed it on Conan Meriadoc. But he himself, 
with the rest of his fellow soldiers, marched into the 
further part of Gaul, which after many bloody battles he 
subdued, as he did also all Germany, being everywhere 
victorious. But the seat of his empire he made at 



BRITISH HISTORY, 101 

Triers, and fell so furiously upon the two emperors 
Gratian and Valentinian, that he killed the one, and 
forced the other to flee from Rome. 



CHAPTER XV. 

A FJGHT BETWEEN THE AQUITANIANS AND CON AN. 

In the meantime the Gauls and Aquitanians gave dis- 
turbance to Conan, and the Armorican Britons, and 
harassed them with their frequent incursions ; but he as 
often defeated them, and bravely defended the country 
committed to him. After he had entirely vanquished 
them, he had a mind to bestow wives on his fellow sol- 
diers, by whom they might have issue to keep perpetual 
possession of the country : and to avoid all mixture with 
the Gauls, he sent over to the island of Britain for wives 
for them. In order to accomplish this, messengers were 
sent to recommend the management of this affair to 
Dianotus, king of Cornwall, who had succeeded his 
brother Caradoc in that kingdom. He was a very noble 
and powerful prince, and to him Maximian had com- 
mitted the government, while he was employed in affains 
abroad. He had also a daughter of wonderful beauty, 
named Ursula, with whom Conan was most passionately 
in love. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

GUANIUS AND MELGA MURDER ELEVEN THOUSAND VIRGINS. 

MAXIMIAN IS KILLED AT ROME. 

Dianotus, upon this message sent him by Conan, was st. ureuia 
very ready to execute his orders, and summoned together eleven thou, 
the daughters of the nobility from all provinces, to the 
number of eleven thousand ; but of the meaner sort, 
sixty thousand; and commanded them all to appear 
together in the city of London. He likewise ordered 



102 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

ships to be brought from all shores, for their transporta- 
tion to their future husbands. And though in so great 
a multitude many were pleased with this order, yet it 
was displeasing to the greater part, who had a greater 
affection for their relations and native country. Nor 
perhaps were there wanting some, who, preferring vir- 
ginity to the married state, would have rather lost their 
lives in any country, than enjoyed the greatest plenty in 
wedlock. In short, most of them had views and wishes 
different from one another, had they been left ta their 
own liberty. But now the ships being ready, they went 
on board, and sailing down the Thames, made towards 
the sea. At last, as they were steering towards the 
Armorican coast, contrary winds rose and dispersed the 
whole fleet. In this storm the greater part of the ships 
foundered ; but the women that esciq)ed the danger 
of the sea, were driven upon strange islands, and by a 
barbarous people either murdered or made slaves. For 
they happened to fall into the hands of the cruel army of 
Ouanius and Melga, who by the command of Gratian 
were making terrible destruction in Germany, and the 
nations on the sea-coast. Guanius was king of the 
Huns, and Melga of the Picts, whom Gratian had en- 
gaged in his party, and had seaat into Germany, to harass 
those of Maximian's party along the sea-coasts. While 
they were thus exercising their barbarous rage, they 
happened to light upon these virgins, who had been 
driven on those parts, and were so inflamed with their 
beauty, that they courted them to their brutish embraces ; 
which when the women would not submit to, the Am- 
brons fell upon them, and without remorse murdered 
the greatest part of them. This done, the two wicked 
leaders of the Picts and Huns, Guanius and Melga, 
being the partisans of Gratian and Valentinian, when 
they had learned that the island of Britain was drained 
of all its soldiers, made a speedy voyage towards it ; and 
taking into their assistance the people of the adjacent 



BRITISH HISTORY. 103 

islands, arrived in Albania. Then joining In a body, 
they invaded the kingdom, which was left without either 
government or defence, and made miserable destruction 
among the common people. For Maximian, as we have 
already related, had carried away with him all the war- 
like youth that could be found, and had left behind him 
only the husbandmen, who had neither sense nor arms, 
for the defence of their country. Guanius and Melga, 
finding that they were not able to make the least oppo- 
sition, began to domineer most insolently, and to lay 
waste their cities and countries, as if they had only been 
pens of sheep. The news of this grievous calamity 
coming to Maximian, he sent away Gratian Mimiceps, 
with two legions, to their assistance ; who, as soon as 
they arrived, fought with the enemy, and after a most 
bloody victory over them, forced them to fly over into 
Ireland. In the meantime Maximian was killed at 
Rome by Gratian's friends : and the Britons, whom he 
had carried with him, were also slain or dispersed. 
Those of them that could escape, went to their coimtry- 
men in Armorica, which was now called the other 
Britain. 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH'S 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



BOOK VI. 



CHAPTER I. 

GRATIAN, BEING ADVANCED TO THE THRONE, IS KILLED BY 
THE COMMON PEOPLE. THE BRITONS DESIRE THE ROMANS 
TO DEFEND THEM AGAINST GUANIUS AND MELGA. 

But Gratian Miiniceps, hearing of the death of 
Maximian, seized the crown, and made himself king. 
After this he exercised such tyranny, that the common 
people fell upon him in a tumultuous manner, and 
murdered him. When this news reached other coimtries, 
their former enemies returned back from Ireland, and 
Daciaoa, i. e. bringing with them the Scots, Norwegians, and Dacians, 
made dreadful devastations with fire and sword over 
the whole kingdom, from sea to sea. Upon this most 
grievous calamity and oppression, ambassadors are dis- 
patched with letters to Rome, to beseech with tears 
and vows of perpetual subjection, that a body of men 
might be sent to revenge their injuries, and drive out 
the enemy from them. The ambassadors in a short 
time prevailed so far, that, unmindful of past injuries, 
the Romans granted them one legion, which was trans- 
ported in a fleet to their country, and there speedily 
encountered the enemy. At last, after the slaughter of 
a vast multitude of them, they drove them entirely out 



BRITISH HISTORY. 105 

of the country, and rescued the miserable people from 
their outrageous cruelty. Then they gave orders for a 
wall to be built between Albania and Deira, from one The wau of 

Deira. 

sea to the other, for a terror to the enemy, and safe- 
guard to the country. At that time Albania was wholly 
laid waste, by the frequent invasions of barbarous 
nations ; and whatever enemies made an attempt upon 
the country, met with a convenient landing-place there. 
So that the inhabitants were diligent in working upon 
the wall, which they finished partly at the public, 
partly upon private charge. 



CHAPTER 11. 

GUETHELIn'^S speech to the BRITONS, AT THE ROMANS 

RETURNING HOME. 

The Romans, after this, declared to the Britons, that 
they should not be able for the future to undergo the 
fatigue of such laborious expeditions ; and that it was 
beneath the dignity of the Roman state to harass so 
great and brave an army, both by land and sea, against 
base and vagabond robbers ; but that they ought to apply 
themselves to the use of arms, and to fight bravely in 
defending to the utmost of their power, their coimtry, 
riches, wives, children, and, what is dearer than all these, 
their liberty and lives. As soon as they had given them 
this exhortation, they commanded all the men of the 
island, that were fit for war, to appear together at Lon- 
don, because the Romans were about to return home. 
When, therefore, they were all assembled, Guethelin, 
the metropolitan of London, had orders to make a 
speech to them, which he did in these words : — 

" Though I am appointed by the princes here present 
to speak to you, I find myself rather ready to burst into 
tears, than to make an eloquent oration. It is a most 
sensible afiliction to me to observe the weak and desti- 



106 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

tute state into which you are fallen since Maximian drew 
away with him all the forces and youth of this kingdom. 
You that were left were people wholly inexperienced in 
war, and occupied with other employments, as tilling the 
ground, and several kinds of mechanical trades. So that 
when your enemies from foreign countries came upon 
you, as sheep wandering without a shepherd, they forced 
you to quit your folds, till the Roman power restored 
you to them again. Must your hopes, therefore, always 
depend upon foreign assistance ! And will you never 
use yourselves to handle arms against a band of robbers, 
that are by no means stronger than yourselves, if you 
are not dispirited by sloth and cowardice ? The Romans 
are now tired with the continual voyages wherewith they 
are harassed to defend you against your enemies : they 
rather choose to remit to you the tribute you pay them, 
than undergo any longer this fatigue by land and sea. 
Because you were only the conmion people at the time 
when we had soldiers of our own, do you therefore think 
that manhood has quite forsaken you i Are not men in 
the course of human generation often the reverse of 
one ano^ther t Is not a jdoughman often the father of 
a soldier, and a soldier of a ploughman ! Does not the 
same diversity happen in a mechanic and a soldier? 
Since then in this manner one produces another, I 
cannot think it possible for manhood to be lost among 
them. As then you are men, behave yourselves like 
men : Call upon the name of Christ, that he may in- 
spire you with courage to defend your liberties/' 

No sooner had he concluded his e^ech, than the 
people raised such a shout, that one would have thought 
them on a sudden inspired with courage from heaven. 



BRITUH HISTORY. 



107 



CHAPTER III. 

THE BRITONS ARE AGAIN CRUELLY HABASiED BY GUANIU8 

AND MELGA. 

After this the Romans encouraged the timorous 
people Bs much as they could, and lefb them patterns of 
then* arms. They likewise commanded towers, having 
a prospect towards the sea, to be placed at proper dis- 
tances all along the south coast, where their ships were, 
and from whence they feared the invasions of the barba- 
rians. But, according to the proverb, ^^ It is easier to 
make a hawk of a kite, than a scholar of a ploughman ;^ 
all learning to him is but as a pearl thrown before swine. 
Thus, no sooner had the Romans taken their fSEurewell of 
them, than the two leaders, Guanius and Melga, issued 
forth from their ships, in which they had fled over into 
Ireland, and with their bands of Scots, Picts, Norwe- 
gians, Dacians, and others, whom they had brought 
along with them, seized upon all Albania as £ar as the 
very wall. Understanding, likewise, that the Romans 
were gone, never to return any more, they now, in a 
more insolent manner than before, begin their devasta- 
tions in the island. Hereupon the country fellows upon 
the battlements of the walls sat night and day with 
quaking hearts, not daring to stir from their seats, and 
readier for flight than making the least resistance. In 
the mean time the enemies ceased not with tlieir hooks 
to pull them down headlong, and dash the wretched herd 
to pieces upon the groimd; jvho gained at least this 
advantage by their speedy death, that they avoided the 
sight of that most deplorable calamity, which forthwith 
threatened their relations and dearest children. Such 
was the terrible vengeance of God for that most wicked 
madness of Maximian, in draining the kingdom of all its 
forces, who, had they been present, would have repulsed 



108 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

any nation that invaded them ; an evident proof of 
which they gave, by the vast conquests they made 
abroad, even in remote countries ; and also by main- 
taining their own country in peace, while they continued 
here. But thus it happens when a country is left to 
the defence of country clowns. In short, quitting their 
high wall and their cities, the coimtry people are forced 
again to fly, and to suffer a more fatal dispersion, a more 
furious pursuit of the enemy, a more cruel and more 
general slaughter than before; and like lambs before 
wolves, so was that miserable people torn to pieces 
by the merciless barbarians. Again, therefore, the 
wretched remainder send letters to Agitius, a man of 
great power among the Romans, to this effect. "To 
or^uu». Agitius, thrice consul, the groans of the Britons." 
And after some few other complaints they add : " The 
sea drives us to the barbarians, and the barbarians drive 
ns back to the sea: thus are we tossed to and fro 
between two kinds of death, being either drowned or 
put to the sword." Notwithstanding this most moving 
address, they procured no relief, and the ambassadors 
returning back in great heaviness, declared to their 
countrymen the repulse which they had suflFered. 



CHAPTER IV. 

6UETHELIN DESIRES SUCCOURS OF ALDROEN. 

Hereupon, after a consultation together, Guethelin, 
archbishop of London, passed over into lesser Britain, 
called then Armorica, or Letavia, to desire assistance 
of their brethren. At that time Aldroen reigned there, 
being the fourth king from Conan, to whom, as has 
been already related, Maximian had given that king- 
dom. This prince, seeing a prelate of so great dignity 
arrived, received him with honour, and inquired after 
the occasion of his coming. To whom Guethelin : — 



BRITISH HISTORY. 109 

" Your Majesty can be no stranger to the misery 
which we, your Britons, have suffered (which may even 
demand your tears,) since the time that Maximian 
drained our island of its soldiers, to people the kingdom 
which you enjoy, and which God grant you may long 
enjoy in peace. For against us the poor remains of the 
British race, all the people of the adjacent islands, have 
risen up, and made an utter devastation in our country, 
which then abounded with all kinds of riches ; so that 
the people now are wholly destitute of all manner of sus- 
tenance, but what they can get in hunting. Nor had we 
any power or knowledge of military affairs left among 
us to encounter the enemy. For the Romans are tired 
of us, and have absolutely refused their assistance. So 
that now, deprived of all other hope, we come to implore 
your clemency, that you would furnish us with forces, 
and protect a kingdom, which is of right your own, from 
the incursions of barbarians. For who but yourself 
ought, without your consent, to wear the crown of Con- 
stantino and Maximian, since the right your ancestors 
had to it is now devolved upon you ? Prepare then 
your fleet, and go with me. Behold! I deliver the 
kingdom of Britain into your hands." 

To this Aldroen made answer : " There was a time 
formerly when I would not have refused to accept of the 
island of Britain, if it had been offered me ; for I do not 
think there was anywhere a more fruitful country while 
it enjoyed peace and tranquillity. But now, since the 
calamities that have befallen it, it is become of less 
value, and odious both to me and all other princes. 
But above all things the power of the Romans was so 
destructive to it, that nobody could enjoy any settled 
state or authority in it, without loss of liberty, and 
bearing the yoke of slavery under them. And who 
would not prefer the possession of a lesser country with 
liberty, to all the riches of that island in servitude? 
The kingdom that is now under my subjection I enjoy 



110 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

with honour, and without paying homage to any supe- 
rior ; so that I prefer it to all other countries, since I 
can govern it without being controlled. Nevertheless, 
out of respect to the right that my ancestors for many 
generations have had to your island, I deliver to you my 
brother Constantino with two thousand men, that with 
the good providence of God, he may free your country 
from the inroads of barbarians, and obtain the crown 
for himself. For I have a brother called by that name, 
w:ho is an expert soldier, and in aU other respects an 
accomplished man. If you please to accept of him, I 
will not refuse to send him with you, together with the 
said number of men ; for indeed a larger number I do 
not mention to you, because I am daily threatened with 
disturbance from the Grauls.^ He had scarcely done 
speaking before the archbishop returned him thanks, 
and when Constantino was called in, broke out into 
these expressions of joy : '^ Christ conquers ; Christ 
conunands ; Christ reigns : behold the king of desolate 
Britain! Be Christ only present, and behold our de- 
fence, our hope and joy.^ In short, the ships being 
got ready, the men who were chosen out from all parts 
of the kingdom, were delivered to Guethelin. 



CHAPTER V. 

CONSTAXTINE, BEING MADE KING OF BRITAIN, LEAVES 

THREE SONS. 

When they had made all necessary preparations, they 
embarked, and arrived at the port of Totness ; and then 
without delay assembled together the youth that was left 
in the island, and encountered the enemy ; over whom, 
by the merit of the holy prelate, they obtained the vic- 
tory. After this the Britons, before dispersed, flocked 
together from all parts, and in a council held at Silcestre, 
promoted Constantino to the throne, and there performed 



BRITISH HISTORY. Ill 

the ceremony of his coronation. They also married 
him to a lady, descended from a noble Roman family, 
whom Archbishop Guethelin had educated, and by whom 
the king had afterwards three sons, named Constans, 
Aurelius Ambrosius, and Uther Pendragon. Constans, 
who was the eldest, he delivered to the church of Am- 
phibalus in Winchester, that he might there take upon 
him the monastic order. But the other two, viz. Aure- 
lius and Uther, he committed to the care of Guethelin 
for their education. At last, after ten years were ex- 
pired, there came a certain Pict, who had entered in his 
service, and under pretence of holding some private dis- 
course with him, in a nursery of young trees where no- 
body was present, stabbed him with a dagger. 



CHAPTER VI. 

CONSTANS IS BY VORTEGIRN CROWNBD KING OP BRITAIN. 

Upon the death of Constantine, a dissension arose 
among the nobility, about a successor to the throne. 
Some were for setting up Aurelius Ambrosius; others 
Uther Pendragon; others again some other persons of 
the royal family. At last, when they could come to no 
conclusion, Vortegim, consul of the Gewisseans, who vortigem. 
was himself very ambitious of the crown, went to Con- 
stans the monk, and thus addressed himself to him. 
" You see your father is dead, and your brothers on 
account of their age are incapable of the government ; 
neither do I see any of your family besides yourself, 
whom the people ought to promote to the kingdom. If 
you will therefore follow my advice, I will, on condition 
of your increasing my private estate, dispose the people 
to favour your advancement, and free you from that 
habit, notwithstanding that it is against the rule of your 
order.*" Constans, overjoyed at the proposal, promised, 
with an oath, that upon these terms he would grant him 



112 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

whatever he would desire. Then Vortegirn took him, 
and investing him m his regal habiliments, conducted 
him to London, and made him king, though not with the 
free consent of the people. Archbishop Guethelin was 
then dead, nor was there any other that durst perform 
the ceremony of his unction, on account of his having 
quitted the monastic order. However, this proved no 
hindrance to his coronation, for Vortegirn himself per- 
formed the ceremony instead of a bishop. 



CHAPTER VII. 

VORTEGIRN TREACHEROUSLY CONTRIVES TO GET KING 

GONSTANS ASSASSINATED. 

CoNSTANs, being thus advanced, committed the whole 
government of the kmgdom to Vortegirn, and sur- 
rendered himself up so entirely to his counsels, that he 
did nothing without his order. His own incapacity for 
government obUged him to do this, for he had learned 
any thing else rather than state affairs within his 
cloister. Vorterim became sensible of this, and there- 
fore began to deUberate with himself wha^ course to 
take to obtain the crown, of which he had been before 
extremely ambitious. He saw that now was his proper 
time to gain his end easily, when the kingdom was 
wholly intrusted to his management ; and Constans, who 
bore the title of king, was no more than the shadow of 
one; for he was of a soft temper, a bad judge in matters 
of right, and not in the least feared, either by his own 
people, or by the neighbouring states. And as for his 
two brothers, Uther Pendragon and Aurelius Ambrosius, 
they were only children in their cradles, and therefore 
incapable of the government. There was likewise this 
farther misfortune, that all the older persons of the 
nobility were dead, so that Vortegirn seemed to be the 
only man surviving, that had craft, policy, and expe- 



BRITISH HISTORY. 113 

rience in matters of state ; and all the rest in a manner 
children, or raw youths, who only inherited the honours 
of their parents and relations that had been killed in 
the former wars. Vortegim, finding a concurrence of 
so many favourable circumstances, contrived how he 
might easily and cunningly depose Constans the monk, 
and immediately establish himself in his place. But 
in order to do this, he waited until he had first well 
established his power and interest in several countries. 
He therefore petitioned to have the king's treasures, 
and his fortified cities, in his own custody ; pretending 
there was a rumour, that the neighbouring islanders 
designed an invasion of the kingdom. This being 
granted him, he placed his own creatures in those cities, 
to secure them for himself. Then having formed a 
scheme how to execute his treasonable designs, he went 
to the king, and represented to him the necessity of 
augmenting the number of his domestics, that he might 
more safely oppose the invasion of the enemy. " Have 
not I left all things to your disposal!^ jaid Constans: 
" Do what you will as to that, so that they be but 
faithful to me." Vortegim replied, " I am informed 
that the Picts are going to bring the Dacians and Nor- 
wegians m upon us, with a design to give us very great 
annoyance. I would therefore advise you, and in my 
opinion it is the best course you can take, that you 
maintain some Picts in your court, who may do you 
good service among those of that nation. For if it is 
true that they are preparing to begin a rebellion, you 
may employ them as spies upon their countrymen in 
their plots and stratagems, so as easily to escape them."^ 
This was the dark treason of a secret enemy; for he 
did not recommend this out of regard to the safety of 
Constans, but because he knew the Picts to be a giddy 
people, and ready for all manner of wickedness; so 
that in a fit of drunkenness or passion, they might 
easily be incensed against the king, and make no scruple 



114 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

to assassinate him. And such an accident, when it 
should happen, would make an open way for his accea- 
sion to thV throne, which he io ofte^ had in view. 
Hereupon he dispatched messengers into Scotland, with 
an invitation to a hundred Pictish soldiers, whom ac- 
cordingly he received into the king's household; and 
when admitted, he showed them more respect than all 
the rest of the domestics, by making them several 
presents, and allowing them a luxurious table, insomuch 
that they looked upon him as the king. So great was 
the regard they had for him, that they made songs of 
him about the streets, the subject of which was, that 
Vortegim deserved the government, deserved the sceptre 
of Britain ; but that Constans was unworthy of it. This 
encouraged Vortegim to show them still more favour, 
in order the more firmly to engage them in his interest ; 
and when by these practices he had made them entirely 
his creatiu-es, he took an opportunity, when they were 
drunk, to tell them, that he was going to retire out of 
Britain, to see if he could get a better estate ; for the 
small revenue he had then, he said, would not so much 
as enable him to maintain a retinue of fifty men. Then 
putting on a look of sadness, he withdrew to his own 
apartment, and left them drinking in the hall. The 
Picts at this sight were in inexpressible sorrow, as 
thinking what he had said was true, and murmuring 
said one to another, " Why do we sufler this monk to 
live! Why do not we kill him, that Vortegim may 
enjoy his crown ! Who is so fit to succeed as he? A man 
so generous to us is worthy to rule, and deserves all the 
honour and dignity that we can bestow upon him." 



BRITISH HISTORY. 115 



CHAPTER VIII. 

AURELIUS AMBROSIUS AND UTHER PENDRAGON FLEE FROM 
YORTEGIRN, AND GO TO LESSER BRITAIN. 

After this, breaking into Constans's bed-chamber, 
they fell upon him and killed him, and carried his head 
to Yortegim. At the sight of it, he put on a mournful 
countenance, and burst forth into tears, though at the 
same time he was almost transported with joy. How- 
ever, he summoned together the citizens of [London, 
(for there the fact was committed,) and commanded all 
the assassins to be bound, and their heads to be cut off 
for this abominable parricide. In the meantime there 
were some who had a suspicion, that this piece] of vil- 
lany was whoUy the contrivance of Yortegim, and that 
the Picts were only his instruments to execute it. 
Others again as positively asserted his innocence. At 
last the matter being left in doubt, those who had the 
care of the two brothers, Aurelius Ambrosius, and Uther 
Pendragon, fled over with them into Lesser Britain, 
for fear of being killed by Yortegim. There they were 
kindly received by King Budes, who took care to give 
them an education suitable to their royal birth. 



CHAPTER IX. 

VORTEGIRN MAKES HIMSELF KING OF BRITAIN. 

Now Yortegim, seeing nobody to rival him in thevortegim 
kingdom, placed the crown on his own head, and thus crown; 
gained the pre-eminence over all the rest of the princes. 
At last his treason being discovered, the people of 
the adjacent islands, whom the Picts had brought 
into Albania, made insurrection against him. For the 
Picts were enraged on accoimt of the death of their 

i2 



116 GEOFFREY OP MONMOUTH. 

fellow-soldiers, who had been slain for the murder of 
Constans, and endeavoured to revenge that injury upon 
him. Vortegim therefore was daily in great distress, 
and lost a considerable part of his army in the war with 
them. He had likewise no less trouble from another 
quarter, for fear of Aurelius Ambrosius, and his brother 
Uther Pendragon, who, as we said before, had fled, on 
his account, into Lesser Britain. For he heard it 
rumoured day after day, that they had now arrived at 
man's estate, and had built a vast fleet, with a design to 
return back to the kingdom, which was their undoubted 
right. 

CHAPTER X. 

VORTEGIRN TAKES THE SAXONS THAT WERE NEW-GOMERS, 

TO HIS ASSISTANCE. 

In the meantime there arrived in Kent three bri- 
gandines, or long galleys, fuU of armed men, under the 
Hengist and commaud of two brothers, Horsus and Hengist. Vor- 
**"*"' tegim was then at Dorobemia, now Canterbury, 
which city he used often to visit ; and being informed 
of the arrival of some tall strangers in large ships, he 
ordered that they should be received peaceably^ and 
conducted into his presence. As soon as they were 
brought before him, he cast his eyes upon the two 
brothers, who excelled all the rest both in nobility and 
gracefulness of person ; and having taken a view of the 
whole company, asked them of what country they were, 
and what was the occasion of their coming into his 
kingdom. To whom Hengist (whose years and wisdom 
entitled him to a precedence), in the name of the rest, 
made the following answer : — 

" Most noble king. Saxony, which is one of the 
countries of Germany, was the place of our birth ; and 
the occasion of our coming was to offer our service to 
you or some other prince. For we were driven out of 



BRITISH HISTORY. . - 117 

our native country, for no other reason, but that the 
laws of the kingdom required it. It is customary among 
us, that when we come to be overstocked with people, 
our princes from all the provinces meet together, and 
command all the youth of the kingdom to assemble 
before them ; then casting lots, they make choice of the 
strongest and ablest of them, to go into foreign nations, 
to procure themselves a subsistence, and free their 
native country from a superfluous multitude of people. 
Our country, therefore, being of late overstocked, our 
princes met, and after having cast lots, made choice of 
the youth which you see in your presence, and have 
obliged us to obey the custom that has been established 
of old. And us two brothers, Hengist and Horsus, 
they made generals over them, out of respect to our 
ancestors, who enjoyed the same honour. In obedience, 
therefore, to the laws so long established, we put out to 
sea, and under the good guidance of Mercury have 
arrived in your kingdom. 

The king, at the name of Mercury, looking earnestly 
upon them, asked them what religion they professed. 
" We worship," replied Hengist, " our country gods, 
Saturn and Jupiter, and the other deities tliat govern 
the world, but especially Mercury, whom in our lan- 
guage we call Woden, and to whom our ancestors con- 
secrated the fourth day of the week, still called after 
his name Wodensday. Next to him we worship theoHginof 
powerfid goddess, Frea, to whom they also dedicated and Friday, 
the sixth day, which after her name we call Friday.'' 
Vortegim replied, " For your credulity, or rather in- 
credulity, I am much grieved, but I rejoice at your 
arrival, which, whether by God's providence, or some 
other agency, happens very seasonably for me in my 
present difficulties. For I am oppressed by my enemies 
on every side, and if you will engage with me in my 
wars, I will entertain you honourably in my kingdom, 
and bestow upon you lands and other possessions." The 



118 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

barbarians readily accepted his offer, and the agree- 
ment between them being ratified, they resided at his 
court. Soon after this, the Picts, issuing forth from 
Albania, with a very great army, began to lay waste the 
northern parts of the island. When Vortegim had 
information of it, he assembled his forces, and went to 
meet them beyond the Humber. Upon their engaging, 
the battle proved very fierce on both sides, though 
there was but little occasion for the Britons to exert 
themselves, for the Saxons fought so bravely, that the 
enemy, formerly so victorious, were speedily put to 
flight. 

CHAPTER XI. 

HENGIST BRINGS OVER GREAT NUMBERS OF SAXONS INTO 
BRITAIN : HIS CRAFTY PETITION TO VORTEGIRN. 

VoRTEGiRN, therefore, as he owed the vifetory to 
them, increased his bounty to them, and gave their 
general, Hengist, large possessions of land in Lindesia, 
for the subsistence of himself and his fellow-soldiers. 
Hereupon Hengist, who was a man of experience and 
subtilty, finding how much interest he had with the 
king, addressed him in this maimer ; — ^' Sir, your ene- 
mies give you disturbance from all quarters, and few of 
your subjects love you. They all threaten you, and 
say, they ai^e going to bring over Aurelius Am- 
brosius from Armorica, to depose you, and make him 
king. If you please, let us send to our country to 
invite over some more soldiers, that with our forces 
increased we may be better able to oppose them. But 
there is one thing which I would desire of your cle- 
mency, if I did not fear a refusal." Vortegim made 
answer : " Send your messengers to Germany, and invite 
over whom you please, and you shall have no refusal 
from me in whatever you shall desire." Hengist, with 
^ low bow, returned him thanks, and said, ^'The pos- 



BRITISH HISTORY. 119 

sessions which you have given me in land and houses 
are very large, but you have not yet done me that 
honour which becomes my station and birth, because, 
among other things, I should have had some town or 
city granted me, that I might be entitled to greater 
esteem among the nobility of your kingdom. I ought 
to have been made a consul or prince^ since my an- 
cestors enjoyed both those dignities." — "It is not in 
my power," repHed Vortegim, "to do you so much 
honour, because you are strangers and pagans ; neither 
am I yet so far acquainted with your manners and cus- 
toms, as to set you upon a level with my natural bom 
subjects. And indeed, if I did esteem you as my 
subjects, I should not be forward to do so, because the 
nobility of my kingdom would strongly dissuade me 
from it." — " Give your servant," said Hengist, " only so 
much ground in the place you have assigned me, as I 
can encompass with a leathern thong, for to build a 
fortress upon, as a place of retreat if occasion should 
require. For I will always be faithful to you, as I have 
been hitherto, and pursue no other design in the request 
which I have made." With these words the king was 
prevailed upon to grant him his petition ; and ordered 
him to dispatch messengers into Germany, to invite 
more men over speedily to his assistance. Hengist im- 
mediately executed his orders, and taking a builds hide, 
made one thong out of the whole, with which he enr 
compassed a rocky place that he had carefully made 
choice of, and within that circuit began to build a 
castle, which^ when finished, took its name from the 
thong wherewith it had been measured ; for it was 
afterwards called, in the British tongue, Kaercorrei ; in 
Saxon Thancastre, that is, Thong Castle. 



120 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER XII. 

VORTEGIRN MARRIES ROWEN, THE DAUGHTER OF HENOIST. 

In the meantime the messengers retmmed from 
Germany, with eighteen ships full of the best soldiers 
they could get. They also brought along with them 
Rowen, the daughter of Hengist, one of the most 
The Lady accomplishod beauties of that age. After their arrival, 
Hengist invited the king to his house, to view his new 
buildings, and the new soldiers that were come over. 
The king readily accepted of his invitation, but pri- 
vately, and having highly commended the magnificence 
of the structure, enlisted the men into his service. 
Here he was entertained at a royal banquet ; and when 
that was over, the young lady came out of her chamber 
bearing a golden cup full of wine, with which she ap- 
proached the king, and making a low courtesy, said to 
him, "Laverd king wacht heil!'** The king, at the 
sight of the lady's face, was on a sudden both surprised 
and inflamed with her beauty ; and calling to his inter- 
preter, asked him what she said, and what answer he 
should make her. '^ She called you *• Royal lord,' " said 
the interpreter, '^and offered to drink your health. 
Your answer to her must be ' Drinc heil ! '** Vortegim 
accordingly answered ^^ Drinc heil ! " and bade her drink ; 
after which, he took the cup from her hand, kissed her, 
and drank himself. From that time to this, it has been 
the custom in Britain, that he who drinks to any one 
says ^' Wacht heil !'' and he that pledges him, answers 
" Drinc heil r Vortegim being now drunk with the 
variety of liquors, the devil took this opportunity to 
enter into his heart, and to make him in love with the 
damsel, so that he became suitor to her father for her. 
It was, I say, by the devil's entering into his heart, that 
he who was a Christian, should fall in love with a pagan. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 121 

By this example, Hengist, being a prudent man, dis- 
covered the king's levity, and consulted with his brother 
Horsus, and the other ancient men present, what to do 
in relation to the king's request. They unanimously 
advised him to give him his daughter, and in considera- 
tion of her to demand the province of Kent. Accord- 
ingly the daughter was without delay delivered to Vor- 
tegim, and the province of Kent to Hengist, without 
the knowledge of Oorangan, who had the government of 
it. The king the same night married the pagan lady, 
and became extremely delighted with her ; by which he 
quickly brought upon himself the hatred of the nobility, 
and of his own sons. For he had already three sons, 
whose names were Vortimer, Katigem, and Pascentius* 



CHAPTER XIII. 

THE BISHOPS, GERMANUS AND LUPUS, RESTORE THE CHRIS- 
TIAN FAITH THAT HAD BEEN CORRUPTED IN BRITAIN, 
OGTA AND EBISSA ARE FOUR TIMES ROUTED BY VORTLMER. 

At that time came St. Germanus, bishop of Auxerre, SLGermaims 
and Lupus, i>ishop of Troyes, to preach the Gospel to the v^- 
Britons. For the Christian faith had been corrupted 
among them, partly by the pagans whom the king had 
brought into society with them, partly by the Pelagian 
heresy, with the poison whereof they had been a long 
time infected. But by the preaching of these holy men, 
the true faith and worship was again restored, the many 
miracles they wrought giving success to their labours. 
Gildas has in his elegant treatise given an account of the 
many miracles God wrought by them. The king being 
now, as we have said, possessed of the lady, Hengist 
said to him : '^ As I am your father, I claim the right 
of being your counsellor : do not therefore slight my 
advice, since it is to my countrymen you must owe the 
donquest of all your enemies. Let us invite over my 



122 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

son Octa, and his brother Ebissa, who are brave sol- 
diers, and give them the countries that are in the nor- 
thern parts of Britain, by the wall, between Deira and 
Albania. For they will hinder the inroads of the bar- 
barians, and so you shall enjoy peace on the other side of 
the Humber." Vortegim complied with his request, and 
ordered them to invite over whomsoever they knew able 
to assist him. Immediately upon the receipt of this 
message, came Octa, Ebissa, and Cherdich, with three 
hundred ships filled with soldiers, who were all kindly 
received by Vortegim, and had ample presents made 
them. For by their assistance he vanquished his ene- 
mies, and in every engagement proved victorious. Hen- 
gist in the meantime continued to invite over more and 
more ships, and to augment his numbers daily. Which 
when the Britons observed, they were afraid of being 
betrayed by them, and moved the king to banish them 
out of his coasts. For it was contrary to the rule of 
the Gospel, that Christians should hold fellowship, or 
have any intercoiurse, with pagans. Besides which, the 
number of those that were come over was now so great, 
that they WerlB a terror to his subjects ; and nobody 
could now know who was a pagan, or who a Christian, 
since pagans married the daughters and kinswomen of 
Christians. These things they represented to the king, 
and endeavoured to dissuade him from entertaining 
them, lest they might by some treacherous conspi- 
racy prove an overmatch for the ^tive inhabit- 
ants. But Vortegim, who loved them above all other 
nations on account of his wife, was deaf to their advice. 
For this reason the Britons quickly desert him, and 
unanimously set up Vortimer his son for their king; 
who at their instigation began to drive out the barba- 
rians, and to make dreadful incursions upon them. Four 
battles he fought with them, and was victorious in all : 
TheDeruent. the first upou the rfvcr Derwcut ; the second upon the 
ford of Epiffrod, where Horsus and Katigem, another 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



123 



son of Vortegii*n, met, and after a sharp encounter killed 
each other; the third upon the sea-shore, where the 
enemies fled shamefully to their ships, and betook them- 
selves for refuffe to the Isle of Thanet. But Vortimer isie of 

Thftnet. 

besieged them there, and daily distressed them with his 
fleet. And when they were no longer able to bear the 
assaults of the Britons, they sent King Vortegim, who 
was present with them in all those wars, to his son Vor- 
timer, to desire leave to depart, and return back safe to 
Germany. And while a conference upon this subject 
was being held, they in the meantime went on board 
their long galleys, and leaving their wives and children 
behind them, returned back to Germany. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

VORTIMEr's KINDNESS TO HIS SOLDIERS AT HIS DEATH. 

VoRTiMER, after this great success, began to restore vortimer. 
his subjects to their possessions which had been taken 
from them, and to show them all marks of his afiection 
and esteem, and at the instance of St. Germanus to re- 
build their churches. But his goodness quickly stirred 
up the enmity of the devil against him, who entering 
into the heart of his stepmother Kowen, excited her to 
contrive his death. For this purpose she consulted with 
the poisoners, and procured one who was intimate with 
him, whom she corrupted with large and numerous pre- 
sents, to give him a poisonous draught ; so that this 
brave soldier, as soon as he had taken it, was seized with 
a sudden illness, that deprived him of all hopes of life. 
Hereupon he forthwith ordered all his men to come to 
him, and having shown them how near he was to his 
end, distributed among them all the treasure his pre- 
decessors had heaped up, and endeavoured to comfort 
them in their sorrow and lamentation for him, telling 
them, he was only going the way of all flesh. But he 



124 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

exhorted those brave and warlike young men, who had 
attended him in all his victories, to persist com^geously 
in the defence of their country against all hostile inva- 
sion ; and with wonderful greatness of mind, commanded 
a brazen pyramid to be placed in the port where the 
Saxons used to land, and his body when dead to be bu- 
ried on the top of it, that the sight of his tomb might 
frighten back the barbarians to Germany. For he said 
none of them would dare approach the country, that 
should but get a sight of his tomb. Such was the admi- 
rable bravery of this great man, who, as he had been a 
terror to them while living, endeavoured to be no less so 
when dead. Notwithstanding which, he was no sooner 
dead, than the Britons had no regard to his orders, but 
buried him at London. 



CHAPTER XV. 

HENGIST, HAVING WICKEDLY MURDERED THE PRINCES OF 
BRITAIN, KEEPS VORTEGIRN PRISONER. 

VoRTEGiRN, after the death of his son, was again re- 
stored to the kingdom, and at the request of his wife 
sent messengers into Oermany to Hengist, with an invi- 
tation to return into Britain, but privately, and with a 
small retinue, to prevent a quarrel between the bar- 
barians and his subjects. But Hengist, hearing that 
y ortimer was dead, raised an army of no less than three 
hundred thousand men, and fitting out a fleet returned 
with them to Britain. When Vortegim and the nobi- 
lity heard of the arrival of so vast a multitude, they 
were immoderately incensed, and after consultation to- 
gether, resolved to fight them, and drive them from their 
coasts. Hengist, being informed of their design by mes- 
sengers sent from his daughter, immediately entered into 
deliberation what course to pursue against them. After 
several stratagems had been considered^ he judged it 



BRITISH HISTORY. 125 

most feasible, to impose upon the nation by making a 
show of peace. With this view he sent ambassadors to 
the king, to declare to him, that he had not brought so 
great a number of men, for the purpose either of staying 
with him, or offering any violence to the country. But 
the reason why he brought them, was because he thought 
y ortinfer was yet living, and that he should have occa- 
sion for them against him, in case of an assault. But 
now since he no longer doubted of his being dead, he 
submitted himself and his people to the disposal of Voiv 
tegim ; so that he might retain as many of them as he 
should think fit, and whomsoever he rejected, Hengist 
would allow to return back without delay to Germany. 
And if these terms pleased Vortegim, he desired him 
to appoint a time and place for their meeting, and ad- 
justing matters according to his pleasure. When these 
things were represented to the king, he was mightily 
pleased, as being very unwilling to part with Hengist ; 
and at last ordered his subjects and the Saxons to meet 
upon the calends of May, which were now very near, at 
the monastery of Ambrius, for the settling of the mat- 
ters above mentioned. The appointment being agreed 
to on both sides, Hengist, with a new design of villany 
in his head, ordered his soldiers to carry every one of 
them a long dagger under their garments ; and while 
the conference should be held with the Britons, who 
would have no suspicion of them, he would give them 
this word of command, " Nemet oure Saxas ;*" at which 
moment they were all to be ready to seize boldly every 
one his next man, and with his drawn dagger stab him. 
A ccordingly they all met at the time and place appointed, 
and began to treat of peace ; and when a fit opportu- 
nity offered for executing his villany, Hengist cried out, 
^' Nemet oure Saxas," and the same instant seized Vor- 
tegim, and held him by his cloak. The Saxons, upon 
the signal given, drew their daggers, and falling upon 
the princes, who little suspected any such design, assas- 



126 GEOFFREY OP MONMOUTH. 

sinated them to the number of four hundred and sixty 
barons and consuls ; to whose bodies St. Eldad after- 
wards gave Christian burial, not far from Kaercaradane, 
Sausbury. now Salisbury, in a burying place near the monastery 
of Ambrius, the abbot, who was the founder of it. For 
they all came without arms, having no thoughts of any- 
thing but treating of peace; which gave the others a 
fairer opportunity of exercising their villanous design 
against Uiem. But the pagans did not escape un- 
punished while they acted this wickedness; a great 
number of them being killed during this massacre of 
their enemies. For the Britons, taking up clubs and 
stones from the ground, resolutely defended themselves, 
and did good execution upon the traitors. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

ELDOl's valiant exploit. HBNGIST FORCES VORTEGIRN TO 
YIELD UP THE STRONGEST FORTIFICATIONS IN BRITAIN, IN 
CONSIDERATION OF HIS RELEASE. 

There was present one Eldol, consul of Gloucester, 
who, at the sight of this treachery^ took up a stake 
which he happened to find, and with that made his 
defence. Every blow he gave carried death along with 
it ; and by breaking either the head, arms, shoulders, 
or legs of a great many, he struck no small terror into 
the traitors, nor did he move from the spot before he 
had killed with that weapon seventy men. But being 
no longer able to stand his inround a&rainst such num- 
bers, he made his escape from them, ^tired to his 
own city. Many fell on both sides, but the Saxons got 
the victory ; because the Britons, having no suspicion 
of treachery, came unarmed, and therefore made a 
weaker defence. After the commission of this detest- 
able villany, the Saxons woidd not kill Vortegim ; but 
having threatened him with death and bound him, de- 



BRITISH HISTORY. 127 

manded his cities and fortified places in consideration 
of their granting him his life. He, to secure himself, 
denied them nothing ; and when they had made him 
confirm his grants with an oath, they released him from 
his chains, and then marched first to London, which 
they took, as they did afterwards York, Lincoln, and 
Winchester ; wasting the countries through which they 
passed, and destroying the people, as wolves do shei^ 
when left by their shepherds. When Vortegim saw 
the desolation which they made, he retired into the 
parts of Cambria, not knowing what to do against so 
barbarous a people. 



CHAPTER XVIL 

VORTEGIRN, AFTER CONSULTATION WITH MAGICIANS, ORDERS A 
YOUTH TO BE BROUGHT THAT NEVER HAD A FATHER. 

At last he had recourse to magicians for their advice, 
and commanded them to tell him what course to take. 
They advised him to build a very strong tower for his 
own safety, since he had lost all his other fortified 
places. Accordingly he made a progress about the 
country, to find out a convenient situation, and came at 
last to Mount Erir, where he assembled workmen from 
several countries, and ordered them to build the tower. 
The builders, therefore, began to lay the foundation; 
but whatever they did one day the earth swallowed up 
the next, so aa to leave no appearance of their work. 
Vortegim being informed of this, again consulted with 
his magicians concerning the cause of it, who told him 
that he must find out a youth that never had a father, 
and kill him, and then sprinkle the stones and cement 
with his blood ; for by those means, they said, he would 
have a firm foundation. Hereupon messengers are 
forthwith dispatched away over all the provinces, to 
inquire out such a man. In their travels they came to 



128 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



a city, called afterwards Kaermerdin, where they saw 
some young men, playing before the gate, and went up 
to them ; but being weary with their journey, they sat 
down in the ring, to see if they could meet with what 
they were in quest of. Towards evening, there hap- 
pened on a sudden a quarrel between two of the young 
men, whose names were Merlin and Dabutius. In the 
Mcrttn. dispute, Dabutius said to Merlin : ^^ You fool, do you 
presume to quarrel with me ! Is there any equality in 
our birth! I am descended- of royal race, both by my 
father and mother's side. As for you, nobody knows 
what you are, for you never had a father." At that 
word the messengers looked earnestly upon Merlin, and 
asked the by-standers who he was. They told him, it 
was not known who was his father ; but that his mother 
was daughter to the king of Demetia, and that she 
lived in St. Peter's Church among the nuns of that 
city. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

VOBTEGIRN INQUIRES OF MERUn'^S MOTHER CONCERNINO 
HER CONCEPTION OF HIM. 

Upon this the messengers hastened to the governor 
of the city, and ordered him, in the king's name, to 
send Merlin and his mother to the king. As soon as 
the governor understood the occasion of their message, 
he readfly obeyed the order, and sent them to Vort^im 
to complete his design. When they were introduced 
into the king^s presence, he received the mother in a 
very respectful manner, on account of her noble birth ; 
and b^;an to inquire of her by what man she had eanr 
ceived. ^ My sovereign lord," said she, ^^ by the life of 
your soul and mine, I know nobody that b^ot him of 
me. Only this I know, that as I was once with my 
companions in our chambers, there appeared to me a 
person in the shape of a most beautiful young man, who 



BRITISH HISTORY. 129 

often embraced me eagerly in his arms, and kissed me ; 
and when he had stayed a little time, he suddenly va- 
nished out of my sight. But many times after this he 
woidd talk with me when I sat alone, without making 
any visible appearance. When he had a long time 
haunted me in -this manner, he at last lay with me 
several times in the shape of a man, and left me with 
child. And I do affirm to you, my sovereign lord, 
that excepting that young man, I know no body that 
begot him of me.'' The king, full of admiration at 
this account, ordered Maugantius to be called, that he 
might satisfy him as to the possibility of what the 
woman had related. Maugantius, being introduced, 
and having the whole matter repeated to him, said to 
Vortegim ; " In the books of our philosophers, and in 
a great many histories, I have found that several men 
have had the like original. For, as Apuleius informs 
us in his book concerning the Demon of Socrates, be- 
tween the moon and the earth inhabit those spirits, 
which we call incubuses. These are of the nature partly 
of men, and partly of angels, and whenever they please 
assume human shapes, and lie with women. Perhaps 
one of them appeared to this woman, and begot that 
young man of her.'' 



CHAPTER XIX. 

merlin's speech to the king's MAGICIANS, AND ADVICE 
ABOUT THE BUILDING OF THE TOWER. 

Merlin in the mean time was attentive to all that 
had passed, and then approached the king, and said to 
him, " For what reason am I and my mother introduced 
into your presence ? " — " My magicians," answered Vor- 
tegim, "advised me to seek out a man that had no 
father, with whose blood my building is to be sprinkled, 
in order to make it stand.*' — " Order your magicians/* 

K 



^ 



130 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

said Merlin, "to come before me, and I will convict 
them of a lie." The king was surprised at his words, 
and presently ordered the magicians to come, and sit 
down before Merlin, who spoke to them after this man- 
ner : " Because you are ignorant what it is that hin- 
ders the foundation of the tower, you have recommended 
the shedding of my blood for cement to it, as if that 
would presently make it stand. But tell me now, what 
is there under the foundation ! For something there is 
that will not suffer it to stand." The magicians at this 
began to be afraid, and made him no answer. Then 
said Merlin, who was also called Ambrose, " I entreat 
your majesty would command your workmen to dig into 
the ground, and you will find a pond which causes the 
foundation to sink.'' This accordingly was done, and 
then presently they found a pond deep under ground, 
which had made it give way. Merlin after this went 
again to the magicians, and said, " Tell me, ye false 
sycophants^ what is there under the pond.'' But they 
were silent. Then said he again to the king, " Command 
the pond to be drained^ and at the bottom you will see 
two hollow stones, and in them two dragons asleep." 
The king made no scruple of believing him, since he 
had found true what he said of the pond, and therefore 
ordered it to be drained : which done, he found as Mer- 
lin had said ; and now was possessed with the greatest 
admiration of him. Nor were the rest that were pre- 
sent less amazed at his wisdom, thinking it to be no 
less than divine inspiration. 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH'S 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



BOOK VII. 

CONCERNING THE PROPHECIES OF MERLIN. 



CHAPTER I. 

GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTh's PREFACE TO MERLIN *S PROPHECY. 

I HAD not got thus far in my History, when the 
subject of public discourse happening to be concerning 
Merlin, I was obliged to publish his prophecies at the 
request of my acquaintance, but especially of Alexander, 
bishop of Lincoln, a prelate of the greatest piety and 
wisdom. There was not any person, either among the 
clergy or laity, that was attended with such a train of 
knights and noblemen, whom his settled piety and great 
munificence engaged in his service. Out of a desire 
therefore to gratify him, I translated these prophecies, 
and sent them to him with the following letter. 



CHAPTER II. 

Geoffrey's letter to Alexander, bishop of Lincoln. 

" The regard which I owe to your great worth, most 
noble prelate, has obliged me to undertake the transla- 
tion of Merlin's prophecies out of British into Latin, 

k2 



132 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

before I had made an end of the History, which I had 
begun concerning the acts of the British kings. For 
my design was to have finished that first, and afterwards 
to have taken this work in hand ; lest by being engaged 
on both at once, I should be less capable of attending 
with any exactness to either. Notwithstanding, since 
the deference which is paid to your penetrating judg- 
ment will screen me from censure, I have employed 
my rude pen, and in a coarse style present you with 
a translation out of a language with which you are 
unacquainted. At the same time, I cannot but won- 
der at your recommending this matter to one of my 
low genius, when you might have caused so many men 
of greater learning, and a richer vein of intellect, to 
undertake it; who with their sublime strains would 
much more agreeably have entertained you. Besides, 
without any disparagement to all the philosophers in 
Britain, I must take the liberty to say, that you your- 
self, if the business of your high station would give you 
leisure, are capable of furnishing us with loftier produc- 
tions of this kind than any man living. However, since 
it was your pleasure that Geoffrey of Monmouth should 
be employed in this prophecy, he hopes you will favour- 
ably accept of his performance, and vouchsafe to give a 
finer turn to whatever you shall find unpolished, or 
otherwise faulty in it.^^ 



CHAPTER III. 

THE PROPHECY OF MERLIN. 

The prophe- As Vortcgim, king of the Britons, was sitting upon 
*^ ° ®' * the bank of the drained pond, the two dragons, one of 
which was white, the other red, came forth, and ap- 
proaching one another, began a terrible fight, and cast 
forth tire with their breath. But the white dragon had 
the advantage, and made the other fly to the end of the 



BRITISH HISTORY. 133 

lake. And he, for grief at his flight, renewed the assault The prophe- 
upon his pursuer, and forced him to retire. After this 
battle of the dragons, the king commanded Ambrose 
Merlin to tell him what it portended. Upon which he, 
bursting into tears, delivered what his prophetical spirit 
suggested to him, as follows : — 

'' Woe to the red dragon, for his banishment hasteneth 
on. His lurking holes shall be seized by the white 
dragon, which signifies the Saxons whom you invited 
over; but the red denotes the British nation, which 
shall be oppressed by the white. Therefore shall its 
mountains be levelled as the valleys, and the rivers of 
the valleys shall run with blood. The exercise of re- 
ligion shall be destroyed, and churches be laid open to 
ruin. At last the oppressed shall prevail, and oppose 
the cruelty of foreigners. For a boar of Cornwall shall 
give his assistance, and trample their necks under his 
feet. The islands of the ocean shall be subject to his 
power, and he shall possess the forests of Gaul. The 
house of Romulus shall dread his courage, and his end 
shall be doubtful. He shall be celebrated in the mouths 
of the people ; and his exploits shall be food to those 
that relate them. Six of his posterity shall sway the 
sceptre, but after them shall arise a German worm. He 
shall be advanced by a sea-wolf, whom the woods of 
Africa shall accompany. Religion shall be again abo- 
lished^ and there shall be a translation of the metro- 
politan sees. The dignity of London shall adorn Doro- 
bemia, and the seventh pastor of York shall be resorted 
to in the kingdom of Armorica. Menevia shall put on 
the pall of the City of Legions, and a preacher of Ireland 
shall be dumb on account of an infant growing in the 
womb. It shall rain a shower of blood, and a raging 
famine shall ^fflict mankind. When these things 
happen, the reoofie shall be grieved; but when his 
fatigue is over, shall grow strong. Then shall mis- 
fortunes hasten upon the white one, and the buildings 



134 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

The prophe- of his ffardens shall be pulled do^^n. Seven that sway 

cy of Merlin. . 

the sceptre shall be killed, one of whom shall become a 
saint. The wombs of mothers shall be ripped up, and 
infants be abortive. There shall be a most grievous 
punishment of men, that the natives may be restored. 
He that shall do these things shall put on the brazen 
man, and upon a brazen horse shall for a long time 
guard the gates of London. After this shall the red 
dragon return to his proper manners, and turn his rage 
upon himself. Therefore shall the revenge of the Thun- 
derer show itself, for every field shall disappoint the 
husbandmen. Mortality shall snatch away the people, 
and make a desolation over all countries. The re- 
mainder shall quit their native soil, and make foreign 
plantations. A blessed king shall prepare a fleet, and 
shall be reckoned the twelfth in the court among the 
saints. There shall be a miserable desolation of the 
kingdom, and the floors of the harvests shall return to 
the fruitful forests.^ The white dragon shall rise again, 
and invite over a daughter of Germany. Our gardens 
shall be again replenished with foreign seed, and the red 
one shall pine away at the end of the pond. Aft^r that 
shall the German worm be crowned, and the brazen 
prince buried. He has his bounds assigned him, which 
he shall not be able to pass. For a hundred and fifty 
years he shall continue in trouble and subjection, but 
shall bear sway three hundred. Then shall the North 
wind rise against him, and shall snatch away the flowers 
which the West wind produced. There shall be gilding 
in the temples, nor shall the edge of the sword cease. 
The German dragon shall hardly get to his holes, be- 
cause the revenge of his treason shall overtake him. 
At last he shall flourish for a little time, but the deci- 
mation of Neustria shall hurt him. For a people in 
wood and in iron coats shall come, and revenge upon 
him his wickedness. They shall restore the ancient in- 
habitants to their dwellings, and there shall be an open 



BRITISH HISTORY. 135 

destruction of foreimers. The seed of the white dragon The prophe- 

® , ° cy of Merlin. 

shall be swept out of our gardens, and the remainder 
of his generation shall be decimated. They shall bear 
the yoke of slavery, and wound their mother with spades 
and ploughs. After this shall succeed two dragons, 
whereof one shall be killed with the sting of envy, but 
the other shall return under the shadow of a name. 
Then shall succeed a lion of justice, at whose roar the 
Galilean towers and the island dragons shall tremble. 
In those days gold shall be squeezed from the lily and 
the nettle, and silver shall flow from the hoofs of bel- 
lowing cattle. The frizled shall put on various fleeces, 
and the outward habit denote the inward parts. The 
feet of barkers shall be cut ofiF; wild beasts shall enjoy 
peace : mankind shall be grieved at their pimishment : 
the form of commerce shall be divided : the half shall 
be round. The ravenousness of kites shall be de- 
stroyed, and the teeth of wolves blunted. The lion's 
whelps shall be transformed into sea-fishes; and an 
eagle shall build her nest upon Mount Aravius. Vene- 
dotia shall grow red with the blood of mothers, and the 
house of Corineus kill six brethren. The island shall 
be wet with night-tears ; so that all shall be provoked 
to all things. Woe to thee, Neustria, because the 
lion's brain shall be poured upon thee ; and he shall be 
banished with shattered limbs from his native soil. Pos- 
terity shall endeavour to fly above the highest places ; 
but the favour of new comers shall be exalted. Piety 
shall hurt the possessor of things got by impiety, till 
he shall have put on his Father : therefore, being armed 
with the teeth of a boar, he shall ascend above the tops 
of mountains, and the shadow of him that wears a 
helmet. Albania shall be enraged, and assembling her 
neighbours, shall be employed in shedding blood. There 
shall be put into her jaws a bridle that shall be made 
on the coast of Armorica. The eagle of the broken 
covenant shall gild it over, and rejoice in her third nest. 



136 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

The prophe- The rearing whelps shall watch, and leaving the woods, 
^^ *' * shall hunt within the walls of cities. They shall make 
no small slaughter of those that oppose them, and shall 
cut off the tongues of bulls. They shall load the necks 
of roaring lions with chains, and restore the times of 
their ancestors. Then from the first to the fourth, from 
the fourth to the third, from the third to the second, 
the thumb shall roll in oil. The sixth shall overturn 
the walls of Ireland, and change the woods into a plain. 
He shall reduce several parts to one, and be crowned 
with the head of a lion. His beginning shall lay open 
to wandering affection, but his end shall carry him up 
to the blessed, who are above. For he shall restore the 
seats of saints in their countries, and settle pastors in 
convenient places. Two cities he shall invest with two 
palls, and shall bestow virgin-presents upon virgins. 
He shall merit by this the favour of the Thunderer, and 
shall be placed among the saints. From him shall pro- 
ceed a lynx penetrating all things, who shall be bent 
upon the ruin of his own .nation ; for through him 
Neustria shall lose both islands, and be deprived of its 
ancient dignity. Then shall the natives return back to 
the island; for there shall arise a dissension among 
foreigners. Also a hoary old man, sitting upon a snow- 
white horse, shall turn the course of the river Periron, 
and shall measure out a mill upon it with a white rod. 
Cadwallader shall call upon Conan, and take Albania 
into alliance. Then shall there be a slaughter of fo- 
reigners ; then shall the rivers run with blood. Then 
shall break forth the fountains of Armorica, and they 
shall be crowned with the diadem of Brutus. Cambria 
shall be filled with joy ; and the oaks of Cornwall shall 
flourish. The island shall be called by the name of 
Brutus ; and the name given it by foreigners shall be 
abolished. From Conan shall proceed a warlike boar, 
that shall exercise the sharpness of his tusks within the 
Gallic woods. For he shall cut down all the larger 



BRITISH HISTORY. 137 

oaks, and shall be a defence to the smaller. The Ara- The prophe. 
bians and Africans shall dread him ; for he shall pursue ^^^ *' ' 
his furious course to the farther part of Spain. There 
shall succeed the goat of the Venereal Castle, having 
golden horns and a silver beard, who shall breathe such a 
cloud out of his nostrils, as shall darken the whole sur- 
face of the island. There shall be peace in his time ; 
and com shall abound by reason of the fruitfulness of 
the soil. Women shall become serpents in their gait, 
and all their motions shall be full of pride. The camp of 
Venus shall be restored ; nor shall the arrows of Cupid 
cease to wound. The fountain of a river shall be turned 
into blood ; and two kings shall fight a duel at Stafford 
for a lioness. Luxury shall overspread the whole 
groimd ; and fornication not cease to debauch mankind. 
All these things shall three ages see; till the buried 
kings shall be exposed to public view in the city of Lon- 
don. Famine shall again return ; mortality shall re- 
turn ; and the inhabitants shall grieve for the destruc- 
tion of their cities. Then shall come the board of 
commerce, who shall recall the scattered flocks to the 
pasture they had lost. His breast shall be food to the 
hungry, and his tongue drink to the thirsty. Out of 
his mouth shall flow rivers, that shall water the parched 
jaws of men. After this shall be produced a tree upon 
the Tower of London, which having no more than three 
branches, shall overshadow the surface of the whole 
island with the breadth of its leaves. Its adversary, 
the North wind, shall come upon it, and with its noxious 
blast shall snatch away the third branch ; but the two 
remaining ones shall possess its place, till they shall 
destroy one another by the multitude of their leaves : 
and then shall it obtain the place of those two, and shall 
give sustenance to birds of foreign nations. It shall 
be esteemed hurtful to native fowls ; for they shall not 
be able to fly freely for fear of its shadow. There shall 
succeed the ass of wickedness, swift against the gold- 



138 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

The prophe- SHiiths ; but slow against the ravenousness of wolves, 
cy o er n. j^ ^jjQge ^j^yg i]^q q^Ics of the forests shall bum, and 

acorns grow upon the branches of teil trees. The 
Severn sea shall discharge itself through seven months, 
and the river Uske burn seven months. Fishes shall 
die with the heat thereof; and of them shall be en- 
gendered serpents. The baths of Badon shall grow 
cold, and their salubrious waters engender death. Lon- 
don shall mourn for the death of twenty thousand ; and 
the river Thames shall be turned into blood. The 
monks in their cowls shall be forced to man*y, and 
their cry shall be heard upon the mountains of the 
Alps." 

CHAPTER IV. 

THE CONTINUATION OF THE PROPHECY. 

" Three springs shall break forth in the city of Win- 
chester, whose rivulets shall divide the island into three 
parts. Whoever shall drink of the first, shall enjoy long 
life, and shall never be afflicted with sickness. He that 
shall drink of the second, shall die of hunger, and pale- 
ness and horror shall sit in his countenance. He that 
shall drink of the third, shall be surprised with sud- 
den death, neither shall his body be capable of burial. 
Those that are willing to escape so great a surfeit, will 
endeavour to hide it with several coverings : but 
whatever bulk shall be laid upon it, shall receive the 
form of another body. For earth shall be turned into 
stones ; stones into water ; wood into ashes ; ashes into 
water, if cast over it. Also a damsel shall be sent from 
the city of the forest of Canute to administer a cure, 
who, after she shall have practised all her arts, shall dry 
up the noxious fountains only with her breath. After- 
wards, as soon as she shall have refreshed herself with 
the wholesome liquor, she shall bear in her right hand 
the wood of Caledon, and in her left the forts of the 



BRITISH HISTORY. 139 

walls of London. Wherever she shall go, she shall make The prophe- 
sulphureous steps, which will smoke with a double flame. 
That smoke shall rouse up the city of Ruteni, and shall 
make food for the inhabitants of the deep. She shall 
overflow with rueful tears, and shall fill the island with 
her dreadful cry. She shall be killed by a hart with ten 
branches, four of which shall bear golden diadems : but 
the other six shall be turned into buffaloes horns, whose 
hideous sound shall astonish the three islands of Britain. 
The Daneian wood shall be stirred up^ and breaking 
forth into a human voice, shall cry : Come, O Cambria, 
and join Cornwall to thy side, and say to Winchester, 
the earth shall swallow thee up. Translate the seat of 
thy pastor to the place where ships come to harbour, 
and the rest of the members will follow the head. For 
the day hasteneth, in which thy citizens shall perish on 
account of the guilt of perjury. The whiteness of wool 
has been hurtful to thee, and the variety of its tinc- 
tures. Woe to the perjured nation, for whose sake the 
renowned city shall come to ruin. The ships shall re- 
joice at so great an augmentation, and one shall be 
made out of two. It shall be rebuilt by Eric, loaden 
with apples, to the smell whereof the birds of several 
woods shall flock together. He shall add to it a vast 
palace, and wall it round with six hundred towers. 
Therefore shall London envy it, and triply increase her 
walls. The river Thames shall encompass it round, 
and the fame of the work shall pass beyond the Alps. 
Eric shall hide his apples within it, and shall make sub- 
terraneous passages. At that time shall the stones 
speak, and the sea towards the Gallic coast be con- 
tracted into a narrow space. On each bank shall one 
man hear another, and the soil of the island shall be 
enlarged. The secrets of the deep shall be revealed, 
and Gaul shall tremble for fear. After these things 
shall come forth a hern from the forest of Calaterium, 
which shall fly round the island for two years together. 



140 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

The prophe- With her nocturnal cry she shall call together the 
' winged kind, and assemble to her all sorts of fowls. 
They shall invade the tillage of husbandmen, and devour 
all the grain of the harvests. Then shall follow a 
famine upon the people, and a grievous mortality upon 
the famine. But when this calamity shall be over, a 
detestable bird shall go to the valley of Galabes, and 
shall raise it to be a high mountain. Upon the top 
thereof it shall also plant an oak, and build its nest in 
its branches. Three eggs shall be produced in the nest, 
from whence shall come forth a fox, a w^olf, and a bear. 
The fox shall devour her mother, and bear the head of 
an ass. In this monstrous form shall she frighten her 
brothers, and make them fly into Neustria. But they 
shall stir up the tusky boar, and returning in a fleet 
shall encounter with the fox ; who at the beginning of 
the fight shall feign herself dead, and move the boar to 
compassion. Then shall the boar approach her carcase, 
and standing over her, shall breathe upon her face and 
eyes. But she, not forgetting her cunning, shall bite 
his left foot, and pluck it off from his body. Then shall 
she leap upon him, and snatch away his right ear and 
tail, and hide herself in the caverns of the moimtains. 
Therefore shall the deluded boar require the wolf and 
bear to restore him his members ; who, as soon as they 
shall enter into the cause, shall promise two feet of the 
fox, together with the ear and tail, and of these they 
shall make up the members of a hog. With this he 
shall be satisfied, and expect the promised restitution. 
In the mean time shall the fox descend from the moun- 
tains, and change herself into a wolf, and under pre- 
tence of holding a conference with the boar, she shall go 
to him, and craftily devour him. After that she shall 
transform herself into a boar, and feigning a loss of 
some members, shall wait for her brothers ; but as soon 
as they are come, she shall suddenly kill them with her 
tusks, and shall be crowned with the head of a lion. In 



BRITISH HISTORY. 141 

her days shall a serpent be brought forth, which shall be The prophe. 
a destroyer of mankind. With its length it shall encom- ^^ 
pass London, and devour all that pass by it. The moun- 
tain ox shall take the head of a wolf, and whiten his 
teeth in the Severn. He shall gather to him the flocks 
of Albania and Cambria, which shall drink the river 
Thames dry. The ass shall call the goat with the long 
beard, and shall borrow his shape. Therefore shall the 
mountain ox be incensed, and having called the wolf, 
shall become a homed bull against them. In the exer- 
cise of his cruelty he shall devour their flesh and bones, 
but shall be burned upon the top of Urian. The ashes 
of his funeral-pile shall be turned into swans, that shall 
swim on dry ground as on a river. They shall devour 
fishes in fishes, and swallow up men in men. But when 
old age shall come upon them, they shall become sea- 
wolves, and practise their frauds in the deep. They 
shall drown ships, and collect no small quantity of silver. 
The Thames shall again flow, and assembling together 
the rivers, shall pass beyond the bounds of its channel. 
It shall cover the adjacent cities, and overturn the moun- 
tains that oppose its course. Being full of deceit and 
wickedness, it shall make use of the fountain Galabes. 
Hence shall arise factions provoking the Venedotians to 
war. The oaks of the forest shall meet together, and 
encounter the rocks of the Gewisseans. A raven shall 
attend with the kites, and devour the carcases of the 
slain. An owl shall build her nest upon the walls of 
Gloucester, and in her nest shall be brought forth an 
ass. The serpent of Malvemia shall bring him up, and 
put him upon many fraudulent practices. Having taken 
the crown, he shall ascend on high, and frighten the 
people of the country with his hideous braying. In his 
days shall the Pachaian mountains tremble, and the pro- 
vinces be deprived of their woods. For there shall come 
a worm with a fiery breath, and with the vapour it sends 
forth shall burn up the trees. Out of it shall proceed 



142 GEOFFREY OK MONMOITTH. 

The prophe- seven lions deformed with the heads of goats. With the 
' stench of their nostrils they shall corrupt women, and 
make \vives turn common prostitutes. The father shall 
not know his own son, because they shall grow wanton 
like brute beasts. Then shall come the giant of wicked- 
ness, and terrify all with the sharpness of his eyes. 
Against him shall arise the dragon of Worcester, and 
shall endeavour to banish him. But in the engagement 
the dragon shall be worsted, and oppressed by the wicked- 
ness of the conqueror. For he shall mount upon the 
dragon, and putting off his garment shall sit upon him 
naked. The dragon shall bear him up on high, and beat 
his naked rider with his tail erected. Upon this the 
giant rousing up his whole strength, shall break his jaws 
with his sword. At last the dragon shall fold itself up 
under its tail, and die of poison. After him shall suc- 
ceed the boar of Totness, and oppress the people with 
grievous tyranny. Gloucester shall send forth a lion, 
and shall disturb him in his cruelty, in several battles. 
He shall trample him under his feet, and terrify him with 
open jaws. At last the lion shall quarrel with the king- 
dom, and get upon the backs of the nobility. A bull 
shall come into the quarrel, and strike the lion with his 
right foot. He shall drive him through all the inns in 
the kingdom, but shall break his horns against the walls 
of Oxford. The fox of Kaerdubalem shall take revenge 
on the lion, and destroy him entirely with her teeth. 
She shall be encompassed by the adder of Lincoln, who 
with a horrible hiss shall give notice of his presence to a 
multitude of dragons. Then shall the dragons encoim- 
ter, and tear one another to pieces. The winged shall 
oppress that which wants wings, and fasten its claws into 
the poisonous cheeks. Others shall come into the quar- 
rel, and kill one another. A fifth shall succeed those 
that are slain, and by various stratagems shall destroy 
the rest. He shall get upon the back of one with his 
sword, and sever his head from his body. Then throw- 



BRITISH HISTORY. 143 

ing ofiF his garment, he shall get upon another, and put Tfce prophe- 
his right and left hand upon his tail. Thus being naked 
shall he overcome him, whom when clothed he was not 
able to deal with. The rest he shall gall in their flight, 
and drive them round the kingdom. Upon this shall 
come a roaring lion dreadful for his monstrous cruelty. 
Fifteen parts shall he reduce to one, and shall alone 
possess the people. The giant of the snow-white colour 
shall shine, and cause the white people to flourish. 
Pleasures shall effeminate the princes^ and they shall 
suddenly be changed into beasts. Among them shall 
arise a lion swelled with human gore. Under him 
shall a reaper be placed in the standing com, who, while 
he is reaping, shall be oppressed by him. A charioteer 
of York shall appease them, and having banished his 
lord, shall mount upon the chariot which he shall drive. 
With his sword unsheathed shall he threaten the East, 
and fill the tracks of his wheels with blood. After- 
wards he shall become a sea-fish, who, being roused 
up with the hissing of a serpent, shall engender with 
him. From hence shall be produced three thundering 
bulls, who having eaten up their pastures shall be turned 
into trees. The first shall carry a whip of vipers, and 
turn his back upon the next. He shall endeavour to 
snatch away the whip, but shall be taken by the last. 
They shall turn away their f^ces from one another, till 
they have thrown away the poisoned cup. To him shall 
succeed a husbandman of Albania, at whose back shall 
be a serpent. He shall be employed in ploughing the 
ground, that the country may become white with corn. 
The serpent shall endeavour to diffuse his poison, in 
order to blast the harvest. A grievous mortality shall 
sweep away the people, and the walls of cities shall be 
made desolate. There shall be given for a remedy the 
city of Claudius, which shall interpose the nurse of the 
scourger. For she shall bear a dose of medicine, and 
in a short time the island shall be restored. Then shall 



144 GEOFFREY OF MOXMOUTH. 

The prophe- twQ succcssively sway the sceptre, whom a horned dra- 
gon shall serve. One shall come in armour, and shall 
ride upon a flying serpent. He shall sit upon his back 
with his naked body, and cast his right hand upon his 
tail. With his cry shall the seas be moved, and he shall 
strike terror into the second. The second therefore shall 
enter into confederacy with the lion ; but a quarrel hap- 
pening, they shall encounter one another. They shall 
distress one another, but the courage of the beast shall 
gain the advantage. Then shall come one with a drum, 
and appease the rage of the lion. Therefore shall the 
people of the kingdom be at peace, and provoke the lion 
to a dose of physic. In his established seat he shall 
adjust the weights, but shall stretch out his hands into 
Albania. For which reason the northern provinces 
shall be grieved, and open the gates of the temples* 
The sign-bearing wolf shall lead his troops, and sur- 
round Cornwall with his tail. He shall be opposed by 
a soldier in a chariot, who shall transform that people 
into a boar. The boar therefore shall ravage the pro- 
vinces, but shall hide his head in the depth of Severn. 
A man shall embrace a lion in wine, and' the dazzling 
brightness of gold shall blind the eyes of beholders. 
Silver shall whiten in the circumference, and torment 
several wine-presses. Men shall be drunk with wine, 
and, regardless of heaven, shall be intent upon the earth. 
From them shall the stars turn away their faces, and 
confound their usual course. Com will wither at their 
malign aspects ; and there shall fall no dew from heaven. 
The roots and branches will change their places, and 
the novelty of the thing shall pass for a miracle. The 
brightness of the sun shall fade at the amber of Mer- 
cury, and horror shall seize the beholders. Stilbon of 
Arcadia shall change his shield; the helmet of Mars 
shall call Venus. The helmet of Mars shall make a 
shadow; and the rage of Mercury pass his bounds. 
Iron Orion shall unsheath his sword : the marine Phoebus 



BRITISH HISTORY. 145 

shall torment the clouds ; Jupiter shall go out of his 
lawful paths ; and Venus forsake her stated lines. The 
malignity of the star Saturn shall fall down in rain, and 
slay mankind with a crooked sickle. The twelve houses 
of the stars shall lament the irregular excursions of their 
guests ; and Oemini omit their usual embraces, and call 
the urn to the fountains. The scales of Libra shall hang 
obliquely, till Aries put his crooked horns under them. 
The tail of Scorpio shall produce lightning, and Cancer 
quarrel with the Sun. Virgo shall mount upon the back 
of Sagittarius, and darken her virgin flowers. The cha- 
riot of the Moon shall disorder the zodiac, and the 
Pleiades break forth into weeping. No offices of Janus 
shall hereafter return, but his gate being shut shall lie 
hid in the chinks of Ariadne. The seas shall rise up in 
the twinkling of an eye, and the dust of the ancients 
shall be restored. The winds shall fight together with 
a dreadful blast, and their sound shall reach the stars. 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH'S 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



BOOK VIII. 
CHAPTER I. 

VORTEGIRN ASKS MERLIN CONCERNING HIS OWN DEATH. 

Merlin, by delivering these and many other prophe- 
cies, caused in all that were present an admiration at 
the ambiguity of his expressions. But Vortegim above 
all the rest both admired and applauded the wisdom^ 
and prophetical spirit of the young man : for that age 
had produced none that ever talked in such a manner 
before him. Being therefore curious to learn his own 
fate, he desired the young man to tell him what he knew 
concerning that particular. Merlin answered : — " Fly 
the fire of the sons of Constantine, if you are able to do 
it : already are they fitting out their ships : already are 
they leaving the Armorican shore : already are they 
spreading out their sails to the wind. They will steer 
towards Britain : they will invade the Saxon nation : 
they will subdue that wicked people ; but they will first 
bum you being shut up in a tower. To your own ruin 
did you prove a traitor to their father, and invite the 
Saxons into the island. You invited them for your safe- 
guard ; but they came for a punishment to you. Two 
deaths instantly threaten you ; nor is it easy to deter- 
mine, which you can best avoid. For on the one hand 



BRITISH HISTORY. 14? 

the Saxons shall lay waste your country, and endeavour 
to kill you : on the other shall arrive the two brothers, 
Aurelius Ambrosius and Uther Pendragon, whose busi- 
ness will be to revenge their father's murder upon you. 
Seek out some refuge if you can : to-morrow they will 
be on the shore of Totness. The faces of the Saxons 
shall look red with blood, Hengist shall be killed, and 
Aurelius Ambrosius shall be crowned. He shall bring 
peace to the nation ; he shall restore the churches ; but 
shall die of poison. His brother Uther Pendragon shall 
succeed him, whose days also shall be cut short by poi- 
son. There shall be present at the commission of this 
treason your own issue, whom the boar of Cornwall shall 
devour.'" Accordingly the next day early, arrived Aure- Aureiius 
lius Ambrosius and his brother, with ten thousand 
men. 

CHAPTER II. 

AURELIUS AMBROSIUS, BEING ANOINTED KING OF BRITAIN, 
BURNS VORTEGIRN BESIEGED IN A TOWER. 

As soon as the news of his coming was divulged, the 
Britons, who had been dispersed by their great calamities, 
met together from all parts, and gaining this new acces- 
sion of strength from their countrymen, displayed un- 
usual vigour. Having assembled together the clergy, 
they anointed Aurelius king, and paid him the customary 
homage. And when the people were urgent to fell upon 
the Saxons, he dissuaded them from it, because his de- 
sire was to pursue Vortegim first. For the treason 
committed against his father so very much affected him, 
that he thought nothing done till that was first avenged. 
In pursuance therefore of this design, he marched with 
his army into Cambria, to the town of Genoreu, whither 
Vortegim had fled for refuge. That town was in the 
country of Hergin, upon the river Gania, in the moun- 
tain called Cloarius. As soon as Ambrosius was arrived 

l2 



148 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

there, bearing in his mind the murder of his father 
and brother, he spake thus to Eldol, duke of Glou- 
cester. 

" See, most noble duke, whether the walls of this 
city are able to protect Vortegim against my sheathing 
this sword in his bowels. He deserves to die, and you 
cannot, I suppose, be ignorant of his desert. Oh most 
villanous of men, whose crimes deserve inexpressible 
tortures ! First he betrayed my father Constantino, 
who had delivered him and his country from the inroads 
of the Picts ; afterwards my brother Constans, whom 
he made king on purpose to destroy him. Again, when 
by his craft he had usurped the crown, he introduced 
pagans among the natives, in order to abuse those who 
continued steadfast in their loyalty to me : but by the 
good providence of God, he unwarily fell into the snare, 
which he had laid for my faithful subjects. For the 
Saxons, when they found him out in his vnckedness, 
drove him from the kingdom ; for which nobody ought 
to be concerned. But this I think matter of just grief, 
that this odious people, whom that detestable traitor in- 
vited over, has expelled the nobility, laid waste a fruitful 
country, destroyed the holy churches, and almost extin- 
guished Christianity over the whole kingdom. Now, 
therefore, my countrymen, show yourselves men ; first 
revenge yourselves upon him that was the occasion of all 
these disasters ; then let us turn our arms against our 
enemies, and free our country from their brutish ty- 
ranny." 

Immediately, therefore, they set their engines to work, 

and laboured to beat down the walls. But at last, when 

all other attempts failed, they had recourse to fire, which 

Death of meeting with proper fuel, ceased not to rage, till it had 

burnt dovm the tower and Vortegim in it. 



Vorteg^. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 149 



CHAPTER III. 

THE PRAISE OF AURELIUs's VALOUR. THE LEVITY OF THE 
SCOTS EXPOSED. FORCES RAISED AGAINST HENGIST. 

Hengist, with his Saxons, was struck with terror at 
this news, for he dreaded the valour of Aurelius. Such character of 
was the bravery and courage this prince was master of, ^ "*' 
that while he was in Gaul, there was none that durst 
encounter with him. For in all encounters he either 
dismounted his adversary, or broke his spear. Besides, 
he was magnificent in his presents, constant at his 
devotions, temperate in all respects, and above all things 
hated a lie. A brave soldier on foot, a better on horse- 
back, and expert in the discipline of an army. Reports 
of these his noble accomplishments, while he yet con- 
tinued in Armorican Britain, were daily brought over 
into the island. Therefore, the Saxons, for fear of him, 
retired beyond the Humber, and in those parts fortified 
the cities and towns; for that country always was a 
place of refuge to them ; their safety lying in the neigh- 
bourhood of Scotland, which used to watch all oppor- 
tunities of distressing the nation ; for that country being 
in itself a frightful place to live in, and wholly unin- 
habited, had been a safe retreat for strangers. By its 
situation it lay open to the Picts, Scots, Dacians, Nor- Dacian«,i.<f. 
wegians, and others, that came to plunder the island. 
Being, therefore, secure of a safe reception in this 
country, they fled towards it, that, if there should be 
occasion, they might retreat into it as into their own 
camp. This was good news to Aurelius, and made him 
conceive greater hopes of victory. So assembling his 
people quickly together, he augmented his army, and 
made an expeditious march towards the north. In his 
passage through the countries, he was grieved to see 
the desolation made in them, but especially that the 



150 r.EOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

cliurches were levelled with the pround; and he pro- 
mised to rebuild them, if he gained the victory. 



CHAPTER IV. 

HENGIST MARCHES WITH HIS ARMY AGAINST AURELIUS, 
INTO THE FIELD OF MAISBBLI. 

But Hengist, upon his approach, took courage again, 
and chose out the bravest of his men, whom he exhorted 
to make a gallant defence, and not be daunted at 
Aurelius, who, he told them, had but few Armorican 
Britcms with him, since their number did not exceed 
ten thousand. And as for the native Britons, he made 
no account of them, since they had been so often de- 
feated by him. He therefore promised them the vic- 
tory, and that they should come off safely, considering 
the superiority of their number, which amounted to two 
hundred thousand men in arms. After he had in this 
manner animated his men, he advanced with them 
towards Aurelius, into a field caUed Maisbeli, through 
which Aurelius was to pass. For his intention was to 
make a sudden assault by a surprise, and fall upon the 
Britons before they were prepared. But Aurelius per- 
ceived the design, and yet did not, on that account, 
delay going to the field, but rather pursued his march 
with more expedition. When he was come within sight 
of the enemy, he put his troops in order, commanding 
three thousand Armoricans to attend the cavalry, and 
drew out the rest together with the islanders into line 
of battle. The Demetians he placed upon the hills, 
and the Yenedotians in the adjacent woods. His reason 
for which was, that they might be there ready to fall 
upon the Saxons, in case they should flee in that di- 
rection. 



BRITISH HISl'ORY. 151 



CHAPTER V. 

A BATTLE BETWEEN AURELIUS AND IIENGIST. 

In the mean time, Eldol, duke of Gloucester, went to 
the king, and said, '^ This one day should suffice for all 
the days of my life, if by good providence I could but 
get an opportunity to engage with Hengist ; for one of 
us should die before we parted. I still retain deeply 
fixed in my memory the day appointed for our peaceably 
treating together, but which he villanously made use of 
to assassinate all that were present at the treaty, except 
myself only, who stood upon my defence with a stake 
which I accidentally found, until I made my escape. 
That very day proved fatal, through his treachery, to 
no less than four hundred and sixty barons and consuls, 
who all went unarmed. From that conspiracy God 
was pleased to deliver me, by throwing a stake in my 
way, wherewith I defended myself and escaped.*" Thus 
spoke Eldol. Then Aurelius exhorted his companions 
to place all their hope in the Son of God, and to make 
a brave assault with one consent upon the enemy, in 
defence of their country. Nor was Hengist less busy 
on the other hand in forming his troops, and giving 
them directions how to behave themselves in the battle ; 
and walked himself through their several ranks, the 
more to spirit them up. At last, both armies, being 
drawn out in order of battle, began the attack, which 
they maintained with great bravery, and no small loss of 
blood, both of the Britons and Saxons. Aurelius ani- 
mated the Christians, Hengist the pagans ; and all the 
time of the engagement, Eldol's chief endeavour was to 
encounter Hengist, but he had no opportunity for it. 
For Hengist, when he found that his own men were 
routed, and that the Christians, by the especial favour 
of God, had the advantage, fled to the town called 



152 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

Kaerconan, now Cunungeburg. Aurelius pursued him, 
and either killed or made slaves of all he found in the 
way. When Hengist saw that he was pursued by 
Aurelius, he would not enter the town,' but assembled 
his troops, and prepared them to stand another engage- 
ment. For he knew the town would not hold out 
against Aurelius, and that his whole security now lay in 
his sword. At last Aurelius overtook him, and after 
marshalling his forces, began another most furious 
fight. And here the Saxons steadily maintained their 
ground, notwithstanding the numbers that fell. On 
both sides there was great slaughter, the groans of the 
dying causing a greater rage in those that survived. 
In short, the Saxons would have gained the day, had not 
a detachment of horse from the Armorican Britons 
come in upon them. For Aurelius had appointed them 
the same station which they had in the former battle ; 
so that, upon their advancing, the Saxons gave ground, 
and when once a little dispersed, were not able to rally 
again. The Britons, encouraged by this advantage, ex- 
erted themselves, and laboured vdth all their might to 
distress the enemy. All the time Aurelius was fully 
employed, not only in giving conmiands, but encouraging 
his men by his own example ; for with his own hand he 
killed all that stood in his way, and pursued those that 
fled. Nor was Eldol less active in all parts of the field, 
running to and fro to assault his adversaries ; but still 
his main endeavour was to find an opportunity of en- 
countering Hengist. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 153 



CHAPTER VI. 

HENGIST, IN A DUEL WITH ELDOL^ IS TAKEN BY HIM. 
THE SAXONS ARE SLAIN BY THE BRITONS WITHOUT 
MERCY. 

As there were therefore several movements made by 
the parties engaged on each side, an opportmiity occurred 
for their meeting, and briskly engaging each other. In 
this encounter of the two greatest champions in the field, 
the fire sparkled with the clashing of their arms, and 
every stroke in a manner produced both thunder and 
lightning. For a long time was the victory in suspense, 
as it seemed sometimes to favour the one, sometimes the 
other. While they were thus hotly engaged, Gorlois, 
duke of Cornwall, came up to them with the party he 
commanded, and did great execution upon the enemies' 
troops. At the sight of him, Eldol, assured of victory, 
seized on the helmet of Hengist, and by main force 
dragged him in among the Britons, and then m transports 
of joy cried out with a loud voice, " God has fulfilled my 
desire ! My brave soldiers, down, down, with your ene- 
mies the Ambrons. The victory is now in your hands : 
Hengist is defeated, and the day is your own." In the 
meantime the Britons failed not to perform every one 
his part against the pagans, upon whom they made many 
vigorous assaults ; and though they were obliged some- 
times to give ground, yet their courage did not fail them 
in making a good resistance; so that they gave the 
enemy no respite till they had vanquished them. The 
Saxons therefore fled whithersoever their consternation 
hurried them, some to the cities, some to the woods upon 
the hills, and others to their ships. But Octa, the son 
of Hengist, made his retreat with a great body of men to 
York: and Eosa, his kinsman, to the city of Alclud, 
where he had a very large army for his guard. 



154 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER VII. 

HENG18T IS BEHEADED BY ELDOL. 

Death of AuRELius, after this victory, took the city of Conan 

above-mentioned, and stayed there three days. During 
this time he gave orders for the burial of the slain, for 
curing the wounded, and for the ease and refreshment of 
his forces that were fatigued. Then he called a council 
of his principal officers, to deliberate what was to be done 
with Hengist. There was present at the assembly Eldad, 
bishop of Gloucester, and brother of Eldol, a prelate of 
very great wisdom and piety. As soon as he beheld Hen- 
gist standing in the king^s presence, he demanded silence, 
and said, '' Though all should be unanimous for setting 
him at liberty, yet would I cut him to pieces. The pro- 
phet Samuel is my warrant, who, when he had Agag, king 
of Amalek, in his power, hewed him in pieces, saying, As 
thy sword hath made women childless, so shall thy mother 
be childless among women. Do therefore the same to 
Hengist, who is a second Agag.*" Accordingly Eldol 
took his sword, and drew him out of the city, and then 
cut off his head. But Aurelius, who showed moderation 
in all his conduct, commanded him to be buried, and a 
heap of earth to be raised over his body, according to the 
custom of the pagans. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

OCTA, BEING BESIEGED IN YORK, SURRENDERS HIMSELF 
TO THE MERCY OF AURELIUS. 

From hence Aurelius cotiducted his army to York, to 
besiege Octa, Hengist's son. When the city was in- 
vested, Octa was doubtful whether he should give him 
any opposition, and stand a siege against such a power- 



BRITISH HISTORY. 155 

ful anny. After consultation upon it, he went out with 
his principal nobility that were present, carrying a chain subjection of 
in his hand, and sand upon his head, and presented him- 
self to the king with this address : " My gods are van- 
quished, and I doubt not that the sovereign power is in 
your God, who has compelled so many noble persons to 
come before you in this suppliant manner. Be pleased 
therefore to accept of us, and of this chain. If you do 
not think us fit objects of your clemency, we here present 
ourselves ready to be fettered, and to undergo whatever 
puni s hment you shall adjudge us to." Aurelius was 
moved with pity at the spectacle, and demanded the 
advice of his council what should be done with them. 
After various proposals upon this subject, Eldad the 
bishop rose up, and delivered his opinion in these words: 
** The Gibeonites came voluntarily to the children of 
Israel to desire mercy, and they obtained it. And shall 
we Christians be worse than the Jews, in refusing them 
mercy ? It is mercy which they beg, and let them have 
it. The island of Britain is large, and in many places 
uninhabited. Let us make a covenant with them, and 
sufier them at least to inhabit the desert places, that 
they may be our vassals for ever." The king acquiesced 
in Eldad's advice, and suffered them to partake of his 
clemency. After this Eosa and the rest that fled, being 
encouraged by Octa's success, came also, and were ad- 
mitted to the same favour. The king therefore granted 
them the country bordering upon Scotland, and made a 
firm covenant with them. 



156 



Ul!X)PFKEY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER IX. 



Rebuilding 
of York 
Minster. 



AURELIUS, HAVING ENTIRELY ROUTED THE ENEMIES, RE- 
STORES ALL THINGS IN BRITAIN, ESPECIALLY ECCLESIAS- 
TICAL AFFAIRS, TO THEIR ANCIENT STATE. 

The enemies being now entirely reduced, the king sum- 
moned the consuls and princes of the kingdom together 
at York, where he gave orders for the restoration of the 
churches, which the Saxons had destroyed. He himself 
undertook the rebuilding of the metropolitan church of 
that city, as also the other cathedral churches in that 
province. After fifteen days, when he had settled work- 
men in several places, he went to London, which city had 
not escaped the fury of the enemy. He beheld with 
great sorrow the destruction made iix it, and recaUed the 
remainder of the citizens from all parts, and began the 
Reatorauon rostoratioH of it. Here he settled the a&irs of the 

of London. 

whole kingdom, revived the laws, restored the right 
heirs to the possessions of their ancestors ; and those 
estates, whereof the heirs had been lost in the late 
grievous calamity, he distributed among his fellow sol- 
diers. In these important concerns, of restoring the 
nation to its ancient state, repairing the churches, re- 
establishing peace and law, and settling the administra- 
tion of justice, was his time wholly employed. From 
Winchester, heuco he Went to Winchester, to repair the ruins of it, 
as he did of other cities ; and when the work was 
finished there, he went, at the instance of Bishop Eldad, 
to the monastery near Kaercaradoc, now Salisbury, 
where the consuls and princes, whom the wicked Hengist 
had treacherously murdered, lay buried. At this place 
was a convent that maintained three hundred friars, 
situated on the mountain of Ambrius, who, as is 
reported, had been the founder of it. The sight of the 
place where the dead lay, made the king, who was of a 



Salisbury. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



157 



compassionate temper, shed tears, and at last enter upon 
thoughts, what kind of monument to erect upon it. For 
he thought something ought to be done to perpetuate 
the memory of that piece of ground, which was honoured 
with the bodies of so many noble patriots, that died for 
their country. 



CHAPTER X. 

AURELIUS IS ADVISED BY MERLIN TO REMOVE THE GIANt's 
DANCE FROM THE MOUNTAIN KILLARAUS. 

For this purpose he summoned together several car- 
penters and masons, and commanded them to employ 
the utmost of their art, in contriving some new struc- 
ture, for a lasting monument to those great men. But 
they, in diffidence of their own skill, refusing to under- 
take it, Tremounus, archbishop of the City of Legions, 
went to the king, and said, '^ If any one living is able to 
execute your commands. Merlin, the prophet of Vorte- 
gim, is the man. In my opinion there is not in all your 
kingdom a person of a brighter genius, either in predicting 
Aiture events, or in mechanical contrivances. Order him 
to come to you, and exercise his skill in the work which 
you design.'*^ Whereupon Aurelius, after he had asked a 
great many questions concerning him, despatched several 
messengers into the countries to find him out, and bring 
him to him. After passing through several provinces, 
they found him in the country of the Gewisseans, at the 
fountain of Galabes, which he frequently resorted to. 
As soon as they had delivered their message to him, 
they conducted him to the king, who received him with 
joy, and, being curious to hear some of his wonderful 
speeches, conunanded him to prophesy. Merlin made 
answer : " Mysteries of this kind are not to be revealed 
but when there is the greatest necessity for it. If I 
should pretend to utter them either for ostentation or 



158 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

diversion, the spirit that instructs me would be silent, 
and would leave me when I should have occasion for it." 
When he had made the same refusal to all the rest pre- 
sent, the king would not urge him any longer about his 
predictions, but spoke to him concerning the monument 
which he designed. " If you are desirous," said Merlin, 
" to honour the burying-place of these men with an ever- 
lasting monument, send for the Giant's Dance, which is 
in Killaraus, a mountain in Ireland. For there is a 
structure of stones there, which none of this age could 
raise, without a profound knowledge of the mechanical 
arts. They are stones of a vast magnitude and won- 
derful quality ; and if they can be placed here, as they 
are there, round this spot of ground, they will stand for 



ever." 



CHAPTER XI. 

UTHER PENDRAGON IS APPOINTED WITH MERLIN TO 
BRING OVER THE GIANt's DANCE. 

At these words of Merlin, Aurelius burst into laugh- 
ter, and said, " How is it possible to remove such vast 
stones from so distant a country, as if Britain was not 
furnished with stones fit for the work ! " Merlin replied : 
" I entreat your majesty to forbear vain laughter; for 
what I say is without vanity. They are mystical stones, 
and of a medicinal virtue. The giants of old brought 
them from the farthest coasts of Africa, and placed 
them in Ireland, while they inhabited that country. 
Their design in this was to make baths in them, when 
they should be taken with any illness. For their me- 
thod was to wash the stones, and put their sick into the 
water, which infallibly cured them. With the like suc- 
cess they cured wounds also, adding only the application 
of some herbs. There is not a stone there which has 
not some healing virtue." When the Britons heard 



BRITISH HISTORY. 159 

this, they resolved to send for the stones, and to make 
war upon the people of Ireland if they should offer to 
detain them. And to accomplish this business, they 
made choice of Uther Pendragon, who was to be at- 
tended with fifteen thousand men. They chose also 
Merlin himself, by whose direction the whole affair was 
to be managed. A fleet being therefore got ready, they 
set sail, and with a fair wind arrived in Ireland. 

CHAPTER XIL 

GILLOMANIUS BEING ROUTED BY UTHER, THE BRITONS 
BRING OVER THE GIANt's DANCE INTO BRITAIN. 

At that time Gillomanius, a youth of wonderful va- 
lour, reigned in Ireland ; who, upon the news of the ar- 
rival of the Britons in his kingdom, levied a vast army, 
and marched out against them. And when he had 
learned the occasion of their coming, he smiled, and 
said to those about him, " No wonder a cowardly race 
of people were able to make so great devastation in 
the island of Britain, when the Britons are such brutes 
and fools. Was ever the like folly heard of? What 
are the stones of Ireland better than those of Britain, 
that our kingdom must be put to this disturbance for 
them? To smns, soldiers, and defend your country; 
while I have life they shall not take from us the least 
stone of the Giants Dance.'' Uther, seeing them pre- 
pared for a battle, attacked them ; nor was it long ere 
the Britons had the advantage, who, having dispersed 
and killed the Irish, forced Gillomanius to flee. After 
the victory they went to the mountain Killaraus, and 
arrived at the structure of stones, the sight of which 
filled them both with joy and admiration. And while 
they were all standing round them. Merlin came up to 
them, and said, " Now try your forces, young men, and 
see whether strength or art can do the most towards 
taking down these stones." At this word they all set 



160 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

to their engines with one accord, and attempted the 
removing of the Giant's Dance. Some prepared cables, 
others small ropes, others ladders for the work, but all 
to no pmpose. Merlin laughed at their vain efforts, and 
then began his own contrivances. When he had placed 
in order the engines that were necessary, he took down 
the stones with an incredible facility, and gave direc- 
tions for carrying them to the ships, and placing them 
therein. This done, they with joy set sail again, to 
return to Britain ; where they arrived with a fair gale, 
and repaired to the burying-place with the stones. 
When Aurelius had notice of it, he sent messengers to 
all parts of Britain, to summon the clergy and people 
together to the mount of Ambrius, in order to cele- 
brate with joy and honour the erection of the monu- 
ment. Upon this summons appeared the bishops, ab- 
bots, and people of all other orders and qualities ; and 
upon the day and place appointed for their general 
meeting, Aurelius placed the crown upon his head, 
and with royal pomp celebrated the feast of Pentecost, 
the solemnity whereof he continued the three following 
days. In the meantime, all places of honour that were 
vacant, he bestowed upon his domestics, as rewards for 
their good services. At that time the two metropolitan 
sees of York and Legions were vacant ; and with the 
general consent of the people, whom he was willing to 
please in this choice, he granted York to Sanxo, a man 
of great quality, and much celebrated for his piety ; and 
the City of Legions to Dubricius, whom Divine Provi- 
dence had pointed out as a most useful pastor in that 
place. As soon as he had settled these and other af&irs 
in the kingdom, he ordered Merlin to set up the stones 
stonehenge. brought ovor from Ireland, about the sepulchre ; which 
he accordingly did, and placed them in the same manner 
as they had been in the mountain Killaraus, and thereby 
gave a manifest proof of the prevalence of art above 
strength. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 161 



CHAPTER XIII. 

PASCENTIUS BRINGS IN THE SAXONS AGAINST THE BRITONS. 

At the same time Pascentius, the son of Vortegim, second inva- 
who had fled over into Germany, was levying all the saxon8.under 

, »f o Pascentius. 

forces of that kingdom against Aurelius Ambrosius, with 
a design to revenge his father's death; and promised 
his men an immense treasure of gold and silver, if with 
their assistance he could succeed in reducing Britain 
under his power. When he had at last corrupted all 
the youth of the country with his large promises, he 
prepared a vast fleet, and arrived in the northern parts 
of the island, upon which he began to make great devas- 
tations. The king, on the other hand, hearing this 
news, assembled his army, and marching against them, 
challenged the enraged enemy to a battle ; the challenge 
was accepted, and by the blessing of God the enemy 
was defeated and put to flight. 



CHAPTER XIV, 

PASCENTIUS, ASSISTED BY THE KING OF IRELAND, AGAIN IN- 
VADES BRITAIN. AURELIUS DIES BY THE TREACHERY OF 
EOPA, A SAXON. 

Pascentius, after this flight, durst not return to 
Germany, but shifting his sails, went over to Gillo- 
manius, in Ireland, by whom he was well received. And 
when he had given him an account of his misfortune, 
Gillomanius, in pity to him, promised him his assistance, 
and at the same time vented his complaint of the 
injuries done him by Uther, the brother of Aurelius, 
when he came for the Giant's Dance. At last, entering 
into confederacy together, they made ready their fleet, 
in which they embarked, and arrived at the city of 



162 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

Menevia. This news caused Uther Pendragon to levy 
his forces, and march into Cambria to fight them. 
For his brother Aurelius then lay sick at Winchester, 
and was not able to go himself. When Pascentius, 
Gillomanius, and the Saxons heard of it, they highly 
rejoiced, flattering themselves, that his sickness would 
facilitate to them the conquest of Britain. While this 
occurrence was the subject of the people's discourse, 
one of the Saxons, named Eopa, came to Pascentius, 
and said, " What reward will you give the man that 
shall kill Aurelius Ambrosius for you !^ To whom Pas- 
centius answered, ^' Oh that I could find a man of such 
resolution ! I would give him a thousand pounds of 
silver, and my friendship for life ; and if by good fortune 
I can but gain the crown, I promise upon oath to make 
him a centurion." To this Eopa replied, " I have 
learned the British language, and know the manners of 
the people, and have skill in physic. If, therefore, you 
will perform this promise, I will pretend to be a Chris- 
tian and a Briton, and when^ as a physician, I shall be 
admitted into the king's presence, I will make him a 
potion that shall dispatch him. And to gain the rea- 
dier access to him, I will put on the appearance of a 
devout and learned monk.'' Upon the offer, Pascentius 
entered into covenant with him, and confirmed what he 
had promised with an oath. Eopa, therefore, shaved 
his beard and head, and in the habit of a monk hastened 
to Winchester, loaded with vessels full of medical pre- 
parations. As soon as he arrived there, he offered his 
service to those that attended about the king, and was 
graciously received by them ; for to them nobody was 
now more acceptable than a physician. Being intro- 
duced into the king's presence, he promised to restore 
him to his health, if he would but take his potions. 
Upon which he had his orders forthwith to prepare one 
of them, into which when he had secretly conveyed a 
poisonous mixture, he gave it to the king. As soon a3 



BRITISH HISTORY. 163 

Aurelius had drunk it up, the wicked Ambron ordered 
him presently to cover himself close up, and fall asleep, 
that the detestable potion might the better operate. 
The king readily obeyed his prescriptions, and in hopes 
of his speedy recovery fell asleep. But the poison Death of au- 
quickly diffused itself through all the pores and veins of 
his body, so that the sleep ended in death. In the mean- 
time the wicked traitor, having cunningly withdrawn him- 
self first from one and then from another, was no longer 
to be found in the court. During these transactions at 
Winchester, there appeared a star of wonderful mag- 
nitude and brightness, darting forth a ray, at the end 
of which was a globe of fire in form of a dragon, out of 
whose mouth issued forth two rays; one of which 
seemed to stretch out itself beyond the extent of Gaul, 
the other towards the Irish Sea, and ended in seven 
lesser rays. 

CHAPTER XV. 

A COMET PRESIGNIFIBS THE REIGN OP UTHER. 

At the appearance of this star^ a general fear and 
amazement seized the people ; and even Uther, the 
king's brother, who was then upon his march with his 
army into Cambria, being not a little terrified at it, wsust 
very curious to know of the learned men, what it por- 
tended. Among others, he ordered Merlin to be called, 
who also attended in this expedition to give his advice 
in the management of the war; and who, being now pre- 
sented before him, was commanded to discover to him 
the signification of the star. At this he burst out into 
tears, and with a loud voice cried out, " O irreparable 
loss ! O distressed people of Britain ! Alas ! the illus- 
trious prince is departed ! The renowned king of the 
Britons, Aurelius Ambrosius, is dead f whose death will 
prove fatal to us all, unless God be our helper. Make 
haste, therefore, most noble Uther, make haste to 

M 2 



164 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

engage the enemy : the victory will be yours, and you 
shall be king of all Britain. For the star, and the fiery 
dragon under it, signifies yourself, and the ray ex- 
tending towards the Gallic coast, portends that you 
shall have a most potent son, to whose power all those 
kingdoms shall be subject over which the ray reaches. 
But the other ray signifies a daughter, whose sons and 
grandsons shall successively enjoy the kingdom of 
Britam.'' 

CHAPTER XVI. 

PASCENTIUS AND GILLOMANIUS ARE KILLED IN BATTLE. 

Uther, though he doubted of the truth of what 
Merlin had declared, pursued his march against the 
enemy, for he was now come within half a day's march 
of Menevia. When Oillomanius, Pascentius, and the 
Saxons were informed of his approach, they went out 
to give him battle. As soon as they were come within 
sight of each other, both armies began to form them- 
selves into several bodies, and then advanced to a close 
attack, in which both sides suffered a loss of men, as 
usually happens in such engagements. At last, towards 
the close of the day, the advantage was on Utber's side, 
and the death of Gillomanius and Pascentius made a 
way for complete victory. So that the barbarians, being 
put to flight, hastened to their ships, but were slain by 
their pursuers. Thus, by the favour of Christ, the 
general had triumphant success, and then with all pos- 
sible expedition, after so great a fatigue, returned back 
to Winchester : for he had now been informed, by 
messengers that arrived^ of the king's sad fate, and of 
his burial by the bishops of the country, near the con- 
vent of Ambrius, within the Giant^s Dance, which in his 
lifetime he had commanded to be made. For upon 
hearing the news of his death, the bishops, abbots, and 
all the clergy of that province, had met together at 



BRITISH HISTORY. 165 

Winchester, to solemnize his funeral. And because in 
his lifetime he had given orders for his being buried in 
the sepulchre which he had prepared, they therefore 
carried his corpse thither, and performed his exsequies 
with royal magnificence. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

UTHER PENDRAGON IS MADE KING OF BRITAIN. 

But Uther his brother, having assembled the clergy uthcr Pen. 
of the kingdom, took the crown, and by universal con- crowned, 
sent was advanced to the kingdom. And remembering 
the explanation which Merlin had made of the star 
above-mentioned, he commanded two dragons to be 
made of gold, in likeness of the dragon which he had 
seen at the ray of the star. As soon as they were 
finished, which was done with wonderful nicety of work- 
manship, he made a present of one to the cathedral 
church of Winchester, but reserved the other for him- 
self, to be carried along with him to his wars. From 
this time, therefore, he was called Uther Pendragon, 
which in the British tongue signifies the dragon's head ; 
the occasion of this appellation being Merlin's predict- 
ing, from the appearance of a dragon, that he should be 
king. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

OCTA AND EOSA ARE TAKEN IN BATTLE. 

In the meantime Octa the son of Hengist, and his 
kinsman Eosa, seeing they were no longer bound by the 
treaty which they had made with Aurelius Ambrosius, 
began to raise disturbances against the king, and infest 
his countries. For they were now joining with the 
Saxons whom Pascentius had brought over, and sending 
messengers into Germany for the rest. Being therefore 



166 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

attended with a vast army, he ii\yaded the northern pro- 
vinces, and in an outrageous manner destroyed all the 
cities and fortified places, from Albania to York. At 
last, as he was beginning the siege of that city, Uther 
Pendragon came upon him with the whole power of the 
kingdom, and gave him battle. The Saxons behaved 
with great gallantry, and, having sustained the assaults 
of the Britons, forced them to fly ; and upon this ad- 
vantage pursued them with slaughter to the mountain 
Damen, which was as long as they could do it with day- 
light. The mountain was high, and had a hazel-wood 
upon the top of it, and about the middle broken and 
cavernous rocks, which were a harbour to wild beasts. 
The Britons made up to it, and stayed there all night 
among the rocks and hazel-bushes. But as it began to 
draw towards day, Uther commanded the consuls and 
pirinces to be called together, that he might consult with 
them in what manner to assault the enemy. Where- 
upon they forthwith appeared before the king, who com- 
manded them to give their advice ; and Oorlois, duke of 
Cornwall, had orders to deliver his opinion first, out of 
regard to his years and great experience. " There is no 
occasion,^' said he, " for ceremonies or speeches, while 
we see that it is still night : but there is for boldness 
and courage, if you desire any longer enjoyment of your 
life and liberty. The pagans are very numerous, and 
eager to fight, and we much inferior to them in number ; 
so that if we stay till daybreak, we cannot^ in my opinion, 
attack them to advantage. Come on, therefore, while 
we have the favour of the night, let us go down in a 
close body, and surprise them in their camp with a 
sudden assault. There can be no doubt of success, if 
with one consent we fall upon them boldly, while they 
think themselves secure, and have no expectation of our 
coming in such a manner." The king and all that were 
present, were pleased with his advice, and pursued it. 
For as soon as they were armed and placed in their 



BRITISH HISTORY. 167 

ranks, they made towards the enemies'* camp, designing 
a general assault. But upon approaching to it, they Defeat of the 
were discovered by the watch, who with sound of trum- 
pet awaked their companions. The enemies being here- 
upon put into confusion and astonishment, part of them 
hastened towards the sea, and part ran up and down 
whithersoever their fear or precipitation drove them. 
The Britons, finding their coming discovered, hastened 
their march, and keeping still close together in their 
ranks, assailed the camp ; into which when they had 
found an entrance, they ran with their drawn swords 
upon the enemy ; who in this sudden surprise made but 
a faint defence against their vigorous and regular attack; 
and pursuing this blow with great eagerness they des- 
troyed some thousands of the pagans, took Octa and 
Eosa prisoners, and entirely dispersed the Saxons. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

UTHER, FALLING IN LOVE WITH IGERNA, ENJOYS HER BY 
THE ASSISTANCE OF MERLIn's MAGICAL OPERATIONS. 

After this victory Uther repaired to the city of 
Alclud, where he settled the affairs of that province, and 
restored peace everjrwhere. He also made a progress 
round all the countries of the Scots, and tamed the 
fierceness of that rebellious people, by such a strict ad- 
ministration of justice, as none of his predecessors had 
exercised before : so that in his time offenders were 
everywhere under great terror, since they were sure of 
being punished without mercy. At last, when he had 
established peace in the northern provinces, he went to 
London, and commanded Octa and Eosa to be kept in 
prison there. The Easter following he ordered all the 
nobility of the kingdom to meet him at that city, in 
order to celebrate that great festival ; in honour of 
which he designed to wear his crown. The summons 



168 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

was everywhere obeyed, and there was a great con- 
course from all cities to celebrate the day. So the king 
observed the festival with great solemnity, as he had 
designed, and very joyfully entertained his nobility, of 
whom there was a very great muster, with their wives 
and daughters, suitably to the magnificence of the ban- 
quet prepared for them. And having been received 
with joy by the king, they also expressed the same in 
their deportment before him. Among the rest was pre- 
sent Gorlois, duke of Cornwall, with his wife Igema, 
the greatest beauty in all Britain. No sooner had the 
king cast his eyes upon her among the rest of the ladies, 
than he fell passionately in love with her, and little 
regarding the rest, made her the subject of all his 
thoughts. She was the only lady that he continually 
served with fresh dishes, and to whom he sent golden 
cups by his confidants ; on her he bestowed all his 
smiles, and to her addressed all his discourse. The hus- 
band, discovering this, fell into a great rage, and re- 
tired from the court without taking leave : nor was there 
any body that could stop him, while he was under fear 
of losing the chief object of his delight. Uther, there- 
fore, in great wrath commanded him to return back to 
court, to make him satisfaction for this affix)nt. But 
Gorlois refused to obey ; upon which the king was 
highly incensed, and swore he would destroy his country, 
if he did not speedily compound for his offence. Ac- 
cordingly, without delay, while their anger was hot 
against each other, the king got together a great 
army, and marched into Cornwall, the cities and towns 
whereof he set on fire. But Gorlois durst not engage 
with him, on account of the inferiority of his numbers ; 
and thought it a wiser course to fortify his towns, 
till he could get succour from Ireland. And as he 
was under more concern for his wife than himself, he 
Tjntgei put her into the town of Tintagel, upon the sea-shore, 
which he looked upon as a place of great safety. But 



BRITISH HISTORY. 169 

he himself entered the castle of Dimilioc, to prevent 
their being both at once involved in the same danger, 
if any should happen. The king, informed of this, went 
to the town where Gorlois was, which he besieged, and 
shut up all the avenues to it. A whole week was now 
past^ when, retaining in mind his love to Igema, he said 
to one of his confidants, named Ulfin de Ricaradoch : 
" My passion for Igema is such, that I can neither have 
ease of mind, nor health of body, till I obtain her : and 
if you cannot assist me with your advice how to accom- 
plish my desire, the inward torments I endure will kill 
me." — " Who can advise you in this matter," said Ulfin, 
" when no force will enable us to have access to her in 
the town of Tintagel ? For it is situated upon the sea, 
and on every side surrounded by it ; and there is but one 
entrance into it, and that through a straight rock, which 
three men shall be able to defend against the whole power 
of the kingdom. Notwithstanding, if the prophet Merlin 
would in earnest set about this attempt, I am of opinion, 
you might with his advice obtain your wishes." The 
king readily believed what he was so well inclined to, 
and ordered Merlin, who was also come to the siege, to 
be called. Merlin, therefore, being introduced into the 
king'^s presence, was commanded to give his advice, how 
the king might accomplish his desire with respect to 
Igema. And he, finding the great anguish of the king, 
was moved by such excessive love, and said, " To accom- 
plish your desire, you must make use of such arts as 
have not been heard of in your time. I know how, by 
the force of my medicines, to give you the exact likeness 
of Gorlois, so that in all respects you shall seem to be no 
other than himself. If you will therefore obey my pre- 
scriptions, I will metamorphize you into the true sem- 
blance of Gorlois, and Ulfin into Jordan of Tintagel, his 
familiar friend ; and I myself, being transformed into 
another shape, will make the third in the adventure; an 
in this disguise you may go safely to the town where 



170 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

Igema is, and have admittance to her." The king com- 
plied with the proposal, and acted with great caution in 
this affair ; and when he had committed the care of the 
siege to his intimate friends, underwent the medical 
applications of Merlin, by whom he was transformed into 
the likeness of Gorlois ; - as was Ulfin also into Jordan, 
and Merlin himself into Bricel ; so that nobody could 
see any remains now of their former likeness. They 
then set forward on their way to Tintagel, at which they 
arrived in the evening twilight, and forthwith signified 
to the porter, that the consul was come ; upon which the 
gates were opened, and the men let in. For what room 
could there be for suspicion, when Gorlois himself seemed 
to be there present? The king therefore stayed that 
night with Igema, and had the full enjoyment of her, 
for she was deceived with the false disguise which he 
had put on, and the artful and amorous discourses where- 
with he entertained her. He told her he had left his 
own place besieged, purely to provide for the safety of 
her dear self, and the town she was in ; so that believing 
all that he said, she refused him nothing which he de- 
sired. The same night therefore she conceived of the 
Prince most rcnowucd Arthur, whose heroic and wonderful 

Arthur. t i . 

actions have justly rendered his name famous to pos- 
terity. 

CHAPTER XX. 

GORLOIS BEING KILLED, UTHER MARRIES IGERNA. 

In the meantime, as soon as the king^s absence was 
discovered at the siege, his army unadvisedly made an 
assault upon the walls, and provoked the besieged count 
to a battle ; who himself also, acting as inconsiderately 
as they, sallied forth with his men, thinking with such a 
small handful to oppose a powerful army ; but happened 
to be killed in the very first brunt of the fight, and had 
all his men routed. The town also was taken ; but all 



BRITISH HISTORY. l7l 

the riches of it were not shared equally among the be- 
siegers, but every one greedily took what he could get, 
according as fortune or his own strength favoured him. 
After this bold attempt, came messengers to Igema, 
with the news both of the duke's death, and of the event 
of the siege. But when they saw the king in the like- 
ness of the consul, sitting close by her, they were struck 
with shame and astonishment at his safe arrival there, 
whom they had left dead at the siege ; for they were 
wholly ignorant of the miracles which Merlin had wrought 
with his medicines. The king therefore smiled at the 
news, and embracing the countess, said to her : '^ Your 
own eyes may convince you that I am not dead, but 
alive. But notwithstanding, the destruction of the 
town, and the slaughter of my men, is what very much 
firieves me ; so that there is reason to fear the king's 
Sming upon us. and teking us in this place. To pL 
vent which, I will go out to meet him, and make my 
peace with him, for fear of a worse disaster." Accord- 
ingly, as soon as he was out of the town, he went to his 
army, and having put off the disguise of Gorlois, was 
now Uther Pendragon again. When he had a full 
relation made to him how matters had succeeded, he was 
sorry for the death of Gtorlois, but rejoiced that Igema 
was now at liberty to marry again. Then he returned 
to the town of Tintagel, which he took, and in it, wha^ 
he impatiently wished for, Igema herself. After this 
they continued to live together with much affection 
for each other, and had a son and daughter, whose 
names were Arthur and Anne. 



172 GEOFFRKY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER XXL 

OCTA AND EOSA RENEW THE WAR. LOT, A CONSUL, 
MARRIES THE KING^S DAUGHTER. 

In process of time the king was taken ill of a lingering 
distemper; and meanwhile the keepers of the prison, 
wherein Octa and Eosa (as we related before) led a 
weary life, had fled over with them into Germany, and 
occasioned great fear over the kingdom. For there was 
a report of their great levies in Germany, and the vast 
fleet which they had prepared for their return to destroy 
the island : which the event verified. For they returned in 
a great fleet, and with a prodigious number of men, and 
invaded the parts of Albania, where they destroyed both 
cities and inhabitants with fire and sword. Wherefore, 
in order to repulse the enemies, the conmiand of the 
British army was conunitted to Lot of Londonesia, who 
was a consul, and a most valiant knight, and grown up 
to maturity both of years and wisdom. Out of respect 
to his emment merits, the king had given him his daugh- 
ter Anne, and entrusted hun with the care of the king- 
dom, during his illness. In his expedition against the 
enemies he had various success, being often repulsed by 
them, and forced to retreat to the cities ; but he oftener 
routed and dispersed them, and compelled theni to flee 
sometimes into the woods, sometimes to their ships. So 
that in a war attended with so many turns of fortune, it 
was hard to know which side had the better* The 
greatest injury to the Britons was their own pride, in 
disdaining to obey the consults commands; for which 
reason all their efforts against the enemy were less 
vigorous and successful. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 173 



CHAPTER XXII. 

UTHER, BEING ILL, IS CARRIED IN A HORSE-LITTER 

AGAINST THE ENEMY. 

The island being by this conduct now almost laid 
waste, the king, having information of the matter, fell 
into a greater rage than his weakness could bear, and 
commanded all his nobility to come before him, that he 
might reprove them severely for their pride and cowardice. 
And as soon as they were all entered into his presence, he 
sharply rebuked them in menacing language, and swore 
he himself would lead them against the enemy. For 
this purpose he ordered a horse-litter to be made, in 
which he designed to be carried, for his infirmity would 
not suffer him to use any other sort of vehicle ; and he 
charged them to be all ready to march against the 
enemy on the first opportunity. So, without delay, the 
horse-litter and all his attendants were got ready, and 
the day arrived which had been appointed for their 
march. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

OCTA AND EOSA, WITH A GREAT NUMBER OF THEIR MEN, 

ARE KILLED. 

The king, therefore, being put into his vehicle, they siegeofVem- 
marched directly to Verulam, where the Saxons were 
grievously oppressing the people. When Octa and Eosa 
had intelligence that the Britons were come, and that 
the king was brought in a horse-litter, they disdained to 
fight with him, saying, it would be a shame for such 
brave men to fight with one that was half dead. For 
which reason they retired into the city, and, as it were 
in contempt of any danger from the enemy, left their 
gates wide open. But Uther, upon information of this, 



174 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

instantly commanded his men to lay siege to the city, 
and assault the walls on all sides; which orders they 
strictly executed; and were just entering the breaches 
which they had made in the walls, and ready to begin a 
general assault, when the Saxons, seeing the advantages 
which the Britons had gained, and being forced to abate 
somewhat of their haughty pride, condescended so far 
as to put themselves into a posture of defence. They 
therefore mounted the walls, from whence they poured 
down showers of arrows, and repulsed the Britons. On 
both sides the contest continued till night released them 
from the fatigue of their arms, which was what many of 
the Britons desired, though the greater part of them were 
for having the matter quickly decided with the enemy. 
The Saxons, on the other hand, finding how prejudicial 
their own pride had been to them, and that the advantage 
was on the side of the Britons, resolved to make a sally at 
break of day, and try their fortune with the enemy in the 
open field ; which accordingly was done. For no sooner 
was it daylight, than they marched out with this design, 
all in their proper ranks. The Britons, seeing them, 
divided their men into several bodies, and advancing 
towards them, began the attack first, their part being 
to assault, while the others were only upon the defensive. 
However, much blood was shed on both sides, and the 
greatest part of the day spent in the fight, when at last, 
Octa and Eosa being killed, the Saxons turned their backs, 
and left the Britons a complete victory. The king at 
this was in such an ecstasy of joy, that whereas before 
he could hardly raise up himself without the help of 
others, he now without any difficulty sat upright in his 
horse-litter of himself, as if he was on a sudden restored 
to health ; and said with a laughing and merry counte- 
nance, " These Ambrons called me the half-dead king, 
because my sickness obliged me to lie on a horse-litter ; 
and indeed so I was. Yet victory to me half dead, is 
better than to be safe and sotmd and vanquished. For 



BRITISH HISTORY. 175 

to die with honour, is preferable to living with dis- 



grace. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

UTHER, UPON DRINKING SPRING WATER THAT WAS TREA- 
CHEROUSLY POISONED BY THE SAXONS, DIES. 

The Saxons, notwithstanding this defeat, persisted Death of 
still in their malice, and entering the northern pro- 
vinces, without respite infested the people there. 
Uther's purpose was to have pursued them; but his 
princes dissuaded him from it, because his illness had 
increased since the victory. This gave new courage 
to the enemy, who left nothing unattempted to make 
conquest of the kingdom. And now they have recourse 
to their former treacherous practices, and contrive how 
to compass the king^s death by secret villany. And 
because they could have no access to him otherwise, 
they resolved to take him off by poison ; in which they 
succeeded. For while he was lying ill at Verulam, 
they sent away some spies in a poor habit, to learn the 
state of the court ; and when they had thoroughly in-^ 
formed themselves of the posture of affairs, they found 
out an expedient by which they might best accomplish 
their villany. For there was near the court a spring 
of very clear water, which the king used to drink of^ 
when his distemper had made all other liquors nauseous 
to him. This the detestable conspirators made use of 
to destroy him, by so poisoning the whole mass of water 
which sprung up, that the next time the king drank of 
it, he was seized with sudden death, as were also a 
hundred other persons after him, till the villany was 
discovered, and a heap of earth thrown over the well. 
As soon as the king's death was divulged, the bishops 
and clergy of the kingdom assembled, and carried his 
body to the convent of Ambrius, where they buried it 
with regal solemnity, close by Aurelius Ambrosiua^ 
within the Giant's Dance. 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH'S 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



BOOK IX. 



CHAPTER I. 

ARTHUR SUCCEEDS UTHER HIS FATHER IN THE KINGDOM 
OF BRITAIN, AND BESIEGES COLGRIN. 

King Arthur. Uther Pendragoii being dead, the nobility from 
several provinces assembled together at Silcestre, and 
proposed to Dubricius, archbishop of Legions, that he 
should consecrate Arthur, Uther's son, to be their king. 
For they were now in great straits, because, upon 
hearing of the king's death, the Saxons had invited 
over their countrymen from Germany, and, under the 
command of Colgrin, were attempting to exterminate 
the whole British race. They had also entirely subdued 
all that part of the island which extends from the 
Humber to the sea of Cathness. Dubricius, therefore, 
grieving for the calamities of his country, in conjunc- 
tion with the other bishops, set the crown upon Arthur's 
head. Arthur was then fifkeen years old, but a youth 
of such unparalleled courage and generosity , joined 
with that sweetness of tem per and in ^te goodnes s, as 
gained him imiversal love. When TSs coronation was 
over, he, according to usual custom, showed his bounty 
and munificence to the people. And such a number of 



BRITISH HISTORY. 177 

soldiers flocked to him upon it, that his treasury wa^ 
not able to answer that vast expense. But such a 
spirit of generosity, joined with valour, can never long 
want means to support itself. Arthur, therefore, the , 
better to keep up his munificence, resolved to make use 
of his courage, and to fall upon the Saxons, that he 
might enrich his followers with their wealth. To this 
he was also moved by the justice of the cause, since thQ 
entire monarchy of Britain belonged to him by here- 
ditary right. Hereupon assembling the youth under 
his command, he marched to York, of which, when 
Colgrin had intelligence, he met him with a very great 
army, composed of Saxons, Scots, and Picts, by the 
river Douglas; where a battle happened, with the loss Battle on 
of the greater part of both armies. Notwithstanding, DoagUs. 
the victory fell to Arthur, who pursued Colgrin to York, 
and there besieged him. Baldulph, upon the news of 
his brother s flight, went towards the siege with a body 
of six thousand men, to his relief; for at the time of the 
battle he was upon the searcoast, waiting the arrival 
of Duke Cheldric with succours from Germany. And 
being now no more than ten miles distant from the 
city, his purpose was to make a speedy march in the 
night-time, and fall upon the enemy by way of surprise. 
But Arthur, having intelligence of his design, sent a 
detachment of six hundred horse, and three thousand 
foot, under the command of Cador, duke of Cornwall, 
to meet him the same night. Cador, therefore, falling 
into the same road along which the enemy was passing, 
made a sudden assault upon them, and entirely defeated 
the Saxons, and put them to flight. Baldulph was 
excessively grieved at this disappointment in the relief 
which he intended for his brother, and began to think 
of some other stratagem to gain access to him; in 
which if he could but succeed, he thought they might 
concert measures together for their safety. And since 
he had no other way for it, he shaved his head and 

N 



178 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

beard, and put on the habit of a jester with a harp, and 
in this disguise walked up and down in the camp, play- 
ing upon his instrument as if he had been a harper. He 
. thus passed unsuspected, and by a little and little went 
up to the walls of the city, where he was at last dis- 
covered by the besieged, who thereupon drew him up 
with cords, and conducted him to his brother. At this 
unexpected, though much desired meeting, they spent 
some time in joyfully embracing each other, and then 
began to consider various stratagems for their deUvery, 
At last, just as they were considering their case des- 
perate, the ambassadors returned from Germany, and 
brought with them to Albania a fleet of six hundred 
sail, laden with brave soldiers, under the conunand of 
Cheldric. Upon this news, Arthur was dissuaded by his 
council from continuing the siege any longer, for fear 
of hazarding a battle with so powerful and numerous an 
army. 

CHAPTER II. 

HOEL SENDS FIFTEEN THOUSAND MEN TO ARTHUr's 

ASSISTANCE. 

Hoei assista Arthur Complied with their advice, and made his re- 
16,000 men. treat to London, where he called an assembly of all the 
clergy and nobility of the kingdom, to ask their advice, 
what course to take against the formidable power of the 
pagans. After some deliberation, it was agreed that 
ambassadors should be despatched into Armorica, to 
King Hoel, to represent to him the calamitous state of 
Britain. {IggL^a® the son of Arthur'^s sister by Dubri- 
cius, king of the Armorican Britons; so that, upon 
advice of the disturbances his uncle was threatened with, 
he ordered his fleet to be got ready, and having assembled 
fifteen thousand men, he arrived with the first fair wind 
at Hamo^s Port, and was received with all suitable honour 
by Arthur, and most affectionately embraced by him. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 179 



CHAPTER III. 

ARTHUR MAKES THE SAXONS HIS TRIBUTARIES. 

After a few days they went to relieve the city Kaer- Arthur raises 

, the sieze of 

liudcoit, that was besieged by the pagans ; which being Lincoln, 
situated upon a mountain, between two rivers in the pro- 
vince of Lindisia, is called by another name Lindoco- 
linum. As soon as they arrived there with all their 
forces, they fought with the Saxons, and made a grievous 
slaughter of them, to the number of six thousand ; part 
of whom were drowned in the rivers, part fell by the 
hands of the Britons. The rest in a great consternation 
quitted the siege and fled, but were closely pursued by 
Arthur, till they came to the wood of Caledon, where 
they endeavoured to form themselves into a body again,; 
and make a stand. And here they again joined battle 
with the Britons, and made a brave defence, whilst the 
trees that were in the place secured them against the 
enemies' arrows. Arthur, seeing this, commanded the 
trees that were in that part of the wood to be cut down, 
and the trunks to be placed quite round them, so as to 
hinder their getting out ; resolving to keep them pent 
up here till he could reduce them by famine. He then 
commanded his troops to besiege the wood, and con- 
tinued three days in that place. The Saxons, having 
now no provisions to sustain them, and being just ready 
to starve with hunger, begged for leave to go out ; in 
consideration whereof they offered to leave all their 
gold and silver behind them, and return back to Ger- 
many with nothing but their empty ships. They pro- 
mised also that they would pay him tribute from Ger- 
many, and leave hostages with him. Arthur, after con- 
sultation about it, granted their petition ; allowing them 
only leave to depart, and retaining all their treasures, as 
also hostages for payment of the tribute. But as they 

n2 



180 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

were under sail on their return home, they repented of 
their bargain, and tacked about again towards Britain, 

Totness. and went on shore at Totness. No sooner were they 
landed, than they made an utter devastation of the coun- 
try as far as the Severn sea, and put all the peasants to 
the sword. From thence they pursued their furious 

Bath. march to the town of Bath, and laid siege to it. When 

the king had intelligence of it, he was beyond measure 
surprised at their proceedings, and immediately gave 
orders for the execution of the hostages. And desisting 
from an attempt which he had entered upon to reduce 
the Scots and Picts, he marched with the utmost expe- 
dition to raise the siege ; but laboured under very great 
difficulties, because he had left his nephew Hoel sick at 
Alclud. At length, having entered the province of So- 
merset, and beheld how the siege was carried on, he 
addressed himself to his followers in these words : 
^' Since these impious and detestable Saxons have dis^ 
dained to keep faith with me, I, to keep faith with God, 
will endeavour to revenge the blood of my countrymen 
this day upon them. To arms, soldiers, to arms, and cou- 
rageously fall upon the perfidious wretches, over whom 
we shall, with Christ assisting us, luidoubtedly obtain 
the victory. 

CHAPTER IV. 

DUBRICIUS'S SPEECH AGAINST THE TREACHEROUS SAXONS. 
ARTHUR WITH HIS OWN HAND KILLS FOUR HUNDRED 
AND SEVENTY SAXONS IN ONE BATTLE. COLGRIN AND 
BALDULPH ARE KILLED IN THE SAME. 



> 



When he had done speaking, St. Dubricius, archbishop 
of Legions, going to the top of a hill, cried out with a 
loud voice : " You that have the honour to profess the 
Christian faith, keep fixed in your minds the love which 
you owe to your country and fellow-subjects, whose suf- 
ferings by the treachery of the pagans will be an ever- 



BRITISH HISTORY. 181 

lasting reproach to you, if you do not courageously nubncius's 
defend them. It is your country which you fight for, 
and for which you should, when required, voluntarily 
suifer death : for that itself is victory, and the cure of 
the soul. For he that shall die for his brethren, oifers 
himself a living sacrifice to God, and has Christ for his 
example, who condescended to lay down his life for his 
brethren. If therefore any of you shall be killed in this 
war, that death itself, which is suffered in so glorious a 
cause, shall be to him for penance and absolution of all 
his sins.*" At these words, all of them, encouraged with 
the benediction of the holy prelate, instantly armed 
themselves, and prepared to obey his orders. Also 
Arthur himself, having put on a coat of mail suitable to 
the grandeur of so powerful a king, placed a golden hel- 
met upon his head, on which was engraven the figure of 
a dragon ; and on his shoulders his shield called Priwen ; 
upon which the picture of the blessed Mary, mother of 
God, was painted, in order to put him frequently in 
mind of her. Then girding on his Calibum, which was 
an excellent sword made in the Isle of Avallon, he 
graced his right hand with his lance, named Ron, whict 
was hard, broad, and fit for slaughter. After this, 
having placed his men in order, he boldly attacked the 
Saxons, who were drawn out in the shape of a wedge, 
as their manner was. And they, notwithstanding that 
the Britons fought with great eagerness, made a noble 
defence all that day ; but at length, towards sun-set- 
ting, climbed up to the next mountain, which served 
them for a camp : for they desired no larger extent of 
ground, since they confided very much in their numbers. 
The next morning, Arthur, with his army, went up the 
mountain, but lost many of his men in the ascent, by 
the advantage which the Saxons had in their station on 
the top, from whence they could pour down upon him 
with much greater speed, than he was able to advance 
against them. Notwithstanding, after a very hard strug- 



182 GEOFFREY OF MOXMOl'TH. 

gle, the Britons gained the summit of the hill, and quickly 
came to a close engagement with the enemy, who again 
gave them a warm reception, and made a very vigorous 
defence. ^ In this manner was a great part of that day 
also spent ; whereupon Arthur, provoked to see the little 
advantage he had yet gained, and that victory still con- 
tinued in suspense, drew out his Calibum, and, calling 
upon the name of the blessed Virgin, rushed forward with 
great fury into the thickest of the enemies' ranks; of 
whom (such was the merit of his prayers) not one escaped 
alive that felt the fury of his sword ; neither did he give 
over the fury of the assault, until he had with his Cali- 
bum alone killed four hundred and seventy men.'^ The 
Britons, seeing this, followed their leader in great multi- 
tudes, and made slaughter on all sides ; so that Colgrin 
and Baldulph his brother, and many thousands more, fell 
before them. But Cheldric, in this imminent danger of 
his men, betook himself to flight. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE SAXONS, AFTER THEIR LEADER CHELDRIC WAS KILLED, 
ARE ALL COMPELLED BY CADOR TO SURRENDER. 

The victory being thus gained, the king commanded 
Tiie Saxons Cador, dukc of Cornwall, to pursue, them, while he him- 
cador. self should hasten his march into Albania ; from whence 
he had advice, that the Scots and Picts were besieging 
Alclud, in which, as we said before, Hoel lay sick. 
Therefore he hastened to his assistance, for fear he 
might fall into the hands of the barbarians. In the 
meantime the duke of Cornwall, who had the command 
of ten thousand men, would not sifi yet pursue the 
Saxons in their flight, but speedily made himself mas- 
ter of their ships, to hinder their getting on board, 
and manned them with his best soldiers, who were to 
beat back the pagans in case they should flee thither : 



BRITISH HISTORA'. 183 

after this he hastily pursued the enemy, according to 
Arthur's command, and allowed no quarter to those he 
could overtake. So that they whose behaviour before 
was so cruel and insolent, now with timorous hearts fled 
for shelter, sometimes to the coverts of the woods, some- 
times to mountains and caves, to prolong a vn*etched 
life. At last, when none of these places could aiford 
them a safe retreat, they entered the Isle of Thanet 
with their broken forces; but neither did they there 
get free from the duke of ComwalFs pursuit, for he still 
continued slaughtering them, and gave them no respite 
till he had kiUed Cheldric, and taken hostages for the Death of 
surrender oi the rest. 



CHAPTER VI. 

ARTHUR GRANTS A PARDON TO THE SCOTS AND PICTS, 
BESIEGED AT THE LAKE LUMOND. 

Having therefore settled peace here, he directed his 
march to Alclud, which Arthur had relieved from the 
oppression of barbarians, and from thence conducted his 
army to Mureif, where the Scots and Picts were be- 
sieged ; after three several battles with the king and 
his nephew, they had fled as far as this province, and 
entering upon the lake Lumond, sought for refuge in 
the islands that are upon it. ^ This lake contains sixty The sixty 

, , , islands in 

islands, and receives sixty rivers into it, which empty j^^ 
themselves into the sea by no more than one mouth. 
There is also an equal number of rocks in these islands, 
as also of eagles'* nests in those rocks, which flocked to- 
gether there every year, and, by the loud and general 
noise which they now made, foreboded some remarkable 
event that should happen to the kingdom.*^ To these 
islands, therefore, had the enemy fled, thinking the lake 
would serve them instead of a fortification; but it 
proved of little advantage to them. For Arthur, having 



184 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

got together a fleet, sailed round the rivers, and be* 
sieged the enemy fifteen days together, by which they 
were so straitened with hunger, that they died by thou- 
sands. While he was harassing them in this manner, 
Ouillamurius, king of Ireland, came up in a fleet with a 
very great army of barbarians, in order to relieve the 
besieged. This obliged Arthur to raise the siege, and 
turn his arms against the Irish, whom he slew without 
mercy, and compelled the rest to return back to their 
country. After this victory, he proceeded in his first 
attempt, which was to extirpate the whole race of the 
Scots and Picts, and treated them with an unparalleled 
severity. And as he allowed quarter to none, the 
bishops of that miserable country, with all the inferior 
clergy, met together, and bearing the reliques of the 
saints and other consecrated things of the church before 
them, barefooted, came to implore the king^s mercy 
for their people. As soon as they were admitted into 
his presence, they fell down upon their knees, and 
humbly besought him to have pity on their distressed 
country, since the sufierings which he had already made 
it undergo, were suflScient ; nor was there any necessity 
to cut off the small remainder to a man ; and that he 
would allow them the enjoyment of a small part of 
the country, since they were willing to bear the yoke 
which he should impose upon them. The king was 
moved at the manner of their delivering this petition, 
and could not forbear expressing his clemency to them 
with tears; and at the request of those holy men, 
granted them pardon. 



CHAPTER VII. 

ARTHUR RELATES THE WONDERFUL NATURE OF SOME PONDS. 

This affair being concluded, Hoel had the curiosity 
^o view the situation of the lake, and wondered to find 



BRITISH HISTORY. 185 

the number of the rivers, islands, rocks, and eagles' Hoei visit* 

n • **** wonders 

nests, SO exactly correspond : and while he was reflecting of Loch 
upon it as something that appeared miraculous, Arthur 
came to him, and told him of another pond in the same 
province, which was yet more wonderful. For not 
far from thence was one whose length and breadth were 
each twenty feet, and depth five feet. But whether 
its square figure was natural or artificial, the wonder of 
it was, there were four diiferent sorts of fishes in the 
four several comers of it, none of which were ever 
found in any other part of the pond but their own. He 
told him likewise of another pond in Wales, near the 
Severn, called by the country people Linligwan, into 
which when the sea flows, it receives it in the manner of 
a gulf, but so as to swallow up the tide, and never be 
filled, or have its banks covered by it. But at the 
ebbing of the sea, tt throws out the waters which it had 
swallowed, as high as a mountain, and at last dashes 
and covers the banks with them. In the meantime, if 
all the people of that country should stand near with 
their faces towards it, and. happened to have their 
clothes sprinkled with the dashing of the waves, they 
would hardly, if at all, escape being swallowed up by 
the pond. But with their backs towards it, they need 
not fear being dashed, though they stood upon the very 
banks. 

CHAPTER VIIL 

ARTHUR RESTORES YORK TO ITS ANCIENT BEAUTY, ESPECIALLY 

AS TO ITS CHURCHES. 

The king, after his general pardon granted to the 
Scots, went to York to celebrate the feast of Christ's 
nativity, which was now at hand. On entering the city, 
he beheld with grief the desolation of the churches; 
for upon the expulsion of the holy Archbishop Sanxo, 
and of all the clergy there, the temples which were half 



186 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

Arthur re- buint down, had DO longGF divine service performed in 
churches and them '. SO much had the impious rage of the pagans pre- 
iiigs of York, vailed. After this, in an assembly of the clergy and 
people, he appointed Pyramus his chaplain metropolitan 
of that see. The churches that lay level with the 
ground, he rebuilt, and (which was their chief ornament) 
saw them filled with assemblies of devout persons of 
both sexes. Also the nobility that were driven out by 
the disturbances of the Saxons, he restored to their 
country. 

CHAPTER IX. 

ARTHUR HONOURS AUGUSEL WITH THE SCEPTRE OF THE 
SCOTS ; URIAN WITH THAT OF MUREIF ; AND LOT WITH 
THE CONSULSHIP OF LONDONESIA. 



Arthur ap. There worc thcrc thrcc brothers of royal blood, viz. 

points '*" 

tributa 

kiii^. 



tributary Lot, Uriau, and Augusel, who, before the Saxons had 



prevailed, held the government of those parts. Being 
willing therefore to bestow on these, as he did on 
others, the rights of their ancestors, he restored to 
Augusel the sovereignty over the Scots; his brother 
Urian he honoured with the sceptre of Mureif ; and 
Lot, who in the time of Aurelius Ambrosius had marr 
ried his sister, by whom he had two sons, Walgan and 
Modred, he re-established in the consulship of Londo- 
nesia, and the other provinces belonging to him. At 
length, when the whole country was reduced by him to 
its ancient state, he took to wife Guanhumara, de- 
scended from a noble family of Romans, who was edu- 
cated under Duke Cador, and in beauty surpassed all 
the women of the island. 



BRITISH HlSl'ORT. 187 



CHAPTER X. 

ARTHUR ADDS TO HJS GOVERNMENT IRELAND, ICELAND, 
GOTHLAND, AND THE ORKNEYS. 

The next summer he fitted out a fleet, and made an Arthur con- 
expedition into Ireland, which he was desirous to reduce, land, Iceland, 
Upon landin&r there, he was met by Kins^ Guillamurius and the 

" .^ o Orkneys. 

before mentioned, with a vast number of men, who 
came with a design to fight him ; but at the very be- 
ginning of the battle, those naked and unarmed people 
were miserably routed, and fled to such places as 
lay open to them for shelter. Guillamurius also in a 
short time was taken prisoner, and forced to submit ; 
as were also all the other princes of the country after 
the king's example, being under great consternation at 
what had happened. After an entire conquest of Ire- 
land, he made a voyage with his fleet to Iceland, which 
he also subdued. And now a rumour spreading over 
the^ rest of the islands, that no country was able to 
withstand him, Doldavius, king of Gothland, and Gun- 
fasius, king of the Orkneys, came voluntarily, and 
made their submission, on a promise of paying tribute. 
Then, as soon as winter was over, he returned back to 
Britain, where having established the kingdom, he re- 
sided in it for twelve years together in peace. 



CHAPTER XL 

ARTHUR SUBDUES NORWAY, DACIA, AQUITAINE, AND GAUL. 

After this, having invited over to him all persons 
whatsoever that were famous for valour in foreign na- 
tions, he began to augment the number of his domestics, 
and introduced such politeness into his cotirt, as people 
of the remotest countries thought worthy of their imi- 



1S8 GEX>FFKEY OK MONMOL'Til. 

Hembdocs tatioii. So that there was not a nobleman who thought 
omj, himself of any consideration, unless his clothes and arms 
were made in the same fashion as those of Arthur'^s 
knights. At length the fame of his munificence and 
valour spreading over the whole world, he became a 
terror to the kings of other countries, who grievously 
feared the loss of their dominions, if he should make 
any attempt upon them. Being much perplexed w^ith 
these anxious cares, they repaired their cities and 
towers, and built towns in convenient places, the better 
to fortify themselves against any enterprise of Arthur, 
when occasion should require/ Arthur, being informed 
of what they were doing, was delighted to find h^w 
much they stood in awe of him, and formed a design for 
the conquest of all Europe. Then having prepared his 
fleet, he first attempted Norway, that he might procure 
the crown of it for Lot, his sister^s husband. This Lot 
was the nephew of Sichelin, king of the Norwegians, 
who being then dead, had appointed him his successor, 
in the kingdom. But the Norwegians, disdaining to 
receive him, had advanced one Riculf to the sovereignty, 
and having fortified their cities, thought they were able 
. to oppose Arthur. Walgan, the son of Lot, was then a 
; youth twelve years old, and was recommended by his 
uncle to the service of Pope SuppHcius, from whom he 
received arms. But to return to the history : as soon 
as Arthur arrived on the coast of Norway, King Riculf, 
attended with the whole power of that kingdom, met him, 
and gave him battle, in which, after a great loss of blood 
on both sides, the Britons at length had the advantage, 
and making a vigorous charge, killed Riculf and many 
others with him. Having thus defeated them, they set 
the cities on fire, dispersed the country people, and pur- 
sued the victory till they had reduced all Norway, as also 
Dacia, under the dominion of Arthur. After the con- 
quest of these countries, and establishment of Lot upon 
the throne of Norway, Arthur made a voyage to Gaul, 



BRITISH HISTORY. 189 

and dividing his army into several bodies, began to lay and oaui. 
waste that country on all sides. The province of Gam^v 
was then committed to FloUo, a Roman tribune, who 
held the government of it under the Emperor Leo. 
Upon intelligence of Arthur's coming, he raised all the 
forces that were under his command, and made war 
against him, but without success. For Arthur was 
attended with the youth of all the islands that he had 
subdued ; for which reason he was reported to have such 
an army as was thought invincible. And even the greater 
part of the Gallic army, encouraged by his bounty, came 
over to his servicle. Therefore FloUo, seeing the dis- 
advantages he lay under, left his camp, and fled with 
a small number to Paris. There having recruited his He besieges 
ai'my, he fortified the city, and resolved to stand another Paris, 
engagement with Arthur. But while he was thinking of 
strengthening himself with auxiliary forces in the neigh- 
bouring countries, Arthur came upon him unawares, and 
besieged him in the city. When a month had passed, 
FloUo, with grief observing his people perish with 
hunger, sent a message to Arthur, that they two alone 
should decide the contest for the kingdom in a duel: 
for being a person of great stature, boldness and courage, 
he gave this challenge in confidence of success. Arthur 
was extremely pleased at Flollo's proposal, and sent him 
word back again, that he would give him the meeting 
which he desired. A treaty, therefore, being on both 
sides agreed to, they met together in the island without 
the city, where the people waited to see the event. They 
were both gracefully armed, and mounted on admirably 
swift horses ; and it was hard to tell which gave greater 
hopes of victory. When they had presented themselves 
against each other with their lances aloft, they put spurs 
to their horses, and began a fierce encounter. But 
Arthur, who handled his lance more warily, struck it 
into the upper part of Flollo's breast, and avoiding his 
enemy's weapon, laid him prostrate upon the ground. 



190 GEOFFREY OF MOXAIOUTH. 

and was just going to dispatch him with his drawn sword. 
But FIollo, starting up on a sudden, met him with his 
lance couched, wherewith he mortally stabbed the breast 
of Arthur's horse, and caused both him and his rider to 
fall. The Britons, when they saw their king lying on the 
ground, fearing he was killed, could hardly be restrained 
from breach of covenant, and falling with one consent 
upon the Gauls. But just as they were upon rushing 
into the lists, Arthur hastily got up, and guarding him- 
self with his shield, advanced with speed against FloUo. 
And now they renewed the assault with great rage, 
eagerly bent upon one another^s destruction. At length 
FloUo, watching his advantage, gave Arthur a blow upon 
the forehead, which might have proved mortal, had he not 
blunted the edge of his weapon against the helmet. When 
Arthur saw his coat of maU and shield red with blood, 
he was inflamed with still greater rage, and lifting up his 
Calibum with his utmost strength, struck it through the 
helmet into FloUo 's head, and made a terrible gash. 
With this wound FloUo fell down, tearing the ground 
with Us spurs, and expired. As soon as this news was 
spread through the army, the citizens ran together, 
and opening the gates, surrendered the city to Arthur. 
After the victory, he divided his army into two parts; 
one of which he committed to the conduct of Hoel, 
whom he ordered to march against Guitard, commander 
of the Pictavians ; while he with the other part should 
endeavour to reduce the other provinces. Hoel upon 
this entered Aquitaine, possessed himself of the cities 
of that country, and after distressing Guitard in several 
battles, forced him to surrender. He also destroyed 
Gascony with fire and sword, and subdued the princes 
of it. At the end of nine years, in which time all the 
parts of Gaul were entirely reduced, Arthur returned 
back to Paris, where he kept his court, and calling an 
assembly of the clergy and people, established peace and 
the just administration of the laws in that kingdom. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 191 

Then he bestowed Neustria, now called Normandy, upon Normandy. 
Bedver, his butler ; the province of Andegavia upon Anjou. 
Caius, his sewer ; and several other provinces upon his 
great men that attended him. Thus having settled the 
peace of the cities and countries there, he returned back 
in the beginning of spring to Britain. 



CHAPTER XII. 

ARTHUR SUMMONS A GREAT MANY KINGS, PRINCES, ARCH- 
BISHOPS, &C. TO A SOLEMN ASSEMBLY AT THE CITY OP 
LEGIONS. 

Upon the approach of the feast of Pentecost, Arthur, Arthur hoWs 
the better to demonstrate his joy after such triumphant bis tributary 
success, and for the more solemn observation of that fes- 
tival, and reconciling the minds of the princes that were 
now subject to him, resolved, during that season, to hold 
a magnificent court, to place the crown upon his head, 
and to invite all the kings and dukes under his subjec- 
tion, to the solemnity. And when he had communicated 
his design to his familiar friends, he pitched upon the 
City of Legions as a proper place for his purpose. For 
besides its great wealth above the other cities, its situa- 
tion, which was in Glamorganshire upon the river Uske, 
near the Severn sea, was most pleasant, and fit for so 
great a solemnity. For on one side it was washed by 
that noble river, so that the kings and princes from the 
countries beyond the seas might have the convenience 
of sailing up to it. On the other side, the beauty of the 
meadows and groves, and magnificence of the royal 
palaces with lofty gilded roofs that adorned it, made^ 
it even rival the grandeur of Rome. It was also famous 
for two churches ; whereof one was built in honour of the 
martyr Julius, and adorned with a choir of virgins, who 
had devoted themselves wholly to the service of God; 
but the other, which was founded in memory of St. 



192 GEOFFREY OP MOXMOUTH. 

Aaron, his companion, and maintained a convent of 
.^canons, was the third metropolitan church of Britain. 
Besides, there was a college of two hmidred philosophers, 
who, being learned in astronomy and the other arts, were 
diligent in observing the courses of the stars, and gave 
Arthur true predictions of the events that would happen 
at that time. In this place, therefore, which afforded 
such delights, were preparations made for the ensuing 
festival. Ambassadors were then sent into several king- 
doms, to invite to court the princes both of Gaul and all 
Names of his the adjaccut islands. Accordingly there came Augusel, 
kings. king of Albania, now Scotland ; Urian, king of Mureif ; 
Cadwallo Lewirh, king of the Venedotians, now called 
the North Wales men ; Sater, king of the Demetians, 
_or South Wales men ; Gador, king of Cornwall ; also the 
archbishops of the three metropolitan sees, London, 
York, and Jhibric ius o f the City of Legions. This pre- 
late, who was primate of Britain, and legate of the apos- 
tolical see, was so eminent for his piety, that he could 
^cure any sick person by his prayers. There came also the 
consuls of the principal cities, viz. Morvid, consul of Glou- 
cester; Mauron, of Worcester; Anaraut, of Salisbury; 
Arthgal, of Cargueit or Warguit; Jugein, of Legecester; 
Cursalen, of Kaicester; Kinmare, duke of Dorobemia; 
Galluc, of Salisbury; Urgennius, of Bath; Jonathal, of 
Dorchester; Boso, of Ridoc, that is, Oxford. Besides 
the consuls, came the following worthies of no less dig- 
nity : Danaut, Map papo; Cheneus, Map coil; Peredur, 
Mab eridur; Guiful, Map Nogoit; Regin, Map claut; 
Eddelein, Map cledauc; Kincar, Mabbagan; Kimmare; 
Gorboroniam, Map goit; Clofaut, Rupmaneton; Kim- 
belim, Map trunat; Cathleus, Map catel; Kinlich, Map 
neton; and many others too tedious to enumerate. 
From the adjacent islands came Guillamurius, king of 
Ireland; Malvasius, king of Iceland; Doldavius, king of 
Gothland; Gunfasius, king of the Orkneys ; Lot, king 
of Norway; Aschillius, king of the Dacians. From the 



BRITISH HISTORY. 193 

parts beyond the seas, came Holdin, king of Ruteni ; 
Leodegarius, consul of Bolonia ; Bedver, the butler, 
duke of Normandy ; Borellus, of Cenomania ; Caius, the 
sewer, duke of Andegavia; Guitard, of Pictavia; also 
the twelve peers of Gaul, whom Guerinus Camotensis 
brought along with him : HoeL duke of the Armorican 
Britons, and his nobility, who came with such a train 
of mules, horsies, and rich furniture, as it is difficult to 
describe. Besides these, there remained no prince of 
any consideration on this side of Spain, who came not 
upon this invitation. And no wonder, when Arthur^s 
munificence, which was celebrated over the whole world, 
made him beloved by all people. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

A DESCRIPTION OF THE ROYAL POMP AT THE CORONATION 

OP ARTHUR. 

When all were assembled together in the city, upon 
the day of the solemnity, the archbishops were conducted 
to the palace, in order to place the crown upon the king'^s Arthur's 
head. Therefore Dubricius, inasmuch as the court was ^° 
kept in his diocese, made himself ready to celebrate the 
office, and undertook the ordering of whatever related 
to it. As soon as the king was invested with his royal 
habiliments, he was conducted in great pomp to the 
metropolitan church, supported on each side by two arch- 
bishops, and having four kings, viz. of Albania, Corn- 
wall, Demetia, and Venedotia, whose right it was, bearing 
four golden swords before him. He was also attended 
with a concert of all sorts of music, which made most 
excellent harmony. On another part was the queen, 
dressed out in her richest ornaments, conducted by the 
archbishops and bishops to the Temple of Virgins ; the 
four queens also of the kiri^ last mentioned, bearing 



194 GEOFFRFA' OF MONMOUTH. 

before her four white doves according to ancient cus- 
tom ; and after her there followed a retinue of women, 
making all imaginable demonstrations of joy. When 
the whole procession was ended, so transporting was the 
harmony of the musical instruments and voices, whereof 
there was a vast variety in both churches, that the 
knights who attended were in doubt which to prefer, and 
therefore crowded from the one to the other by turns, 
and were far from being tired with the solemnity, though 
the whole day had been spent in it. At last, when 
divine service was over at both churches, the king and 
queen put off their crowns, and putting on their lighter 
ornaments^ went to the banquet ; he to one palace with 
the men, and she to another with the women. For the 
Britons still observed the ancient custom of Troy, by 
which the men and women used to celebrate their fes- 
tivals apart. When they had all taken their seats 
according to precedence, Caius the sewer, in rich robes 
of ermine, with a thousand young noblemen, all in like 
manner clothed with ermine, served up the dishes. From 
another part, Bedver the butler was followed with, the 
same number of attendants, in various habits, who 
waited with all kinds of cups and drinking vessels. In 
the queen^s palace were innumerable waiters, dressed 
with variety of ornaments, all performing their respective 
offices ; which if I should describe particularly, I should 
draw out the history to a tedious length. For at that 
time Britain had arrived at such a pitch of grandeur, 
that in abundance of riches, luxury of ornaments, and 
politeness of inhabitants, it far surpassed all other king- 
doms. The knights in it that were famous for feats of 
chivalry, wore their clothes and arms all of the same 
colour and fashion : and the women also no less cele- 
brated for their wit, wore all the same kind of apparel ; 
and esteemed none worthy of their love, but such as 
had given a proof of their valour in three several battles. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 195 

Thus was the valour of the men an encouragement for 
the women's chastity, and the love of the women a spur 
to the soldiers* bravery. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

AFTER A VARIETY OF SPORTS AT THE CORONATION, ARTHUR 
AMPLY REWARDS HIS SERVANTS. 

As soon as the banquets were over, they went into the 
fields without the city, to divert themselves with various 
sports. The military men composed a kind of diversion 
in imitation of a fight on horseback ; and the ladies, 
placed on the top of the walls as spectators, in a sportive 
manner darted their amorous glances at the courtiers, 
the more to encourage them. Others spent)l-ihe re- 
mainder of the day in other diversions, such as shooting 
with bows and arrows, tossing the pike, casting of heavy 
stones and rocks, playing at dice and the like, and all 
these inofifensively and without quarrelling . Whoever ^i^j^ 
gained the victory in any of these sports, was rewarded 
with a rich prize by Arthur. In this manner were the 
first three days spent ; and on the fourth, all who, upon 
account of their titles, bore any kind of office at this 
solemnity, were called together to receive honours and 
preferments in reward of their services, and to fill up 
the vacancies in the governments of cities and castles, 
archbishoprics, bishoprics, abbeys, and other posts of 
honour. 

CHAPTER XV. 

A LETTER FROM LUCIUS TIBERIUS, GENERAL OP THE RO- 
MANS, TO ARTHUR BEING READ, THEY CONSULT ABOUT 
AN ANSWER TO IT. 



But St. Dubricius, from a pious desire of leading st. DnbH- 
a hermit's life, made a voluntary resignation of his 

o2 



cius. 



196 GEOFFRKY OF MONMOUTH. 

archiepiscopal dignity ; and in his room was consecrated 
David, the king's uncle, whose life was a perfect 
example of that gogdness which by his doctrine he 
taught. In place of St. Samson, archbishop of Dole, 
was appointed, with the consent of Hoel, king of the 
cheuanus Armorican Britons, Chelianus, a famous priest of Llan- 
daff, a person highly recommended for his good life and 
character. The bishopric of Silcestre was conferred 
upon Mauganius, that of Winchester upon Diwanius, 
and that of Alclud upon Eledanius. /( While he was dis- 
posing of these preferments among them, it happened 
that twelve men of an advanced age, and venerable 
aspect, and bearing olive branches in their right hands, 
for a token that they were come upon an embassy, ap- 
peared before the king, moving towards him with a slow 
pace, and speaking with a soft voice ; and after their 
compliments paid, presented him with a letter from 
Lucius Tiberius, in these words :— 

" Lucius, procurator of the commonwealth, to Arthur, 
king of Britain, according to his desert. The insolence 
of your tyranny is what fills me with the highest admi- 
ration, and the injuries you have done to Rome still 
increase my wonder. But it is provoking to reflect, that 
you are grown so much above yourself, as wilfully to 
avoid seeing this ; nor do you consider what it is to have 
offended by unjust deeds a senate, to whom you cannot 
be ignorant the whole world owes vassalage. For the 
tribute of Britain, which the senate had enjoined you to 
pay, and which used to be paid to the Roman emperors 
successively from the time of Julius Caesar, you have had 
the presumption to withhold, in contempt of their impe- 
rial authority. You have seized upon the province of 
the AUobroges, and all the islands of the ocean, whose 
kings, while the Roman power prevailed in those parts, 
paid tribute to our ancestors. And because the senate 
have decreed to demand justice of you for such repeated 



BRITISH HISTORY. 197 

injuries, I command you to appear at Rome before the 
middle of August the next year, there to make satisfac- 
tion to your masters, and undergo such sentence as they 
shall in justice pass upon you. Which if you refuse to 
do, I shall come to you, and endeavour to recover with 
my sword, what you in your madness have robbed us 
of.'' 

As soon as the letter was read in the presence of the 
kings and consuls, Arthur withdrew with them into the 
Giant's Tower, which was at the entrance of the palace, 
to think what answer was fit to be returned to such an 
insolent message. As they were going up the stairs, 
Cador, duke of Cornwall, who was a man of a merry dis- 
position, said to the king in a jocose manner : '^ I have Speech of 
been till now under fear, lest the easy life which the of cSrawau! 
Britons lead, by enjoying a long peace, might make 
them cowards, and extinguish the fame of their gal- 
lantry, by which they have raised their name above all 
other nations. For where the exercise of arms is want- 
ing, and the pleasures of women, dice, and other diver- 
sions take place, no doubt, what remains of virtue, 
honour, courage, and thirst of praise, will be tainted with 
the rust of idleness. For now almost five years have 
passed, since we have been abandoned to these delights, 
and have had no exercise of war. Therefore, to deliver 
us from sloth, God has stirred up this spirit of the 
Romans, to restore our military virtues to their ancient 
state.'* In this manner did he entertain them with dis- 
course, till they were come to their seats, on which 
when they were all placed, Arthur spoke to them after 
this manner. 



198 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

ARTHUR, HOLDING A COUNCIL WITH THE KINGS, DESIRES 
EVERY ONE OF THEM TO DELIVER THEIR OPINIONS. 

King " My companions both in good and bad fortune, whose- 

sjleech.' abilities both in counsel and war I have hitherto expe- 
rienced ; the present exigence of affairs, after the mes- 
sage which we have received, requires your careful deli- 
beration and prudent resolutions : for whatever is wisely 
concerted, is easily executed. Therefore we shall be the 
better able to bear the annoyance which Lucius threatens 
to give us, if we unanimously apply ourselves to consider 
how to overcome it. In my opinion we have no great 
reason to fear him, when we reflect upon the unjust 
pretence on which he demands tribute of us. He says 
he has a right to it, because it was paid to Julius Caesar, 
and his successors, who invaded Britain with an army at 
the invitation of the ancient Britons, when they were 
quarrelling among themselves, and by force reduced the 
country under their power, when weakened by civil dis- 
sension. And because they gained it in this manner, 
they had the injustice to take tribute of it. For that 
can never be possessed justly, which is gained by force 
and violence. So that he has no reasonable grounds to 
pretend we are of right his tributaries. But since he has 
the presumption to make an unjust demand of us, we have 
certainly as good reason to demand of him tribute from 
Rome; let the longer sword therefore determine the 
right between us. For if Rome has decreed that tri- 
bute ought to be paid to it from Britain, on account of 
its having been formerly under the yoke of Julius Csesar, 
and other Roman emperors ; I for the same reason now 
decree, that Rome ought to pay tribute to me, because 
my predecessors formerly held the government of it. 
For Belinus, that glorious king of the Britons, with the 



BRITISH HISTORY. 199 

assistance of his brother Brennus, duke of the Allo- 
broges, after they liad hanged up twenty noble Romans 
in the middle of the market-place, took their city, and 
kept possession of it a long time. Likewise Constantino, 
the son of Helena, as also Maximian, who were both 
near of blood to me, and both wore the crown of Bri- 
tain, gained the imperial throne of Rome. Do not you, 
therefore, think that we ought to demand tribute of the 
Romans ? As for Gaul and the adjacent islands of the 
ocean, we have no occasion to return them any answer, 
since they did not defend them, when we attempted to 
free them from their power.'' As soon as he had done 
speaking to this effect, Hoel, king of the Armorican 
Britons, who had the precedence of the rest, made 
answer in these words. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

THE OPINION OF HOEL, KING OP ARMORICA, CONCERNING 

A WAR WITH THE ROMANS. 

" After the most profound deliberation that any of Hoei'a 
us shall be able to make, I think better advice cannot be *^^*^ * 
given, than what your majesty in your great wisdom and 
policy now offers. Your speech, which is no less wise 
than eloquent, has superseded all consultation on our 
part ; and nothing remains for us to do, but to admire 
and gratefully acknowledge your majesty's firmness of 
mind, and depth of policy, to which we owe such excel- 
lent advice. For if upon this motive you are pleased to 
make an expedition to Rome, I doubt not but it will be 
crowned with glorious success ; since it will be under- 
taken for the defence of our liberties, and to demand 
justly of our enemies, what they have unjustly demanded 
of us. For that person who would rob another, de- 
serves to lose his own by him against whom the attempt 
is made. And, therefore, since the Romans threatened 



speech. 



200 GtX>FFREY OF MO.N'MOLTII. 

US with this injur}', it will undoubtedly turn to their 
own loss, if we can have but an opportunity of engaginjf 
with them. This is what the Britons universally desire : 
this is what we have promised us in the Sibylline pro- 
phecies, which expressly declare, that the Roman empire 
shall be obtained by three persons, natives of Britain. 
The oracle is fulfilled in two of them, since it is mani- 
fest (as your majesty obsen^ed) that those two celebrated 
princes, Belinus and Constantine, governed the Roman 
empire : and now you are the third to whom this su- 
preme dignity is promised. Make haste, therefore, to 
receive what God makes no delay to give you ; to subdue 
those who are ready to receive your yoke ; and to ad- 
vance us all, who for your advancement wiU spare neither 
limbs nor life. And that you may accomplish this, I 
myself vnll attend you in person with ten thousand 



men.*" 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

THE OPINION OF AUGUSEL. 

When Hoel concluded his speech, Augusel, king of 
Albania, declared his good affection to the cause after 
AugusePs this manner. ^^ I am not able to express the joy that 
has transported me, since my lord has declared to us 
his designs. For we seem to have done nothing by all 
our past wars with so many and potent princes, if the 
Romans and Germans be suffered to enjoy peace,rand we 
do not severely revenge on them the grievous oppressions 
which they formerly brought upon this country. But 
now, since we are at liberty to encounter them, I am 
overwhelmed with joy and eagerness of desire, to see a 
battle with them : when the blood of those cruel oppres- 
sors will be no less acceptable to me, than a spring of 
water is to one who is parched with thirst. If I shall 
but live to see that day, how sweet will be the wounds 
which I shall then either receive or give? Nay, how 



BRITISH HISTORY. 201 

sweet will be even death itself, when suffered in re- 
venging the injuries done to our ancestors, in defending 
our liberties, and in promoting the glory of our king ? 
Let us then begin with these poltroons, and spoil them 
of all their trophies, by making an entire conquest of 
them. And I for my share will add to the army two 
thousand horse, besides foot." 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THEY UNANIMOUSLY AGREE UPON A WAR WITH THE 

ROMANS. 

To the same effect spoke all the rest, and promised 
each of them their full quota of forces : so that besides 
those promised by the duke of Armorica, the number of 
men from the island of Britain alone was sixty thousand, 
all completely armed. But the kings of the other islands, 
as they had not been accustomed to any cavalry, pro- 
mised their quota of infantry ; and, from the six provin- 
cial islands, viz. Ireland, Iceland, Gothland, the Orkneys, 
Norway, and Dacia, were reckoned a hundred and twenty 
thousand. From the duchies of Gaul, that is, of the 
Ruteni, the Portunians, the Estrusians, the Cenomanni, 
the Andegavians, and Pictavians, were eighty thousand. 
From the twelve consulships of those who came along 
with Guerinus Camotensis, twelve hundred. All toge- 
ther made up a hundred and eighty-three thousand two 
hundred, besides foot which did not easily fall under 
number. 

CHAPTER XX. 

ARTHUR PREPARES FOR A WAR, AND REFUSES TO PAY 

TRIBUTE TO THE ROMANS. 

King Arthur, seeing all unanimously ready for his 
service, ordered them to return back to their countries 



202 GEOFFUEY OF MONMOUTH. 

with speed, and get ready the forces which they had 
promised, and to hasten to the gene)*al rendezvous upon 
the kalends of August, at the mouth of the river 
Barba, that from thence they might advance with them 
to the borders of the Allobroges, to meet the Romans. 
Then he sent word to the emperors by their ambas- 
sadors ; that as to paying them tribute, he would in no 
wise obey their commands ; and that the journey he was 
about to make to Rome, was not to stand the award of 
their sentence, but to demand of them, what they had 
judicially decreed to demand of him. With this 
answer the ambassadors departed : and at the same time 
also departed all the kings and noblemen, to perform with 
all expedition the orders that had been given them. 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH'S 



BRITISH HISTORY^ 



BOOK X. 



CHAPTER I. 

LUCIUS TIBERIUS CALLS TOGETHER THE EASTERN KINGS 

AGAINST THE BRITONS. 

Lucius Tiberius, on receiving this answer, by order of 
the senate published a decree, for the eastern kings to 
come with their forces, and assist in the conquest of 
Britain. In obedience to which there came in a very 
short time, Epistrophius, king of the Grecians; Mus- 
tensar, king of the Africans; Alifantinam, king of Spain; 
Hirtacius, king of the Parthians; Boccus, of the Medes; 
Sertorius, of Libya ; Teucer, king of Phrygia ; Serses, Teucer is 
king of the Itureans; Pandrasus, king of Egypt; Mi- bothking - 
cipsa, king of Babylon ; Polytetes, duke of Bithynia ; t^e original. 
Teucer, duke of Phrygia; Evander, of Syria; iEthion, 
of Boeotia; Hippolytus, of Crete, with the generals and 
nobility under them. Of the senatorian order also came, 
Lucius Catellus, Marius Lepidus, Caius Metellus Cotta, 
Quintus Milvius Catulus, Quintus Carutius, and as 
many others as made up the number of forty thousand 
one hundred and sixty. 



204 OKOFFRKY OF MONMOl'TH. 



ton. 



CHAPTER II. 

ARTHUR COMMITS TO HIS NEPHEW MODRED THE GOVERN- 
MENT OF BRITAIN. HIS DREAM AT HAMo's PORT. 

After the necessary dispositions were made, upon the 
kalends of August, they began their march towards 
Britain, which when Arthur had intelligence of, he com- 
mitted the government of the kingdom to his nephew 
Modred, and Queen Ganhumara, and marched with his 
s.>uthamp. amiy to Hamo's Port, where the wind stood fair for 
him. vBut while he, surrounded with all his numerous 
fleet, was sailing joyfully with a brisk gale, it happened 
that about midnight he fell into a very sound sleep, and 
in a dream saw a bear flying in the air, at the noise of 
which all the shores trembled; also a terrible dragon 
flying from the west, which enlightened the country with 
the brightness of its eyes. When these two met, they 
began a dreadful fight; but the dragon with its fiery 
breath burnt the bear which often assaulted him, and 
threw him down scorched to the ground. Arthur, upon 
this awaking, related his dream to those that attended 
about him, who took upon them to interpret it, and told 
him, that the dragon signified himself, but the bear, 
some giant that should encounter with him : and that 
the fight portended the duel that would be between 
them, and the dragon^s victory the same that would 
happen to himself. But Arthur conjectured it por- 
tended something else, and that the vision was appli- 
cable to himself and the emperor.^ As soon as the 
morning after this night^s sail appeared, they found 
themselves arrived at the mouth of the river Barba. 
And there they pitched their tents, to wait the arrival 
of the kings of the islands, and the generals of the 
other provinces. 



HRITISH HI8T0BY. 205. 



CHAPTER III. 

4 

ARTHUR KILLS A SPANISH GIANT WHO HAD STOLEN AWAY 

HELENA, THE NIECE OF HOEL. 

In the meantime Arthur had news brought him, that 
a giant of monstrous size was come from the shores of 
Spain, and had forcibly taken away Helena, the niece 
of Duke Hoel, from her guard, and fled with her to the 
top of that which is now called MichaeFs Mount ; and st. Michaers 
that the soldiers of the country who pursued him were 
able to do nothing against him. For whether they 
attacked him by sea or land, he either overturned their 
ships with vast rocks, or killed them with several sorta 
of darts, besides many of them that he took and de- 
voured half alive. The next night, therefore, at the 
second hour, Arthur, taking along with him Caius the 
sewer, and Bedver the butler, went out privately from 
the camp, and hastened towards the mountain. For 
being a man of undaunted courage, he did not care to 
lead his army against such monsters ; both because he 
could in this manner animate his men by his own ex- 
ample, and also because he was alone sufficient to deal 
with them. As soon as they came near the mountain, 
they saw a fire burning upon the top of it, and another 
on a lesser mountain, that was not far from it. And 
being in doubt upon which of them the giant dwelt, they 
sent away Bedver to know the certainty of the matter. 
So he, finding a boat, sailed over in it first to* the lesser 
mountain, to which he could in no other way have 
access, because it was situated in the sea. When he 
had begun to climb up to the top of it, he was at first 
frightened with a dismal howling cry of a woman from 
above, and imagined the monster to be there: but 
quickly rousing up his courage, he drew his sword, and 
having reached the top, found nothing but the fire which 



206 (IROFFRRY OF MONMOUTH. 

he had before seen at a distance. He discovered also 
a grave newly made, and an old woman weeping and 
howling by it, who at the sight of him instantly cried 
out in words interrupted with sighs, " O, unhappy man, 
what misfortune brings you to this place I O the inex- 
pressible tortures of death that you must suffer ! I pity 
you, I pity you, because the detestable monster will 
this night destroy the flower of your youth. For that 
most wicked and odious giant, who brought the duke'*s 
niece, whom I have just now buried here, and me, her 
nurse, along with her into this mountain, will come and 
immediately murder you in a most cruel manner. O 
deplorable fate ! This most illustrious princess, sinking 
under the fear her tender heart conceived, while the 
foul monster would have embraced her, fainted away 
and expired. And when he could not satiate his brutish 
lust upon her, who was the very soul, joy, and happi- 
ness of my life, being enraged at the disappointment of 
his bestial desire, he forcibly committed a rape upon 
me, who (let God and my old age witness) abhorred his 
embraces. Fly, dear sir, fly, for fear he may come, as 
he usually does, to lie with me, and finding you here 
most barbarously butcher you." Bedver, moved at 
what she said, as much as it is possible for human 
nature to be, endeavoured with kind words to assuage 
her grief, and to comfort her with the promise of speedy 
help : and then returned back to Arthur, and gave him 
an account of what he had met with. Arthur very 
much lamented the damsel's sad fate, and ordered his 
companions to leave him to deal with him alone ; unless 
there was an absolute necessity, and then they were to 
come in boldly to his assistance. From hence they 
went directly to the next mountain, leaving their horses 
with their armour-bearers, and ascended to the top, 
Arthur leading the way. The deformed savage was then 
by the fire, with his face besmeared with the clotted 
blood of swine, part of which he had already devoured. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 207 

and was roasting the remainder upon spits by the fire. 
But at the sight of them, whose appearance was a sur- 
prise to him, he hastened to his club, which two strong 
men could hardly lift from the ground. Upon this the 
king drew his sword, and guarding himself with his 
shield, ran with all his speed to prevent his getting it. 
But the other, who was not ignorant of his design, had 
by this time snatched it up, and gave the king such a 
terrible blow upon his shield, that he made the shores 
ring with the noise, and perfectly stunned the king's 
ears with it. Arthur, fired with rage at this, lifted up 
his sword, and gave him a wound in the forehead, which 
was not indeed mortal, but yet such as made the blood 
gush out over his face and eyes, and so blinded him; for 
he had partly warded off the stroke from his forehead 
with his club, and prevented its being fatal. However, 
his loss of sight, by reason of the blood flowing over his 
eyes, made him exert himself with greater fury, and 
like an enraged boar against a hunting-spear, so did 
he rush in against Arthur's sword, and grasping him 
about the waist, forced him down upon his knees. But 
Arthur, nothing daunted, slipped out of his hands, and 
so bestirred himself with his sword, that he gave the 
giant no respite till he had struck it up to the very 
back through his skull. At this the hideous monster 
raised a dreadful roar, and like an oak torn up from the 
roots by the winds, so did he make the ground resound 
with his fall. Arthur, bursting out into a fit of laughter 
at the sight, commanded Bedver to cut off his head, 
and give it to one of the armour-bearers, who was to 
carry it to the camp, and there expose it to public view, 
but with orders for the spectators of this combat to 
keep silence. He told them he had found none of so 
great strength, since he killed the giant Ritho, who 
had challenged him to fight, upon the mountain Aravius. 
This giant had made himself furs of the beards of kings 
he had killed, and had sent word to Arthur carefully to 



\^ 



208 GEOFFREY OF MOXMOrTIf. 

flea off his beard and send it to him ; and then, out of 
respect to his pre-eminence over other kings, his beard 
should have the honour of the principal place. But if 
he refused to do it, he challenged him to a duel, 
with this offer, that the conqueror should have the 
furs, and also the beard of the vanquished for a trophy 
of his victory. In this conflict, therefore, Arthur proved 
victorious, and took the beard and spoils of the giant ; 
and, as he said before, had met with none that could be 
^X5ompared to him for strength, till his last engagement. 
After this >actor)', they returned at the second watch 
of the night to the camp with the head ; to see which 
there was a great concourse of people, all extolling 
this wonderful exploit of Arthur, by which he had freed 
the country from a most destructive and voracious 
monster. But Hoel, in great grief for the loss of his 
niece, commanded a mausoleum to be built over her 
body in the mountain where she was buried, which, 
taking the damsel's name^ is called Helena's Tomb to 
this day. 

CHAPTER IV. 

ARTHUR'^S ambassadors to LUCIUS TIBERIUS DELIVER PE- 
TREIUS COTTA, WHOM THEY TOOK PRISONER, TO ARTHUR. 

As soon as all the forces were arrived which Arthur 
expected, he marched from thence to Augustodunum, 
where he supposed the general was. But when he came 
to the river Alba, he had intelligence brought him of 
his having encamped not far off, and that he was come 
with so vast an army, that he would not be able to with- 
stand it. However, this did not deter him from pursuing 
his enterprise ; but he pitched his camp upon the bank 
of the river, to facilitate the bringing up of his forces, 
and to secure his retreat, if there should be occasion ; 
and sent Boso the consul of Oxford, and Guerinus Car- 
notensis, with his nephew Walgan, to Lucius Tiberius, 



BRITISH HISTORY. 209 

requiring him either to retire from the coasts of Gaul, 
or come the next day, that they might try their right 
to that country with their swords. The retinue of 
young courtiers that attended Walgan, highly rejoicing 
at this opportunity, were urgent with him to find some 
occasion for a quarrel in the conunander's camp, that so 
they might engage the Romans. Accordingly they went 
to Lucius^ and commanded him to retire out of Gaul, or 
hazard a battle the next day. But while he was answer-| 
ing them, that he was not come to retire, but to govern 7 
the country, there was present Caius Quintilianus, his) 
nephew, who said, " That the Britons were better at 
boasting and threatening, than they were at fighting.**' 
Walgan immediately took fire at this, and ran upoif^ 
him with his drawn sword, wherewith he cut oflF his 1 
head, and then retreated speedily with his companions/ 
to their horses. The Romans, both horse and foot, 
pursued to revenge the loss of their countryman upon 
the ambassadors, who fled with great precipitation. 
But Guerinus Camotensis, just as one of them was 
come up to him, rallied on a sudden, and with his lance 
struck at once through his armour and the very middle 
of his body, and laid him prostrate on the ground. The 
sight of this noble exploit raised the emulation of Boso of 
Oxford, who, wheeling about his horse, struck his lance 
into the throat of the first 'man he met with, and dis- 
mounted him mortally wounded. In the meantime, Mar-^ 
cellus Mutius, with great eagerness to revenge Quin- ' 
tilian's death, was just upon the back of Walgan, and laid 
hold of him ; which the other quickly obliged him to quit, 
by cleaving both his helmet and head to the breast with 
his sword. He also bade him, when he arrived at the in- 
fernal regions, tell the man he had killed in the camp, 
" That in this manner the Britons showed their boasting 
and threatening." Then having re-assembled his men, 
he encouraged them to dispatch every one his pursuer 
in the same manner as he had done ; which accordingly 



210 fiFX)FFREY OF MONMOUTIf. 

Vthey (lid not fail to accomplish. Notwithstanding, the 
Ilomans continued their pursuit with lances and swords, 
wherewith they annoyed the others, though without 
slaughter or taking any prisoners. But as they came 
near a certain wood, a party of six thousand Britons, 
who, seeing the flight of the consuls, had hid themselves, 
to be in readiness for their assistance, sallied forth^ and 
putting spurs to their horses, rent the air with their loud 
shouts, and being well fenced with their shields, assaulted 
the Romans suddenly, and forced them to fly. And now 
it was the Britons' turn to pursue, which they did with 
better success, for they dismounted, killed, or took seve- 
ral of the enemy. Petreius, the senator, upon this news, 
hastened to the assistance of his countrymen with ten 
thousand men, and compelled the Britons to retreat to 
the wood from whence they had sallied forth ; though 
not without loss of his own men. For the Britons, being 
well acquainted with the ground, in their flight killed 
a great number of their pursuers. The Britons thus 
giving ground, Hider, with another reinforcement of five 
thousand men, advanced with speed to sustain them ; so 
that they again faced those, upon whom they had turned 
their backs, and renewed the assaidt with great vigour. 
The Romans also stood their ground, and continued the 
fight with various success. ' The great fault of the Bri- 
tons was, that though they had been very eager to begin 
the fight, yet when begun they were less careful of 
the hazard they ran. Whereas the Romans were under 
better discipline, and had the advantage of a prudent 
commander, Petreius Cotta, to tell them where to ad- 
vance, and where to give ground, and by these means 
did great injury to the enemy." When Boso observed 
this, he drew ofi^ from the rest a large party of those 
whom he knew to be the stoutest men, and spoke to 
them after this manner : " Since we have begun this 
fight without Arthur's knowledge, we must take care 
that we be not defeated in the enterprise. For, if we 



BRITISH HISTORY. 211 

should, we shall both very much endanger our men, and 
incur the king's high displeasure. Rouse up your cou- 
rage, and follow me through the Roman squadrons, that 
with the favour of good fortune we may either kill or 
take Petreius prisoner." With this they put spurs to 
their horses, and piercing through the enemies' thickest 
ranks, reached the place where Petreius was giving his 
commands. Boso hastily ran in upon him, and grasping boso and 
him about the neck, fell with him to the ground, as he gage. 
had intended. The Romans hereupon ran to his deli- 
very, as did the Britons to Boso's assistance; which 
occasioned on both sides great slaughter, noise, and con- 
fusion, while .one party strove to rescue their leader, and 
the other to keep him prisoner. So that this proved 
the sharpest part of the whole fight, and wher^^in their 
spears, swords, and arrows had the fullest employment. 
At length, the Britons, joining in a close body, and sus- 
taining patiently the assaults of the Romans, retired to 
the main body of their army with Petreius : which they 
had no sooner done, than they again attacked them, 
being now deprived of their leader, very much weakened, 
dispirited, and just beginning to flee. They, therefore, 
eagerly pursued, beat down, and killed several of them, 
and as soon as they had plundered them, pursued the 
rest : but they took the greatest number of them pri- 
soners, being desirous to present them to the king. 
When they had at last sufl&ciently harassed them, they 
returned with their plunder and prisoners to the camp ; 
where they gave an account of what had happened, 
and presented Petreius Cotta with the other prisoners 
before Arthur, with great joy for the victory. Arthur 
congratulated them upon it, and promised them advance- 
ment to greater honours, for behaving themselves so 
gallantly when he was absent from them. Then he gave 
his command to some of his men, to conduct the pri- 
soners the next day to Paris, and deliver them to be 
kept in custody there till further orders. The party 

p2 



-1:2 <;Eorri(FY of MOXMorTir. 

that wore to undertake tliis cliarge, he ordered to be 
conducted hy Cador, Bedver, and the two consuls, Borel- 
hifl and Richerius, with their servants, till they should be 
out of all fear of disturlmnoe from the Romans. 



feated. 



CHAPTER V. 

THR liOMANS ATTACK THE BRITONS WITH A VERY GREAT 
FORCF^ BUT ARE PUT TO FLIGHT BY THEM. 

Romans de- BuT tlic RoHians happening to get intelligence of 
their design, at the command of their general chose out 
fifteen thousand men, who that night were to get before 
the others in their march, and rescue their fellow-sol- 
diers out of their hands. They were to be commanded 
])y Vulteius Catellus and Quintus Carutius, senators, as 
also Evander, king of Syria, and Sertorius, king of 
Libya. Accordingly they began their march that very 
night, and possessed themselves of a place convenient 
for lying in ambuscade, through which they supposed 
the others would pass. In the morning the Britons set 
forward along the same road with their prisoners, and 
were now approaching the place, in perfect ignorance of 
the cunning stratagem of the enemy. No sooner had 
they entered it, than the Romans, to their great sur- 
prise, sprang forth and fell furiously upon them. Not- 
withstanding, the Britons, at length recovering from 
•their consternation, assembled together, and prepared 
for a bold opposition, by appointing a party to guard the 
prisoners, and drawing out the rest in order of battle 
against the enemy. Richerius and Bedver had the 
command of the party that were set over the prisoners ; 
but Cador, duke of Cornwall, and Borellus headed the 
others. But all the Romans had made their sally with- 
out being placed in any order, and cared not to form 
themselves, that they might lose no time in the slaugh- 
ter of the Britons, whom they saw busied in marshal- 



BRITISH HIS1X)RY. 213 

ling their troops and preparing only for their defence. 
By this conduct the Britons were extremely weakened, 
and would have shamefully lost their prisoners, had not 
good fortune rendered them assistance. For Guitard, 
commander of the Pictavians, happened to get informar- 
tion of the designed stratagem, and was come up with 
three thousand men, by the help of which they at last 
got the advantage, and paid back the slaughter upon 
their insolent assailants. Nevertheless, the loss which 
they sustained at the beginning of this action was very 
considerable. For they lost Borellus, the famous consul several uo- 
of the Cenomanni, in an encounter with Evander, king 
of Syria, who struck his lance into his throat ; besides 
four noblemen, viz. Hirelgas Deperirus, Mauricius 
Cadorcanensis, Aliduc of Tintagel, and Hider his son, 
than whom braver men were hardly to be found. But 
yet neither did this loss dispirit the Britons, but rather 
made them more resolute to keep the prisoners, and 
kill the enemy. The Romans, now finding themselves 
unable to maintain the fight any longer, suddenly quit- 
ted the field, and made towards their camp ; but were 
pursued with slaughter by the Britons, who also took 
many of them, and allowed them no respite till they had 
killed Vulteius Catellus, and Evander, king of Syria, 
and wholly dispereed the rest. After which they sent 
away their former prisoners to Paris, whither they were 
to conduct them, and returned back with those newly 
taken to the king ; to whom they gave great hopes of 
a complete conquest of their enemies, since very few of 
the great number that came against them had met with 
any success. 



214 GlIOFKREY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER VI. 

LUCIUH TIBERIUS GOES TO LENUUI.E. ARTHUR, DESIGNING 
TO VANQUISH IIIM, BY A STRATAGEM POSSESSES HIMSELF 
OF THE VALLEY OF SUESIA. 

These repeated disasters wrought no small disturb- 
ance in the mind of Lucius Tiberius, and made hiin 
hesitate whether to bring it to a general battle with 
Arthur, or to retire into Augustodunum, and stay till 
the emperor Leo w4th his forces could come to his assist- 
L. Tiberius ance. At length, giving way to his fears, he entered 
griae. Lengriae with his army, intending to reach the other 

city the night following. Arthur finding this, and being 
desirous to get before him in his march, left the city 
on the left hand, and the same night entered a certain 
valley called Suesia, through which Lucius was to pass. 
There he divided his men into several bodies, command- 
ing one legion, over which Morvid, consul of Gloucester, 
was appointed general, to wait close by, that he might 
retreat to them if there should be occasion, and from 
thence rally his broken forces for a second battle. The 
rest he divided into seven parts, in each of which he 
placed five thousand five hundred and fifty-five men, all 
completely armed. He also appointed difierent stations 
to his horse and foot, and gave command, that just as 
the foot should advance to the attack, the horse, keeping 
close together in their ranks, should at the same moment 
march up obliquely, and endeavour to put the enemy 
into disorder. The companies of foot were, after the 
(< British maimer, drawn out into a square, with a right 
and left wing, under the command of Augusel, king 
of Albania, and Cador, duke of Cornwall ; the one 
presiding over the right wing, the other over the left. 
Over another party were placed the two famous consuls, 
Guerinus Carnotensis, and Boso of Richiden, called in the 



BRITISH HISTORY. 215 

Saxon tongue Oxineford : over a third were Aschillius, 
king of the Daeians, and Lot, king of the Norwegians. 
/ The fourth being commanded by Hoel, duke of the Ar- 
Vmoricans, and Walgan, the king's nephew. After these 
were four other parties placed in the rear; the first 
commanded by Caius the sewer, and Bedver the butler ; 
the second by Holdin, duke of the Ruteni, and Guitard 
of the Pictavians ; the third by Vigenis of Legecester, 
Jonathal of Dorchester, and Cursalem of Caicester ; the 
fourth by Urbgennius of Bath. Behind all these, Ar- 
thur, for himself and the legion that was to attend near 
him, made choice of a place, where he set up a golden 
dragon for a standard, whither the wounded or fatigued 
might in case of necessity retreat as into their camp. 
The legion, that was with him, consisted of six thousand 
six hundred and sixty-six men. 



CHAPTER VII. 

Arthur's exhortation to his soldiers. 

After he had thus placed them all in their stations, Arthurs 
he made the following speech to his soldiers : — " My *p®*^'* 
brave countrymen, who have made Britain the mistress 
of thirty kingdoms, I congratulate you upon your late 
noble exploit, which to me is a proof that your valour is 
so far irom being impaired, that it is rather increased. 
Though you have been five years without exercise, 
wherein the softening pleasures of an easy life had a 
greater share of your time, than the use of arms ; yet 
all this has not made you degenerate from your natural 
bravery, which you have shown in forcing the Romans to 
flee. The pride of their leaders has animated them to 
attempt the invasion of your liberties. They have tried 
you in battle, with numbers superior to yours, and have 
not been able to stand before you ; but have basely with- 
drawn themselves into that city, from which they are 



21(» r.KOFFUnY OF MONMOUTH. 

now ready to march out, and to ])a8S through this valley 
in their way to Augustodununi ; so that you may have 
an opportunity of falling upon them unawares like a flock 
of ttheop. Certainly they expected to find in you the 
cowardice of the Eastern nations, when they thought 
to make your country tributary, and you their slaves. 
What, have they never heard of your wars with the 
Dacians, Norwegians, and princes of the (xauls, whom 
you reduced under my power, and freed from their 
shameful yoke ! We, then, that have had success in a 
greater war, need not doubt of it in a less, if we do but 
endeavour with the same spirit to vanquish these pol- 
troons, ^'ou shall want no rewards of honour, if as faith- 
ful soldiers you do but strictly obey my commands. For 
as soon as we have routed them, we will march straight 
to Rome, and take it; and then all the gold, silver, 
l)alaceH, towers, towns, cities, and other riches of the van- 
quished shall be yours."*' He had hardly done speaking, 
before they all with one voice declared, that they were 
ready to suffer death, rather than quit the field while he 
had life. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

LUCH;8 TIHERIUS, DISCOVERING ARTHUr's DESIGN, IN A 
SPEECH ANIMATES IIIS FOLLOWERS TO FIGHT. 

Speech of L. Hut Lucius Tiberius, discovering the designs that were 
formed against him, would not flee, as he had at first in- 
tended, but taking new courage, resolved to march to 
the same valley against them ; and calling together his 
principal commanders, spoke to them in these words : — 
'' Venerable Fathers, to whose empire both the Eastern 
and Western kingdoms owe obedience, remember the 
virtues of your ancestors, who were not afraid to shed 
their blood, when the vanquishing of the enemies of the 
commonwealth required it ; but to leave an example of 
their courage and military virtues to their posterity. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 21 7 

behaved themselves in all battles with that contempt of 
death, as if God had given them some security against 
it. By this conduct they often triumphed, and by 
triumphing escaped death. Such was the reward of 
their virtue from Divine Providence, which overrules 
all events. The increase of the conunonwealth, and of 
their own valour, was owing to this ; and all those vir- 
tues that usually adorn the great, as integrity, honour, 
and munificence, flourishing a long time in them, raised 
them and their posterity to the empire of the whole 
world. Let their noble examples animate you; rouse 
up the spirit of the ancient Romans, and be not afraid 
to march out against our enemies that are lying in am- 
bush for us in the valley, but boldly with your swords 
demand of them your just rights. Do not think that I 
retired into this city for fear of engaging with them; 
but I thought that, as their pursuit of us was rash and 
foolish, so we might hence on a sudden intercept them 
in it, and by dividing their main body make a great 
slaughter of them. But now, since they have altered 
the measures which we supposed they had taken, let us 
also alter ours. Let us go in quest of them, and bravely 
fall upon them ; or if they shall happen to have the ad- 
vantage in the beginning of the battle, let us only stand 
our ground during the fury of their first assault, and the 
victory will undoubtedly be ours; for in many battles 
this manner of conduct has been attended with victory.*" 
As soon as he had made an end of speaking these and 
other things, they all declared their assent, promised 
with an oath to stand by him, and hastened to arm 
themselves. Which when they had done, they marched 
out of Lengrise to the valley where Arthur had drawn 
out his forces in order of battle. Then they also began The array of 
to marshal their army, which they divided into twelve *""^' 
companies, and according to the Roman manner of bat- 
tle, drew out each company into the form of a wedge, 
consisting of six thousand six hundred and sixty-six 



218 <iKOFFIlEY OF MONMOUTH. 

iiion. Each company also had its respective leaders, 
who were to give direction when to advance, or when to 
be iii>on the defensive. One of them was headed by 
Lucius Catellus the senator, and Alifantinam, king of 
S|>ain ; another by Hirtacius, king of the Parthians, and 
Marius Lepidus, a senator ; a third by Boccus, king of 
the Mcdcs, and Caius Metellus, a senator ; a fourth, by 
Sertorius, king of Libya, and Quintus Milvius, a senator. 
These four companies were phiced in the front of the 
army. In the rear of these were four others, whereof 
one was conmianded by Serses, king of the Itureans ; 
another by Pandrasus, king of Egypt ; a third by Po- 
lytetes, duke of Bithynia ; a fourth by Teucer, duke 
of Phr}'gia. And again behind all these four others, 
whereof the commanders were Quintus Carucius, a 
senator, Lsclius Hostiensis, Sulpitius Subuculus, and 
Mauricius Sylvanus. As for the general himself, he was 
sometimes in one place, sometimes another, to encou- 
rage and direct as there should be occasion. For a 
standard he ordered a golden eagle to be firmly set up 
in the centre, for his men to repair to, whenever they 
should happen to be separated from their company. 



CHAPTER IX. 

A BATTLE BETWEEN ARTHUR AND LUCIUS TIBERIUS. 

Tiie battle And uow the Britous aud Komans stood presentin&r 

liocrlna 

their arms at one another ; when forthwith at the sound 
of the trumpets, the company that was headed by the 
king of Spain and Lucius Catellus, boldly rushed for- 
ward against that which the king of Scotland and duke 
of Cornwall led, but were not able to make the least 
breach in their firm ranks. So that while these stood 
their ground, up came Guerinus and Boso with a body 
of hoi*se upon their full speed, broke through the party 
that began the assault, and met with another which the 



BRITISH HISTORY. 219 

king of the Parthians was leading up against Aschillius, 
king of Dacia. After this first onset, there followed a 
general engagement of both armies with great violence, 
and several breaches were made on each side. The 
shouts, the slaughter, the quantity of blood spilled, and 
the agonies of the dying, made a dreadful scene of hor- 
ror. At first, the Britons sustained a great loss, by 
having Bedver the butler killed, and Caius the sewer 
mortally wounded. For, as Bedver met Boccus, king 
of the Medes, he fell dead by a stab of his lance amidst 
the enemies' troops. And Caius, in endeavouring to re- 
venge his death, was surrounded by the Median troops, 
and there received a mortal wound ; yet as a brave sol- 
dier he opened himself a way with the wing which he 
led, killed and dispersed the Medes, and would have 
made a safe retreat with all his men, had he not met 
the king of Libya with the forces under him, who put 
his whole company into disorder ; yet not so great, but 
that he was still able to get off with a few, and flee with 
Bedver's corps to the golden dragon. The Neustrians 
grievously lamented at the sight of their leader'^s man- 
gled body; and so did the Andegavians, when they 
beheld their consul wounded. But there was now no 
room for complaints, for the furious and bloody shocks 
of both armies made it necessary to provide for their 
own defence. Therefore Hirelgas, the nephew of Bed- 
ver, being extremely enraged at his death, called up to 
him three hundred men, and like a wild boar amongst a 
pack of dogs, broke through the enemies' ranks with his 
horse, making towards the place where he had seen the 
standard of the king of the Medes ; little regarding 
what might befal him, if he could but revenge the loss 
of his uncle. At length he reached the place, killed the 
king, brought off his body to his companions, and laid it 
by that of his uncle, where he mangled it in the same 
manner. Then calling with a loud voice to his country- 
men, he animated their troops, and vehemently pressed 



220 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

them to exert themselves to the utmost, now that 
their spirits were raised, and the enemy disheartened ; 
and especially as they had the advantage of them in 
being placed in better order, and so might the more 
grievously annoy them. Encouraged with this exhor- 
tation, they began a general assault upon the enemy, 
which* was attended with a terrible slaughter on both 
sides. For on the part of the Romans, besides many 
others, fell Alifantinam, king of Spain, Micipsa of Ba- 
bylon, as also Quintus Milvius and Marius Lepidus, 
senators. On the part of the Britons, Holdin, king of 
the Ruteni, Leodegarius of Bolonia, and three consuls 
of Britain, Cursalem of Caicester, Galluc of Salisbury, 
and Urbgennius of Bath. So that the troops which 
they commanded, being extremely weakened, retreated 
till they came to the army of the Armorican Britons, 
commanded by Hoel and Walgan. But these, being in- 
flamed at the retreat of their friends, encouraged them 
to stand their ground, and caused them with the help of 
tlieir o\m forces to put their pursuers to flight. While 
they continued this pursuit, they beat down and killed 
several of them, and gave them no respite, till they 
came to the general's troop ; who, seeing the distress of 
his companions, hastened to their assistance. 



CHAPTER X. 

HOEL AND WALGAN SIGNALIZE THEIR VALOUR IN THE FIGHT. 

The battle And HOW iu this latter encounter the Britons were 
conunues. ^Q^g^^^^j^ ^^h i\^q Jqsq of Kimarcoc, consul of Trigeria, 

and two thousand with him ; besides three famous 
noblemen, Richomarcus, Bloccovius, and Jagivius of 
Bodloan, who, had they but enjoyed the dignity of 
princes, would have been celebrated for their valour 
through all succeeding ages. For, during this assault 
which they made in conjunction with Hoel and Walgan, 



BRITISH HISTORY. 221 

there was not an enemy within their reach that could 
escape the fury of their sword or lance. But upon their 
falling in among Lucius'*s party, they were surrounded 
by them, and suffered the same fate with the consul and 
the other men. The loss of these men made those 
matchless heroes, Hoel and Walgan, much more eager 
to assault the generals ranks, and to try on all sides 
where to make the greatest impression. But Walgan, 
whose valour was never to be foiled, endeavoured to gain 
access to Lucius himself, that he might encounter him, 
and with this view beat down and killed all that stood 
in his way. And Hoel, not inferior to him, did no less 
service in another part, by spiriting up his men, and 
giving and receiving blows among the enemy with the 
same undaunted courage. It was hard to determine, 
which of them was the stoutest soldier. 



CHAPTER XI. 

LUCIUS TIUERiUS BEING KILLED, THE BRITONS OBTAIN 

THE VICTORY. 

But Walgan, by forcing his way through the enemy's -irhe Britons 
troops, as we said before, found at last (what he had ?ictoJ^. 
wished for) access to the general, and immediately en- 
countered him. Lucius, being then in the flower of his 
youth, and a person of great courage and vigour, desired 
nothing more than to engage with such a one as might 
put his strength to its full trial. Putting himself, 
therefore, into a posture of defence, he received Walgan 
with joy, and was not a little proud to try his courage 
with one of whom he had heard such great things.>. The 
fight continued between them a long time, with great 
force of blows, and no less dexterity in warding them 
off, each being resolved upon the other's destruction. 
During this sharp conflict between them, the Romans, 
on a sudden, recovering their courage, made an assault 



222 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

upon the Armoricans, and having relieved their general, 
repulsed Hoel and Walgan, with their troops, till they 
found themselves unawares met by Arthur and the 
forces under him. For he, hearing of the slaughter 
that was a little before made of his men, had speedily 
advanced with his legion, and drawing out his Caliburn, 
spoke to them, with a loud voice, after this manner: 
" What are you doing, soldiers ? Will you suffer these 
effeminate wretches to escape? Let not one of them 
get off alive. Remember the force of your arms, that 
have reduced thirty kingdoms under my subjection. 
Remember your ancestors, whom the Romans, when 
at the height of their power, made tributary. Re- 
member your liberties, which these pitiful fellows, that 
are much your inferiors, attempt to deprive you of. 
Let none of them escape alive. What are you doing T' 
With these expostulations, he rushed upon the enemy, 
made terrible havoc among them, and not a man did he 
meet but at one blow he laid either him or his horse 
dead upon the ground. They, therefore, in astonish- 
ment fled from him, as a flock of sheep from a fierce 
lion, whom raging hunger provokes to devour whatever 
happens to come near him. Their arms were no manner 
of protection to them against the force with which this 
vaUant prince wielded his Caliburn. Two kings, Ser- 
torius of Libya, and Polytetes of Bithynia, unfortunately 
felt its fury, and had their heads cut off by it. The 
Britons, when they saw their king performing such 
wonders, took courage again. With one consent they 
assaulted the Romans, kept close together in their ranks, 
and while they assailed the foot in one part, endeavoured 
to beat down and pierce through the horse in another. 
Notwithstanding, the Romans made a brave defence, 
and at the instigation of Lucius laboured to pay back 
their slaughter upon the Britons. The eagerness and 
force that were now shown on both sides were as great 
as if it was the beginning of the battle. Arthur con- 



BRITISH HISTORY. 223 

tinued to do great execution with his own hand, and 
encouraged the Britons to maintain the fight ; as Lucius 
Tiberius did the Romans, and made them perform many 
memorable exploits. He himself, in the meantime, was 
very active in going from place to place, and suffered 
none to escape with life that happened to come within 
the reach of his sword or lance. The slaughter that 
was now made on both sides was very dreadful, and the 
turns of fortune various, sometimes the Britons prevail- 
ing, sometimes the Romans. At last, while this sharp 
dispute continued, Morvid, consul of Gloucester, with 
his legion, which, as we said before, was placed between 
the hills, came up with speed upon the rear of the- ene- 
my, and to their great surprise assaulted, broke through, 
and dispersed them with great slaughter. This last 
and decisive blow proved fatal to many thousands of Ro- 
mans, and even to the general Lucius himself, who was 
killed among the crowds with a lance by an unknown 
hand. But the Britons, by long maintaining the figh^, 
at last with great difficulty gained the victory. 



CHAPTER XIL 

PART OF THE ROMANS FLEE ; THE REST, OF THEIR OWN ACCORD, 
SURRENDER THEMSELVES FOR SLAVES. 

The Romans, being now, therefore, dispersed, betake The Romans 
themselves through fear, some to the by-ways and woods, tak4n pri- 
some to the cities and towns, and all other places, where 
they could be most safe ; but were either killed or taken 
and plundered by the Britons who pursued: so that 
great part of them voluntarily and shamefully held forth 
their hands, to receive their chains, in order to prolong 
for a while a wretched life. In all which the justice of 
Divine Providence was very visible; considering how 
unjustly the ancestors of the Britons were formerly 



224 CiLOri KKY OF MOXMOUTII. 

invaded and harassed by those of the Romans ; and that 
these stood only in defence of that liberty, which the 
others would have deprived them of; and refused the 
tribute, which the others had no right to demand. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

TFIR BODIES OP THE SLAIN ARE DECENTLY BURIED, EACH IN 

THEIR RESPECTIVE COUNTRIES. 

Thebodiesof Arthur, after he had completed his victory, gave 
buried."*" orders for separating the bodies of his nobiUty from 
those of the enemy, and preparing a pompous funeral 
for them ; and that, when ready, they should be carried 
to the abbeys of their respective countries, there to be 
honourably buried. But Bedver the butler was, with 
great lamentation of the Neustrians, carried to his own 
city Bajocae, which Bedver the first, his great grand- 
father, had built. There he was, with great solemnity, 
laid close by the wall, in a burying-place on the south 
side of the city. But Cheudo was carried, grievously 
wounded, to Camus, a town which he had himself built, 
where in a short time he died of his wounds, and was 
buried, as became a duke of Andegavia, in a convent of 
hermits, which was in a wood not far from the town. 
Also Holdin, duke of Ruteni, was carried to Flanders, 
and buried in his own city Terivana. The other consuls 
and noblemen were conveyed to the neighbouring abbeys, 
according to Arthur''s orders. Out of his great cle- 
mency, also, he ordered the country people to take care 
of the burial of the enemy, and to carry the body of 
Lucius to the senate, and tell them, that was the only 
tribute which Britain ought to pay them. After this he 
stayed in those parts till the next winter was over, and 
employed his time in reducing the cities of the AUo- 
broges.rt But at the beginning of the following summer, 



BRITISH HISTORY. 225 

as he was on his march towards Rome, and was begin- Arthur hem 

ning to pass the Alps, he had news brought him that his rebeiuon. 

nephew Modred, to whose care he had entrusted Britain, 

had by tyrannical and treasonable practices set the 

crown uDon his own head ; and that Queen Guanhumara, 

in vie «! -„£?.,-. •.- ' ^ "^-' '^'ily married 

h^ l^i^.'^r 



\ 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH'S 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



BOOK XI. 



CHAPTER I. 

MODRED MAKES A GREAT SLAUGHTER OF ARTHUR*S MEN, 
BUT IS BEATEN, AND FLEES TO WINCHESTER. 

Modredis Of the matter now to be treated of, most noble 

defeated. 

consul, Geoffrey of Monmouth shall be silent ; but will, 
nevertheless, though in a mean style, briefly relate 
what he found in the British book above mentioned, 
and heard from that most learned historian, Walter, 
archdeacon of Oxford, concerning the wars which this 
renowned king, upon his return to Britain after this 
victory, waged against his nephew. As soon, therefore, 
as the report of this flagrant wickedness reached him, 
he immediately desisted from his enterprise against 
Leo, king of the Romans ; and having sent away Hoel, 
duke of the Armoricans, with the army of Oaul, to 
restore peace in those parts, returned back with speed 
to Britain, attended only by the kings of the islands, 
and their armies. But the wicked traitor, Modred, 
had sent Cheldric, the Saxon leader, into Germany, 
there to raise all the forces he could find, and return 
with all speed: and in consideration of this service, 
had promised him all that part of the island, which 
reaches from the Humber lo Scotland, and whatever 



BRITISH HISTORY. 227 

Hengist and Horsus had possessed of Kent in the 
time of Vortegim. So that he, in obedience to his 
commands, had arrived with eight hundred ships filled 
with pagan soldiers, and had entered into covenant to 
obey the traitor as his sovereign ; who had also drawn 
to his assistance the Scots, Picts, Irish, and all others 
whom he knew to be enemies to his uncle. His whole 
army, taking pagans and Christians together, amounted 
to eighty thousand men; with the help of whom he 
met Arthur just after his landing at the port of 
Rutupi, and joining battle with him, made a very great 
slaughter of his men. For the same day fell Augusel, 
king of Albania, and Walgan, the king's nephew, with y 
innumerable others. Augusel was succeeded in his 
kingdom by Eventus, his brother Urian^s son, who 
afterwards performed many famous exploits in those 
wars. After they had at last, with much difficulty, got 
ashore, they paid back the slaughter, and put Modred 
and his army to flight. For, by long practice in war, they 
had learned an excellent way of ordering their forces ; 
which was so managed, that while their foot were em- 
ployed either in an assault or upon the defensive, the 
horse would come in at full speed obliquely, break 
throu&^h the enemy^s ranks, and so force them to flee^ 
Nevertheless, this perjured usurper got his forces h.^^^ 
together again, and the night following entered Win- ter. **" 
Chester. As soon as Queen Guanhumara heard this, Queen cuan- 
she immediately, despairing of success, fled from York tenn^Z' 
to the City of Legions, where she reserved to lead a 
chaste life among the nuns in the church of Julius 
the Martyr, and enter herself one of their order. 



q2 



228 GEOFFRKY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER II. 

MODRBD, AFTER BEING T^^ICE BESIEGED AND ROUTED, IS 
KILLED. ARTHUR, BEING WOUNDED, GIVES UP THE KING- 
DOM TO CONSTANTINE. 

Modred u BuT ArthuF, whoso anccer was now much more in- 
flamed, upon the loss of so many hundreds of his fellow 
soldiers, after he had buried his slain, went on the third 
day to the city, and there besieged the traitor, who, 
notwithstanding, was unwilling to desist from his enter- 
prise, but used all methods to encourage his adherents, 
and marching out with his troops prepared to fight 
his uncle. In the battle that followed hereupon, great 
numbers lost their lives on both sides; but at last 
Modred's army suffered most, so that he was forced to 
quit the field shamefully. From hence he made a pre- 
cipitate flight, and, without taking any care for the 
burial of his slain, marched in haste towards Cornwall. 
Arthur, being inwardly grieved that he should so often 
escape, forthwith pursued him into that country as far 
as the river Cambula, where the other was expecting his 
coming. And Modred, as he was the boldest of men, 
and always the quickest at making an attack, imme- 
diately placed his troops in order, resolving either to 
conquer or die, rather than continue his flight any 
longer. He had yet remaining with him sixty thousand 
men, out of whom he composed three bodies, which 
contained each of them six thousand six hundred and 
sixty-six men : but all the rest he joined in one body ; 
and having assigned to each of the other parties their 
leaders, he took the command of this upon himself. 
After he had made' this disposition of his forces, he 
endeavoured to animate them, and promised them the 
estates of their enemies if they came off with victory. 
Arthur, on the other side, also marshalled his army. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 229 

which he divided into nine square companies, with a right 
and left wing; and having appointed to each of them 
their commanders, exhorted them to make a total rout 
of those robbers and perjured villains, who^ being brought 
over into the island from foreign countries at the in- 
stance of the arch-traitor, were attempting to rob them 
of all their honours. He likewise told them that a 
mixed army composed of barbarous people of 'so many 
different countries, and who were all raw soldiers and 
inexperienced in war, would never be able to stand 
against such brave veteran troops as they were, pro- 
vided they did their duty. After this encouragement 
given by each general to his fellow soldiers, the battle 
on a sudden began with great fury; wherein it would 
be as well grievous as tedious to relate the slaughter, 
the cruel havoc, and the excess of fury that was to be 
seen on both sides. In this manner they spent a good 
part of the day, till Arthur at last made a push with 
his company, consisting of six thousand six hundred and 
sixty-six men, against that in which he knew Modred 
was; and having opened a way with their swords, they 
pierced quite through it, and made a grievous slaughter. 
For in this assault fell the wicked traitor himself, and and uued. 
many thousands with him. But notwithstanding the 
loss of him, the rest did not flee, but running together 
from all parts of the Held, maintained their ground 
with an undaunted courage. The fight now grew more 
furious than ever, and proved fatal to almost all the 
commanders and their forces. For on Modred's side 
fell Cheldric, Elasius, Egbrict, and Bunignus, Saxons; 
Gillapatric, Gillamor, Gistafel, and Gillarius, Irish ; also 
the Scots and Picts, with almost all their leaders: on 
Arthur's side, Olbrict, king of Norway ; Aschillius, 
king of Dacia ; Cador Limenic Cassibellaun, with many 
thousands of others, as well Britons as foreigners, that 
he had brought with him. And even the renowned 
King Arthur himself was mortally wounded ; and being 



230 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



carried thence to the isle of Avallon to be cured of hie 
Arthur girct wounds, ho gavo up the crown of Britain to his kinanfUM i 
to constan. Constantine, the Bon of Cador, duke of Cornwall, in the 
five hundred and forty-second year of our Lord's incar- 
nation. 



CHAPTER III. 



The 8«xoiui 
rtbel. 



CONSTANTINE MEETS WITH DISTURBANCES FROM THK SAXONS 

AND MODREd's sons. 

Upon Constantine's advancement to the throne, the 
Saxons, with the two sons of Modred, made insurrection 
against him, though without success; for after many 
battles they fled, one to London, the other to Winches- 
ter, and possessed themselves of those places. Then 
died Saint Daniel, the pious prelate of the church of 
Bangor ; and Theon, bishop of Gloucester, was elected 
archbishop of London. At the same time also died 
David, the pious archbishop of Legions, at the city of 
Menevia, in his own abbey; which he loved above all 
the other monasteries of his diocese, because Saint 
Patrick, who had prophetically foretold his birth, was 
the founder of it. For during his residence there 
among his friars, he was taken with a sudden illness, 
of which he died, and at the command of Malgo, king 
of the Venedotians, was buried in that church. He 
was succeeded in the metropolitan see by Kinocus, 
bishop of the church of Lampatem, who was thus 
promoted to a higher dignity. 



CHAPTER IV. 



CONSTANTINE, AFTER HAVING MURDERED THE S0N& OF 
MODRED, is HIMSELF KILLED BY CONAN. 

coMtantine BuT Coustantine pursued the Saxons, and reduced 
them. them under his yoke« He also took the two sons of 



BRITISH HISTORY. 231 

Modred ; and one of them, who had fled for sanctuary 
to the church of St. Amphibaius, in Winchester, he 
murdered before the altar. The other had hidden him- 
self in a convent of friars at London, but at last was 
found out by him, brought before the altar, and there 
put to death. Three years after this, he himself, by the conttantine 

, ta killed by 

vengeance of God pursuing him, was killed by Conan, conan. 

and buried close by Uther Pendragon within the stnio« 

ture of stones, which was set up with wonderful art not 

far from Salisbury, and called in the English tongue stoneheuge. 

Stanheng. 

CHAPTER V. 

AURELIUS CONAN REIGNS AFTER CONSTANTINE. 

After him succeeded Aurelius Conan, his nephew, Aureiius 
a youth of wonderful valour; who, as he gained the 
monarchy of the whole island, would have been worthy 
the crown of it, had he not delighted in civil war. He 
raised disturbances against his uncle, who ought to have 
reigned after Constantine, and cast him into prison ; and 
then killing his two sons, obtained the kingdom, but died 
in the second year of his reign. 



CHAPTER VI. 

WORTIPORIUS, BEING DECLARED KING, CONQUERS THE 

SAXONS. 

After Conan succeeded Wortiporius, against whom wortiporias. 
the Saxons made insurrection, and brought over their 
countrymen from Germany in a very great fleet. But 
he gave them battle and came off with victory, so that 
he obtained the monarchy of the whole kingdom, and 
governed the people carefully and peaceably four years. 



232 GEOFFRRY OF MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER VII. 

MALOO, KINO OF BRITAIN, AND A MOST ORACBPUL PBBSONy 

ADDICTS HIMSELF TO SODOMY. 

Maigo. After him succeeded Malgo, one of the handsomest 

men in Britain, a great scourge of tyrants, and a man 
of great strength, extraordinary munificence, and match- 
less valour, but addicted very much to the detestable 
vice of sodomy, by which he made himself abominable 
to God. He also possessed the whole island, to which, 
after a cruel war, he added the six provincial islands, 
VIZ. Ireland, Iceland, Gothland, the Orkneys, Norway, 
and Dacia. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

BRITAIN, IN THE FLAME OF A CIVIL WAR UNDER KINO 
CARETICUS, IS MISERABLY WASTED BY THE SAXONS AND 
AFRICANS. 

c«retictta. After Malgo succocded Careticus, a lover of civil war, 
and hateful to God and to the Britons. The Saxons, 
discovering his fickle disposition, went to Ireland for 
Gonnund, king of the Africans, who had arrived there 
with a very great fleet, and had subdued that country. 
From tlience, at their traitorous instigation, he sailed 
over into Britain, which the perfidious Saxons in one 
part, in another the Britons by their continual wars 
among themselves, were wholly laying waste. Entering 
therefore into alliance with the Saxons, he made war 
upon King Careticus, and after several battles fought, 
drove him from city to city, till at length he forced him 
to Cirecester, and there besieged him. Here Isembard, 
the nephew of Lewis, king of the Franks, came and made 
a league of amity with him, and out of respect to him 
renounced the Christian faith, on condition that he would 



BRITISH HISTORY. 233 

assist him to gain the kingdom of Gaul from his imcle ; 
by whom, he said, he was forcibly and unjustly expelled 
out of it. At last, after takmg and burning the city, he 
had another fight with Careticus, and made him flee 
beyond the Severn into Wales. He then made an utter The saxom 
devastation of the country, set fire to the adjacent cities, lay wasted 
and continued these outrages, till he had ahnost burnt ""^- 
up the whole surface of the island from the one sea to 
the other ; so that the tillage was everywhere destroyed, 
and a general destruction made of the husbandmen and 
clergy, with fire and sword. This terrible calamity 
caused the rest to flee whithersoever they had any hopes 
of safety. 

CHAPTER IX. 

THE AUTHOR UPBRAIDS THE BRITONS. 

" Why, foolish nation! oppressed with the weight of The author's 

« • t •» •1-1 -11*1 • • apostrophe 

your abominable wickedness, why did you, m your msa- to the people, 
tiable thirst after civil wars, so weaken yourself by do- 
mestic confusions, that whereas formerly you brought 
distant kingdoms under your yoke, now, like a good vine- 
yard degenerated and turned to bitterness, you cannot 
defend your country, nor wives, nor children, against your 
enemies ? Go on, go on in your civil dissensions, little 
understanding the saying in the Gospel, * Every kingdom 
divided against itself shall be brought to desolation, and 
a house divided against itself shall fall.^ Since then your 
kingdom was divided against itself; since the rage of 
civil discord, and the fumes of envy, have darkened your 
minds, since your pride would not suffer you to pay obe- 
dience to one king ; you see therefore your country 
made desolate by impious pagans, and your houses falling 
one upon another ; which shall be the cause of lasting 
sorrow to your posterity. For the barbarous lionesses 
shall see their whelps enjoying the towns, cities, and 
other possessions of your children ; from which they 



231 GlfiOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

shall be miserably expelled, and hardly if ever recover 
their former flomiahing state. 



CHAPTER X. 

LOEGRIA IS AGAIN INHABITED BY THE 8AX0NS. THE BRI- 
TONS, WITH THEIR BISHOPS, RETIRE INTO CORNWAUL AND 
WALES. 



But to retmm to the history; when the itihrnnAn 
tyrant, with many thousands of his Africans, had made 
a devastation almost over the whole island, he jdelded 
up the greater part of it, called Loegria, to the Saxons, 
whose villany had been the occasion of his arrival. 
TbeBritmui Therefore the remainder of the Britons retired into 
waiM and the wcstem parts of the kingdom, that is, Cornwall and 
Wales; from whence they continually made frequent 
and fierce irruptions upon the enemy. The three arch- 
bishops, viz. the archbishop of Legions, Theon of 
London, and Thadioceus of York, when they beheld all 
the churches in their jurisdiction lying level with the 
ground, fled with all the clergy that remained after so 
great a destruction, to the coverts of the woods in 
Wales, carrying with them the reliques of the saints, 
for fear the sacred bones of so many holy men of old 
might be destroyed by the barbarians, if they should 
leave them in that imminent danger, and themselves 
instantly suffer martyrdom. Many more went over in 
a great fleet into Armorican Britain ; so that the whole 
church of the two provinces, Loegria and Northumber- 
land, had its convents destroyed. But these things I 
shall relate elsewhere, when I translate the book con- 
cerning their banishment. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 235 



CHAPTER XI. 

THE BRITONS LOSE THEIR KINGDOM. 

For a long time after this the Britons were dispos- 
sessed of the crown of the kingdom, and the monarchy 
of the island, and made no endeavours to recover their 
ancient dignity : but even that part of the country which state of an- 
yet remained to them, being subject not to one king, both Briton» 
but three tyrants, was often wasted by civil wars. But 
neither did the Saxons yet obtain the crown, but were 
also subject to three kings, who harassed sometimes 
one another, sometimes the Britons. 



CHAPTER XIL 

AUGUSTINE, BEING SENT BY POPE GREGORY INTO BRITAIN, 
PREACHES THE GOSPEL TO THE ANGLES. 

In the meantime Augustine was sent by Pope Saint st.Auga8tinc 
Gregory into Britain, to preach the word of God to preach the 
the Angles, who, being blinded with pagan supersti- Engknd. 
tion, had entirely extinguished Christianity in that part 
of the island which they possessed. But among the 
Britons, the Christian faith still flourished, and never 
failed among them from the time of Pope Eleutherius, 
when it was first planted here. But when Augustine 
came, he found in their province seven bishoprics and 
an archbishopric, all filled with most devout prelates, and 
a great number of abbeys ; by which the flock of Christ 
was still kept in good order. Among the rest, there 
was in the city of Bangor a most noble church, in which 
it is reported there was so great a number of monks, 
that when the monastery was divided into seven parts^ 
having each their priors over them, not one of them had 
less than three hundred monks, who all lived by the 



236 



GFX)FFREY OF MONMOUTH. 



Dfnoot, ab. 
botof Ban- 
for. 



labour of their own hands. The name of their abbot 
was Dinoot, a inan admirably skilled in the liberal arts ; 
who, when Augustine required the subjection of the 
British bishops, and would have persuaded them to 
undertake the work of the Gospel with him among the 
Angles, answered him with several arguments, that they 
owed no subjection to him, neither would they preach 
to their enemies ; since they had their own archbishop, 
and because the Saxon nation persisted in depriving 
them of their country. For this reason they esteemed 
them their mortal enemies, reckoned their faith and re- 
ligion as nothing, and would no more communicate with 
the Angles than with dogs. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



Edelflrld 
slays the 
British 
monks. 



EDELFRID KILLS A GREAT NUMBER OF THE BRITISH MONKS, 
BUT IS AT LAST ROUTED BY THE BRITONS. 

Therefore Hedelbert, king of Kent, when he saw 
that the Britons disdained subjection to Augustine, and 
despised his preaching, was highly provoked, and stirred 
up Edelfrid, king of the Northumbrians, and the other 
petty kings of the Saxons, to raise a great army, and 
march to the city of Bangor, to destroy the Abbot 
Dinoot, and the rest of the clergy who held them in 
contempt. At his instigation, therefore, they assem- 
bled a prodigious army, and in their march to the pro- 
vince of the Britons, came to Legecester, where Brocinail, 
consul of the city, was awaiting their coming. To the 
same city were come innumerable monks and hermits 
from several provinces of the Britons, but especially 
from the city of Bangor, to pray for the safety of their 
people. Whereupon Edelfrid, king of the Northum- 
brians, collecting all his forces, joined battle with Broci- 
nail, who, having a less army to withstand him, at last 
quitted the city and fled, though not without having 




BRITISH HISTORY. 237 

made a great slaughter of the enemy. But Edelfrid, 
when he had taken the city, and understood upon what 
occasion the monks were come thither, commanded his 
men to turn their arms first against them ; and so two 
hundred of them were honoured with the crown of 
martyrdom, and admitted into the kingdom of heaven 
that same day. From thence this Saxon tyrant pro- 
ceeded on his march to Bangor; but upon the news 
of his outrageous madness, the leaders of the Britons, 
viz. Blederic, duke of Cornwall, Margadud, king of the 
Demetians, and Caduan, of the Venedotians, came from 
all parts to meet him, and joining battle with him, He is defeat, 
wounded him, and forced him to flee; and killed of his Britons, 
army to the number of ten thousand and sixty-six men. 
On the Britons' side fell Blederic, duke of Cornwall, 
who was their commander in those wars. 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH'S 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



BOOK XII. 



CHAPTER I. 

CADUAN ACQUIRES BY TREATY ALL BRITAIN ON THIS SIDE 
THE HUMBER, AND EDELFRID THE REST. 

CMiiiftn,king After this all the princes of the Britons met to- 
tona, and' gether at the city of Legecester, and consented to make 
diTide the Caduan their king, that under his command they might 
tween them. puTSue Edclfrid bcyond the Humber. Accordingly, as 
soon as he was crowned, they flocked together from all 
parts, and passed the Humber ; of which when Edelfrid 
received intelligence, he entered into a confederacy with 
all the Saxon kings, and went to meet Caduan. At 
last, as they were forming their troops for a battle, their 
friends came, and made peace between them on these 
terms ; that Caduan should enjoy that part of Britain 
which lies on this side the Humber, and Edelfrid that 
which is beyond it. As soon as they had confirmed this 
agreement with an oath made to their hostages, there 
commenced such a friendship between them, that they 
had all things common. In the meantime it happened, 
that Edelfrid banished his own wife and married 
another, and bore so great a hatred to her that was 
banished, that he would not sufler her to live in the 
kingdom of Northumberland. Whereupon she, being 



BRITISH HISTORY. 239 

with child, went to King Caduan, that by his medi- 
ation she might be restored to her husband. But when 
Edelfrid could by no means be brought to consent to it, 
she continued to live with Caduan, till she was deli- 
vered of the son which she had conceived. A short 
time after her delivery, Caduan also had a son bom to 
him by the queen, his wife. Then were the two boys 
brought up together in a manner suitable to their royal 
birth, one of which was called Cadwallo, the other 
Edwin. When they were nearly arrived at men's estate, 
their parents sent them to Salomon, king of the Armo- 
rican Britons, that in his court they might learn the 
discipline of war, and other princely qualifications. This 
prince, therefore, received them graciously, and ad- 
mitted them to an intimacy with him ; so that there was 
none of their age in the whole court, that had a free 
access, or more familiarly discoursed with the king than 
they. At last he himself was an eye-witness of their 
exploits against the enemy, in which they very much 
signalized their valour. 



CHAPTER II. 

CADWALLO BREAKS THE COVENANT HE HAD MADE 

WITH EDWIN. 

In process of time, when their parents were dead, 
they returned to Britain, where they took upon them 
the government of the kingdom, and began to form 
the same friendship as their fathers. Two years after Edwin and 
this, Ed win asked leave of Cadw allo to w ear a_crown^^ 
and to celebrate the same solemnities, as had been used 
of Old in Northumberland. And when they had begun 
a treaty upon this subject by the river Duglas, that the 
matter might be adjusted according to the advice of 
their wise counsellors; it happened that Cadwallo was 
lying on the other side of the river in the lap of a 



240 OBOFFRET OF MONMOUTH. 

certain nephew of his, whose name was Brian. While 
ambassadors were negociating between them, Brian wept, 
and shed tears so plentifully, that the king'^s face and 
beard were wet with them. The king, imagining that 
it rained, lifted up his face, and seeing the young man 
in tears, asked him the occasion of such sudden grief. 
'^ Good reason,*' said he, '' have I to weep continually, 
as well as the whole British nation, which has groaned 
under the oppression of barbarians ever since the time 
of Malgo, and has not yet got a prince, to restore it to 
its ancient flourishing state. And even the little honour 
that it had left, is lessened by your indulgence ; since 
the Saxons, who are only strangers, and always traitors 
to our country, must now be permitted to wear the 
same crown as you do. For when once they shall attain 
to regal dignity, it will be a great addition to their glory 
in the country from whence they came ; and they will 
the sooner invite over their countrymen, for the utter 
extirpation of our race. For they have been always 
accustomed to treacher}% and never to keep faith with 
any ; which I think should be a reason for our keeping 
them under, and not for exalting them. When King 
Vortegim first retained them in his service, they made 
a show of living peaceably, and fighting for our country, 
till they had an opportunity of practising their wicked- 
ness ; and then they returned evil for good, betrayed 
him, and made a cruel massacre of the people of the 
kingdom. Afterwards they betrayed Aurelius Ambro- 
sius, to whom, even after the most tremendous oaths of 
fidelity, at a banquet with him they gave a draught of 
poison. They also betrayed Arthur, when, setting aside 
the covenant by which they were bound, they joined with 
his nephew Modred, and fought against him. Lastly, 
they broke faith with King Careticus, and brought upon 
him Gormund, king of the Africans, by whose disturbances 
our people were robbed of their country, and the king 
disgracefully driven out."" 



GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 241 



CHAPTER III. 

A QUARREL BETWEEN CADWALLO AND EDWIN. 

At the mention of these thin&:s, Cadwallo repented of Edwin and 

, Cadwallo 

entering into this treaty, and sent word to Edwin, that quarrel. 
he could by no means induce his counsellors to consent 
to his petition. For they alleged that it was contrary 
to law and the ancient establishment, that an island, 
which has always had no more than one crown, should 
be now under subjection to two crowned heads. This 
message incensed Edwin, and made him break off the 
conference, and retire into Northumberland, saying, he 
would be crowned without Cadwallo 's leave. When 
Cadwallo was told this, he declared to him by his am- 
bassadors, that he would cut off his crowned head, if 
he presumed to wear a crown within the kingdom of 
Britain. 

CHAPTER IV. 

CADWALLO IS VANQUISHED BY EDWIN AND DRIVEN OUT 

OF THE KINGDOM. 

This proved the occasion of a war between them, in cad;vaiiois 
which, after several engagements between their men, 
they at last met together themselves beyond the Humber, 
and had a battle, wherein Cadwallo lost many thousands 
of his followers, and was put to flight. From hence he 
marched with precipitation through Albania, and went 
over to Ireland. But Edwin, after this victory, led his 
army through the provinces of the Britons, and burning 
the cities before him, grievously afflicted the citizens and 
country people. During this exercise of his cruelty, 
Cadwallo never ceased endeavouring to return back to 
his country in a fleet, but without success ; because to 

R 



242 OEOFFRET OF MONMOUTH. 

whatever port he steered, Edwin met him with his 
forces, and hindered his landing. For there was come to 
him from S{)ain a very skilful soothsayer named Pellitus, 
who, hy the flight of birds, and the courses of the stars, 
foretold all the disasters that would happen. By these 
means Edwin, getting knowledge of Cadwallo's return, 
prepared to meet him, and shattered his ships so that he 
drowned his men and beat him ofl^ from aU his ports. 
Cadwallo, not knowing what course to take, was ahnost 
in despair of ever returning. At last it came into his 
head to go to Salomon, king of the Armorican Britons, 
and desire his assistance and advice, to enable him to 
return to his kingdom. And so, as he was steering to- 
wards Armorica, a strong tempest rose on a sudden, 
which dispersed the ships of his companions, and in a 
short time left no two of them together. The pilot 
of the king's ship was seized immediately with so great 
a fear, that quitting the stem, he left the vessel to the 
dis{)osal of fortune; so that all that night it was tossed 
up and down in great danger by the raging waves. The 
next morning they arrived at a certain island called 
Gamareia, where \Wth great diflSculty they got ashore. 
Cadwallo was forthwith seized with such grief for the 
loss of his companions, that for three days and nights 
together he refused to eat, but lay sick upon his bed. 
The fourth day he was taken vnth a very great longing 
for some venison, and causing Brian to be called, made 
him acquainted with it. Whereupon Brian took his 
bow and quiver, and went through the island, that if bib 
could light on any wild beast, he might make booty of it. 
And when he had walked over the whole island, without 
finding what he was in quest of, he was extremely con- 
cerned that he could not gratify his master's de»re; and 
was afraid his sickness would prove mortal, if his longing 
were not satisfied. He therefore fell upcm a new device, 
and cut a piece of flesh out of his own thigh, which he 
roasted upon a spit, and carried to the king for venison. 



BRITTSTH HISTORY. 243 

The king, thinking it to be real venison, began to eat 
of it to his great refreshment, admiring the sweetness 
of it, which he fancied exceeded any flesh he ever had 
tasted before. At last, when he had fully satisfied his 
appetite, he became more cheerful, and in three days 
was perfectly well again. Then the vrind standing fair, 
he got ready his ship, and hoisting sails they pursued 
their voyage, and arrived at the city Kidaleta. Fron^ Goes to the 
thence they went to King Salomon, by whom they were Salomon. 
received kindly and with all suitable respect: and as 
soon as he had learned the occasion of their coming, 
he made them a promise of assistance, and spoke to 
them as follows, 

CHAPTER V. 

THE SPEECH OP SALOMON, KING OF ARMORICA, TO 

CADWALLO. 

*' It is a grief to us, noble youths, that the country of saiomon»8 
yoiu* ancestors is oppressed by a barbarous nation, and 
that you are ignominiously driven out of it. But since 
other men are able to defend their kingdoms, it is a 
wonder your people should lose so fruitful an island, and 
not be able to withstand the nation of the Angles, whom 
our countrymen hold in contempt. While the people of 
this country lived together with yours in Britain, they 
bore sway over all the provincial kingdoms, and never 
could be subdued by any nation but the Romans. Neither 
did the Romans do this by their own power, as I have been 
lately informed, but by a dissension among the nobility 
of the island. And even the Romans, though they held 
it under their subjection for a time, yet upon the loss 
and slaughter of their rulers, were driven out with dis- 
grace. But after the Britons came into this province 
under the conduct of Maximian and Conan, those that 
remained never had the happiness afterwards of holding 
an uninterrupted possession of the crown. For though 

r2 



244 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

many of their princes maintained the ancient dignity of 
their ancestors; yet their weak heirs that succeeded, 
though more in number, entirely lost it, upon the inva- 
sion of their enemies. Therefore I am grieved for the 
weakness of your people, since we are of the same race 
with you, and the name Britons is common to you, and 
to the nation that bravely defends their country, which 
you sec at war with all its neighbours.'^ 



CHAPTER VI. 



rADWALL0*S ANSWER TO SALOMON. 



answer. 



c«dwmiio*f When he had concluded his speech, Cadwallo, who 
was a little put to the blush, answered him after this 
manner : ^^ Royal Sir, whose descent is from a race of 
kings, I give you many thanks for your promise of 
assisting me to recover my kingdom. But what you 
say is a wonder, that my people have not maintained 
the dignity of their ancestors, since the time that the 
Britons came to these provinces, I am far from thinking 
to be such. For the noblest men of the whole kingdom 
followed those leaders, and there remained only the 
baser sort to enjoy their honours ; who being raised to 
a high quality, on a sudden were puffed up above their 
station; and growing wanton with riches, gave them« 
selves up to commit such fornication, as is not so much 
as named among the Gentiles; and (as Gildas the his- 
torian testifies) were not only guilty of this vice, but of 
all the enormities that are incident to human nature. 
And what chiefly prevailed, to the entire overthrow 
of all goodness, was the hatred of truth with its as- 
sertors, the love of a lie with the inventors of it, 
the embracing of evil for good, the veneration of 
wickedness for grace, the receiving of Satan for an 
angel of light. Kings were anointed, not for the sake 
of God, but such as were more cruel than the rest; 



BRITISH HISTORY. 245 

and were soon after murdered by their anointers, with- 
out examination, having chosen others yet more cruel in 
their room. But if any of them showed any mildness, 
or seemed a favourer of truth, against him, as the sub- 
verter of Britain, were all their malice and their weapons 
bent. In short, things pleasing to God or displeasing, 
with them had the same weight, even if the worse were 
not the weightier. Therefore were all affairs managed 
contrary to public safety, as if the true physician of all 
had left them destitute of cure. And thus was every 
thing done without discretion, and that not only by 
secular men, but by the Lord s flock, and its pastors. 
Therefore it is not to be wondered, that such a de- 
generate race, so odious to God for their vices, lost 
a, country which they had so heinously corrupted. For 
God was willing to execute his vengeance upon them, by 
suffering a foreign people to come upon them, and drive 
them out of their possessions. Notwithstanding it would 
be a worthy act, if God would permit it, to restore our 
subjects to their ancient dignity, to prevent the reproach 
that may be thrown upon our race, that we were weak 
rulers, who did not exert ourselves in our own defence. 
And I do the more freely ask your assistance, as you are 
of the same blood with us. For the great Malgo, who 
was the fourth king of Britain after Arthur, had two 
sons, named Ennianus and Runo. Ennianus begot Belin; 
Belin, Jago; Jago, Caduan, who was my father. Runo, 
who, after his brother s death, was driven out by the 
Saxons, came to this province and bestowed his daughter 
on Duke Hoel, the son of that great Hoel who shared 
with Arthur in his conquests. Of her was born Alan; 
of Alan, Hoel your father, who while he lived was a 
terror to all Gaul," 



246 CROFFKKY OK MONMOUTH. 



CHAPTER Vll. 



URIAN KILI^ EDW1n'*8 MAUICIAN. 



Ed«rin*« ma- In tlic iiicantiinc, while he was spendmg the winter 
•uin" ' with Salomon, they entered into a resolution, that Brian 
should pass over into Britain, and take some method to 
kill Edwin^s magician, lost he might by his usual art 
inform him of Cadwallo's coming. And when with this 
design he had arrived at Hamo^s Port, he took upon 
himself the habit of a poor man, and made himself a 
staff of iron sharp at the end, with which he might kill 
the magician, if he should happen to meet with hiuL 
From thence he went to York, where Edwin then re- 
sided ; and having entered that city joined himself to 
the poor people, that waited for alms before the king's 
gate. But as he was going to and fro, it happened that 
his sister came out of the hall, with a basin in her hand, 
to fetch watqr for the queen. She had been taken by 
Edwin at the city of Worcester, when after Cadwallo's 
flight he was acting his hostilities upon the provinces of 
the Britons. As she was therefore passing by Brian, 
he immediately knew her, and breaking forth into tears, 
called to her with a low voice ; at which the damsel 
turning her face, was in doubt at first who it could be, 
but upon a nearer approach discovered it to be her bro- 
ther, and was near falling into a swoon, for fear that he 
might by some unlucky accident be known and taken by 
the enemy. She therefore refrained from saluting him, 
or entering into familiar discourse with him, but told 
him, as if she was talking upon some other subject, the 
state of the court, and showed him the magician, that 
he was inquiring for, who was at that very time walking 
among the poor people, while the alms were being dis- 
tributed among them. Brian, as soon as he had taken 
knowledge of the man, ordered his sister to steal out 



BRITISH HISTORY. 247 

privately from her apartment the night following, and 
come to him near an old church without the city, where 
he would conceal himself in expectation of her. Then 
dismissing her, he thrust himself in among the crowd of 
poor people, in that part where Pellitus was placing 
them. And the same moment he got access to him, he 
lifted up his staff, and at once gave him a stab under the 
breast which killed him. This done, he threw away his 
staff, and passed among the rest undistinguished and 
unsuspected by any of the bystanders, and by good pro- 
vidence got to the place of concealment which he had 
appointed. His sister, when night came on, endeavoured 
all she could to get out, but was not able ; because Ed- 
win, being terrified at the killing of Pellitus, had set a 
strict watch about the court, who, making a narrow 
search, refused to let her go out. When Brian found 
this, he retired from that place and went to Exeter, 
where he called together the Britons, and told them 
what he had done. Afterwards having dispatched away 
messengers to Cadwallo, he fortified that city, and sent 
word to all the British nobility, that they should bravely 
defend their cities and towns, and joyfully expect Cad- 
wallo's coming to their relief in a short time, with aux- 
iliary forces from Salomon. Upon the spreading of this 
news over the whole island, Peanda, king of the Mer- Peanda be- 
cians, with a very great army of Saxons, came to Exeter, fiTxeter."* 
and besieged Brian. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

CADWALLO TAKES PEANDA, AND ROUTS HIS ARMY. 

In the meantime Cadwallo arrived with ten thousand cadwauo 
men, whom King Salomon had delivered to him; andsieg*! 
with them he marched straight to the siege against King 
Peanda. But, as he was going, he divided his forces 
into four parts, and then made no delay to advance and 



248 r.KOFKRKY OF MONMOUTH. 

join battle \%ith the enemy, wherein Peanda was forUH 
with taken, and his army routed. For, finding no other 
way for his own safety, he surrendered himself to Cad* 
wallo, and gave hostages, with a promise that he would 
assist him against the Saxons. Cadwallo, after this suc- 
cess against him, summoned together his nobility, that 
had been a long time in a decaying state, and marched 
to Northumberland against Edwin, and made continual 
devastations in that country. AVhen Edwin was informed 
of it, he assembled all the petty kings of the Angles, 
and, meeting the Britons in a field called Hevefeld, pre- 
sently gave them battle, but was killed, and ahnost all 
the people with him, together with Offirid, his son, and 
Godbold, king of the Orkneys, who had come to their 
assistance. 

CHAPTER IX. 

CADWALLO KILLS OSRIC AND AD AN IN FIGHT. 

Having thus obtained the victory, Cadwallo marched 
through the provinces of the Angles, and conunitted 
such outrages upon the Saxons, that he neither spared 
age nor sex ; for his resolution being to extirpate the 
whole race out of Britain, all that he found he put to 

osricu slain, extrcmc tortures. After this he had a battle with Osric, 
Edwin's successor, and killed him together with his two 
nephews, who ought to have reigned after him. He 

Adan.kingof also killed Adan, king of the Scots, who came to their 

the Scots, is . . 

slain. assistance. 

CHAPTER X. 

OSWALD ROUTS PEANDA IN FIGHT, BUT IS KILLED BY 
CADWALLO COMING IN UPON HIM. 

Oswald de- Their deaths made room for Oswald to succeed to the 

** • kingdom of Northumberland ; but Cadwallo drove him, 

with the rest that had given him disturbance, to the very 



BRITISH HISl'ORY. 249 

wall, which the Emperor Severus had formerly built 
between Britain and Scotland. Afterwards he sent Pe- 
anda, king of the Mercians, and the greatest part of his 
army, to the same place, to give him battle. But Oswald, 
as he was besieged one night by Peanda, in the place 
called Hevefeld, that is, the Heavenly Field, set up there 
our Lord's cross, and commanded his men to speak with 
a very loud voice these words : " Let us all kneel down, 
and pray the Almighty, living and true God, to defend 
us from the proud army of the king of Britain, and his 
wicked leader Peanda, For he knows how justly we 
wage this war for the safety of our people.''^ Thtfjr all 
therefore did as he commanded them, and advanced at 
break of day against the enemy, and by their faith 
gained the victory. Cadwallo, upon hearing this news, 
being inflamed with rage, assembled his army, and went oswaid !■ 
in pursuit of the holy King Oswald ; and in a battle 
which he had with him at a place called Bume, Peanda 
broke in upon him and killed him. 



CHAPTER XI. 

OSWIN SUBMITS TO CADWALLO. PEANDA DESIRES LEAVE 
OF CADWALLO TO MAKE WAR AGAINST HIM. 

Oswald, with many thousands of his men, being killed, oswinsuc 
his brother Oswin succeeded him in the kingdom of waid. 
Northumberland, and by making large presents of gold 
and silver to Cadwallo, who was now possessed of the 
government of all Britain, made his peace and submis- 
sion to him. Upon this Alfrid, his brother, and Oidwald, 
his brother's son, began an insurrection ; but, not being 
able to hold out against him, they fled to Peanda, king 
of the Mercians, desiring him to assemble his army and 
pass the Humber with them, that he might deprive 
Oswin of his kingdom. But Peanda, fearing to break; 
the peace, which Cadwallo had settled through the king- 



S50 UEOPPREY OF MONMOUTH. 

floni of Rritain, deferred beginning any disturbanee 
without his leave, till he could some way ^rork him op, 
cither to make war himself upon Oswin, or allow him the 
liberty of doing it. At a certain Pentecost therefore, 
when Cadwallo was celebrating that festival at London, 
and for the greater solemnity wore the crown of Britain, 
all the kings of the Angles, excepting only Oswin, being 
[)rosent, as also all the dukes of the Britons ; Peanda 
went to the king, and inquired of him the reason, why 
Oswin alone was wanting, when all the princes of the 
Saxons were present. Cadwallo answered, that his sick- 
ness was the cause of it ; to which the other replied, 
that he had sent over to Germany for more Saxons, to 
revenge the death of his brother Oswald upon them 
both. He told him further, that he had broken the 
peace of the kingdom, as being the sole author of the 
war and dissension among them ; since Edelfrid, king of 
Northumberland, and Oidwald, his brother's son, had been 
by him harassed with a war, and driven out of their own 
country. He also desired leave, either to kill him, or 
banish hhn the kingdom. 



CHAPTER XII. 

CADWALLO IS ADVISED TO SUFFER PEANDA TO MAKE AX 
INSURRECTION AGAINST OSWIN. 

Margadud»f This matter caused the kine: to enter upon much 

advice to o * 

cadwauo. deliberation, and hold a private consultation with his 
intimate friends, what course to take. Among the rest 
that offered their proposals, Margadud, king of the 
Demetians, spoke as follows: — "Royal Sir, since you 
have proposed to expel the race of the Angles from 
the coasts of Britain, why do you alter your resolution, 
and suffer them to continue in peace among us! At 
least you should permit them to fall out among them- 
selves, and let our country owe its deliverance to their 



BRITISH HISTORY. 251 

own civil broils. No faith is to be kept with one that 
is treacherous, and is continually laying snares for him 
to whom he owes fidelity. Such have the Saxons always 
been to our nation, from the very first time of their 
coining among us. What faith ought we to keep with 
them ? Let Peanda immediately have leave to go 
against Oswin, that by this civil dissension and destruc- 
tion of one another, our island may get rid of them."'' 



CHAPTER XIII. 

PEANDA IS KILLED BY^OSWIN. CADWALLO DIES. 

By these and other words to the same eflect, Cad- 
wallo was prevailed upon to grant the permission de- 
sired. And Peanda, having assembled a vast army, Peanda's in. 
went to the Humber, and laying waste that country, a^i!St**° 
began a fierce war upon the king. Oswin was at last 
reduced to such extremity, that he was forced to promise 
him innumerable royal ornaments, and other presents 
more than one would believe, if he would desist from 
ruining his country, and return home without com- 
mitting any more hostilities. But when the other could 
by no entreaties be prevailed upon to do it, the king, 
in hopes of divine assistance, though he had a less 
army, however, gave him battle near the River Wiimed, 
and having killed Peanda and thirty other commanders, 
gained the victory. Peanda's son Wulfred, by a grant 
from Cadwallo, succeeded to the kingdom, and joining 
with Eba and Edbert, two leaders of the Mercians, re- 
belled against Oswin ; but at last, by Cadwallo'^s com- 
mand, made peace with him. At length, after forty-p 
eight years were expired, that most noble and potent 
king of the Britons, Cadwallo, being grown infirm vdth 
age and sickness, departed this life upon the fifteenth 
of the calends of December. The Britons embalmed 
his body, and placed it with wonderful art in a brazen 



252 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

statue, which was cast according to the measure of his 
stature. This statue they set up with complete armour, 
VL\ion an admirable beautiful brazen horse, over the 
western gate of London, for a monument of the above- 
mentioned victor)', and for a terror to the Saxons. They 
also built under it a church in honour of St. Martin, in 
which divine ceremonies are celebrated for him and the 
others who departed in the faith. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

CADWALLADER SUCCEEDS CADWALLO. 

cadwmiuder He was succecdcd in the kingdom by Cadwallader, 
his son, whom Bede calls the youth Elidualda. At first 
he maintained the government with peace and honow ; 
but after twelve years* enjoyment of the crown, he fell 
into a fit of sickness, and a civil war broke out among 
the Britons. His mother was Peanda's sister, by the 
same father but a different mother, descended from the 
noble race of the Genuisseans. For Cadwallo, after his 
reconciliation with her brother, made her the partner 
of his bed, and had Cadwallader by her. 



CHAPTER XV. 

THE BRITONS ARE COMPELLED, BY PESTILENCE AND FAMINE, 
TO LEAVE BRITAIN. CADWALLADEr's LAMENTATION. 

The Britoni DuRiNG his sickness, the Britons, (as we said before.) 

abandon , _ ^ 

Britain. quarrelling among themselves, made a wicked destruc- 
tion of a rich country ; and this again was attended 
with another misfortune. For this besotted people was 
punished with a grievous and memorable famine ; so that 
every province was destitute of all sustenance, except 
what could be taken in hunting. After the famine 
followed a terrible pestilence, which in a short time 



BRITISH HISTORY. 253 

destroyed such multitudes of people, that the living were 
not sufficient to bury the dead. Those of them that 
remained, flying their country in whole troops together, 
went to the countries beyond the sea, and while they 
were under sail, they with a mournful howling voice sung, 
'^ Thou hast given us, O God, like sheep appointed for 
meat, and hast scattered us among the heathen." Also 
Cadwallader himself, in his voyage with his miserable 
fleet to Armorica, made this addition to the lamentation, 
" Woe to us, sinners, for our grievous impieties, where- 
with we have not ceased to provoke God, while we had 
space for repentance. Therefore the revenge of his 
power lies heavy upon us, and drives us out of our native 
soil, which neither the Romans of old, nor the Scots or 
Picts afterwards, nor yet the treacherous Saxons with 
all their craft, were able to do. But in vain have we 
recovered our country so often from them ; since it was 
not the will of God that we should perpetually hold the 
government of it. He who is the true Judge, when he 
saw we were by no means to be reclaimed from our 
wickedness, and that no human power could expel our 
race, was willing to chastise our folly himself ; and has 
turned his anger against us, by which we are driven out 
in crowds from our native country. Return, therefore, 
ye Romans ; return, Scots and Picts ; return, Ambrons 
and Saxons : behold, Britain lies open to you, being by 
the wrath of God made desolate, which you were never 
able to do. It is not your valour that expels us ; but 
the power of the supreme King, whom we have never 
ceased to provoke." 

CHAPTER XVI, 

CADWALLADER WITH HIS PEOPLE GOES TO ALAN. THE 

SAXONS SEIZE ALL BRITAIN. 

With these dolorous complaints he arrived at the The saxons 

. 1 • 11*11 occupy all 

Armoncan coast, and went with his whole company to Britain. 



254 GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH. 

King Alan, the nephew of Salomon, by whom he wais 
honourably received. So that Britain, being now des- 
titute of its ancient inhabitants, excepting a few in 
Wales that escaped the general mortality, became a 
frightful place even to the Britons themselves for eleven 
years after. Neither was it at the same time more 
favourable to the Saxons, who died in it without inter- 
mission. Notwithstanding the remainder of them, after 
this raging plague was ceased, according to their old 
custom sent word over to their countrymen, that the 
island of Britain was now freed of its native inhabitants, 
and lay open to them, if they would come over and inn 
habit it. As soon as they had received this informa- 
tion, that odious people, gathering together an innume- 
rable multitude of men and women, arrived in North- 
umberland, and inhabited the provinces that lay desolate 
from Albania to Cornwall. For there was now nobody 
to hinder them, excepting the poor remains of the 
Britons, who continued together in the thickets of the 
woods in Wales. From that time the power of the 
Britons ceased in the island, and the Angles began their 
reign. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

CADWALLADER IS BY THE VOICE OF AN ANGEL DETERRED 

FROM RETURNING TO BRITAIN. 

cadwaiiader After some time, whcu the people had recovered 

is deterred by r>t t ni i» •i«»i t» t • i» 

anangei from Strength, Cftdwallader, beinff mindful of his kinraom, 

returning to . . . 

Britain. which was uow frco from the contagion of the pestilence, 
desired assistance of Alan towards the recovery of his 
dominions. The king granted his request; but as he 
was getting ready a fleet, he was commanded by the 
loud voice of an angel to desist from his enterprise. 
For God was not willing that the Britons should reign 
any longer in the island, before the time came of which 
Merlin prophetically foretold Arthur. It also com- 



BRITISH HISTORY. 255 

manded him to go to Rome to Pope Sergius, where, after 
doing penance, he should be enrolled among the saints. 
It told him withal, that the Britons, by the merit of 
their faith, should again recover the island, when the 
time decreed for it was come. But this would not be 
accomplished before they should be possessed of his 
reliques, and transport them from Rome into Britain, 
At the same time also the reliques of the other saints 
should be found, which had been hidden on account of 
the invasion of pagans; and then at last would they 
recover their lost kingdom. When the holy prince had 
received the heavenly message, he went straight to King 
Alan, and gave him an account of what had been told 
him^ 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

CADWALLADER GOES TO ROME AND DIES. 

Then Alan had recourse to several books, as the pro- cadwaiiader 
phecies of the eagle that prophesied at Shaftesbury, and **** 
the verses of Sibyl and Merlin ; and made diligent search 
in them, to see whether the revelation made to Cad- 
waiiader agreed with those written oracles. And when 
he could find nothing contradictory to it, he admonished 
Cadwaiiader to submit to the divine dispensation^ and 
laying aside the thoughts of Britain, perform what the 
angelical voice had commanded him. But he urged him 
to send his son Ivor and his nephew Ini over into the 
island, to govern the remainder of the Britons ; lest a 
nation, descended of so ancient a race, should lose their 
liberty by the incursions of barbarians. Then Cadwaiia- 
der, renouncing worldly cares for the sake of God and 
his everlasting kingdom, went to Rome, and was con- 
firmed by Pope Sergius : and being seized with a sudden 
illness, was, upon the twelfth of the calends of May, in 
the six hundred and eighty-ninth year of our Lord's 



S.'*^ GEX>rFBi:Y OF MoxMorm. 

incmmation. freed from the cormptioD of the flesh, and 
admitted into the glories of the heavenly kingdom. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THE TWO BRITOXS, IVOR AXD IXI, IX VAIX ATTACK THE 
XATIOX OP THE AXGLBB. ATHELSTTAN THE FIRST KINO 
OP THE AXGLBB. 

Atbeittaa As sooH 88 IvoT and In! had got together their ships, 
the aSI^ they, with all the forces they could raise, arrived in the 
island, and for forty-nine years together fiercely attacked 
the nation of the Angles, but to little purpose. For the 
above-mentioned mortality and famine, together with 
the inveterate spirit of faction that was among them, 
had made tins proud people so much degenerate, that 
they were not able to gain any advantage of the enemy. 
And being now also overrun with barbarism, they were 
no longer called Britons, but Gualenses, Welshmen ; a 
word derived either from Gualo their leader, or Guales 
their queen, or from their barbarism. But the Saxons 
managed ai&irs with more prudence, maintained peace 
and concord among themselves, tiUed their grounds, 
rebuilt their cities and towns, and so thro^^ing off the 
dominion of the Britons, bore sway over all Loegria, 
under their leader Attielstan, who first wore a crown 
amongst them. But the Welshmen, being very much 
degenerated from the nobility of the Britons, never afler^^ 
recovered the monarchy of the island ; on the contrary, 
by quarrels among themselves, and wars with the Saxons, 
their country was a perpetual scene of misery and 
slaughter. 



BRITISH HISTORY. 



267 



CHAPTER XX. 

GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTh's CONCLUSION. 

But as for the kings that have succeeded among them 
in Wales, since that time, I leave the history of them to 
Karadoc of Lancarvan, my contemporary ; as I do also 
the kings of the Saxons to William of Malmesbury, and 
Henry of Huntington. But I advise them to be silent 
concerning the kings of the Britons, since they have not 
that book written in the British tongue, which Walter, 
archdeacon of Oxford, brought out of Britain, and which 
being a true history, published in honour of those princes, 
I have thus taken care to translate. 



INDEX. 



Aaron, a British martyr in Dioclesian's persecution, V. 5. 

Adan, king of the Scots, in assisting the Saxons, is killed by 
CadwaUo, XII. 9. 

Adelstan, the first king of the Angles that wore a crown, 
XII. 19. 

iEneas, the Trojan, gains the kingdom of Italy, and mturies 
Lavinia, I. 3. 

Aganippus, king of the Franks, marries Cordeilla, daughter of 
King Leir, II. II. 

Agned, Mt., or Maiden's Castle, now Edinburgh Castle, by 
whom built, II. 7. 

Akalon, river in Greece, I. 5. 

Alanf king of Armorica, consults old prophecies about Cad- 
wallader's revelation, XI I. 18. 

Alba, now Albano, in Italy, I. 3. 

Alban, his charity to his confessor, Amphibalus, and martyr- 
dom, V. 5. 

Albanact, a son of Brutus, killed by Humber, II. 1. 

Albania, now Scotland, called so from Albanact, II. I. 

Albion, the ancient name of Britain, I. 16. 

Alclud, now Dunbritton, by whom built, II. 7. 

Aldroen, king of Armorica, his answer to Archbishop Guethelin's 
petition, VI. 4. He sends succours to the Britons, ib, 

Alfrid and Oidwald begin an insurrection against Oswin, XIL 1 1. 

Alifantinam, king of Spain, is slain in a battle with Arthur, X. 9. 

Allectus, having killed Carausius, tyrannizes over the Britons, 
V. 4. Is routed in battle, and killed by Asclepiodotus, ib. 

Allobroges, in Switzerland, III. 6. 

Ambrius, founder of a famous monastery (of Ambresbury) near 
Salisbury, VI. 15. 

Anacletus is taken prisoner by Brutus, I. 5. Is compelled by 
him to betray the Grecian camp, I. 8. 

Andegavia, now Anjou, in France. 

Andragius, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

s2 



2i}0 INDEX. 

Androgeuii is made duke of Trinovantum by CassibellauD, 
III. 20. His quarrel with Cassibellaun, IV. 8. His letter to 
Julius Caesar, ib. Lies in ambush for Ca8sibellaan» IV. 9. Hia 
answer to Cassibellaun's messengers* ib. Obliges Caesar to a 
reconciliation with Cassibellaun, IV. 10. Goes to Rome with 
Caesar, IV. 11. 

Antenor, Trojan, I. 12. 

Antigonus, brother of Pandrasus, is taken prisoner by Brutus, 1.5. 

Aquitaine, now Guienne, in France, I. 12. 

Archflamens, in Britain, made archbishops^ IV., 19. 

Armories, V. 12. 

Arthgallo is deposed by the Britons, III. 17. His good govem. 
roent after his restoration, ib, 

Arthmail, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Arthur is conceived in adultery by his mother Igema being^ 
imposed upon, VIII. 19' Succeeds Uther Pendragon in the king- 
dom, and is crowned by Dubricius, IX. 1. His munificence and 
other great qualities, ib. Defeats Colgrin and besieges him in 
York, ib. Is advised by his council to raise the siege, ib. Sends 
for assistance to Hoel, king of Armorica, IX. 2. Forces the 
Saxons to raise the siege of Lincoln, IX. 3. Besieges them in the 
wood of Caledon, and makes them tributaries, ib. Executes their 
hostages for breach of treaty, and marches to Bath against 
them, ib. His speech to his soldiers before the battle of Bath, ib, 
A description of his armour, IX. 4. Kills with his own hand 
470 men, and overthrows the Saxons, ib. Marches into Albania 
to relieve Hoel, IX. 5. After thrice defeating the Scots and Picts, 
besieges them in the Lake Lumond, IX. 6. Repulses Guillamurius, 
king of Ireland, ib. Pardons the Scots and Picts at the request 
of their clergy, ib. Relates the wonderful nature of some ponds, 
IX. 7* Restores York to its ancient beauty, IX. 8. Disposes of 
several great preferments, IX. 9- Marries Guanhumara, a lady 
of a Roman family, ib. Reduces Ireland and the provincial 
islands, IX. 10. Invites to his court all persons famed for chi- 
valry, IX. 11. Subdues Norway and Dacia, ib. His expedition 
into Gaul, and great success there, ib. Besieges Flollo in Paris, 
and kills him in a single combat, ib. Reduces all Gaul, and 
divides it among his princes, ib. Summons his great men horn, all 
countries to a solemn assembly at Legions, IX. 12. His coro- 
nation and pompous solemnity there described, IX. 13, 14. His 
speech to his princes upon the Romans demanding tribute, 
IX. 16. His answer to the Roman ambassadors, IX. 20. 
Commits to Modred and Queen Guanhumara the govern- 



^ 



INDEX. 261 

ment of Britain, X. 2. His dream at Hamo's Port, ib. Kills a 
Spanish giant on Mount Michael, X. 3. His message to L. Ti- 
berius, X. 4. Marshals his army for a general battle with the 
Romans, X. 6. His speech to his soldiers before the battle, X. 7, 
His great exploits in this battle, and total overthrow of the 
Romans, X. 11. Gives orders concerning the burial of the slain, 

X. 13. Upon the news of Modred's practices against him, returns 
to Britain, XI. 1. His first victory over Modred, ib. His second 
victory and pursuit of him to Cornwall, XI. 2. His third vic- 
tory, ib. He is mortally wounded, and retires to the Isle of 
Avallon, ib. Gives up the crown to Constantine, Anno Domini, 
542, ib. 

Ascanius, son of iEneas, builds Alba upon the Tyber, I. 3. 

Aschillius, king of Dacia, slain in battle, XI. 2. 

Asclepiodotus frees the Britons from the Roman yoke, V. 4. 
Is made king of Britain, V. 5. Is killed in battle by Coel, V. 6. 

Assaracus joins with Brutus against the Grecians, I. 3. 

Assaracus, son of Ebraucus, obtains the kingdom of Ger- 
many, II. 8. 

Arviragus, by policy, gains a victory of Claudius Caesar, IV. 13. 
Kills L. Hamo, ib. By advice of his council makes his sub- 
mission to Claudius, IV. 14. His fondness for his wife Genuissa, 
daughter of Claudius, IV. 15. Revolts from the Romans, IV. 16, 
His battle with Vespasian, and reconciliation with him, ib. His 
character and death, ib. 

Augusel is made by Arthur king of Albania, IX. 9. His 
speech to Arthur, IX. 18. Is killed in battle with Modred, 

XI. 1. 

Augustin is sent to preach the Gospel to the Angles, XI. 12. 

Augustodunum, Autun, in France. 

Aurelius Ambrosius and Uther Pendragon, fearing the cruelty 
of Vortegirn, fly into Armorica, VI. 8. Aurelius returns to 
Britain and is made king, VIII. 2. Goes against Vortegirn, ib. 
His resentment to Eldol of Vortegim's wicked practices, ib. 
Bums him shut up in a tower, ib. His noble character, VIII. 3. 
Twice defeats Hengist and the Saxons, VIII. 5. Pardons Octa 
and Eosa upon their surrendering themselves, VIII. $. His 
care in repairing the ruins made in Britain, and in restoring things 
to their ancient state, VIII. 9. Consults with Merlin about 
erecting a monument for the massacred Britons, VIII. lo, 11. 
With great solemnity sets up the stones of the Giant's Dance for 
their monument, VIII. 12. Is poisoned by the treachery of Eopa, 



2()2 INDEX. 

a Saxon, VIII. 14. Is buried by the British clergy within the 
Giant's Dance, VIII. 16. 

Avalon, now Glastonbury, in Somersetshire, XI. 2. 

Asara, Mountains of, in Africa, I. 11. 

Badon, Bath, in Somersetshire. 

Bajocse, Bayeux, in France. 

Baldulph, in his march to reliere Colgrin, is routed by Cador, 
duke of Cornwall, IX. 1. By putting on a disguise gets access 
to Colgrin, besieged in York, ib. Is killed at the battle of 
Bath, IX. 4. 

Bangor, Banchor, or Bonium, in Flintshire, (not Carnar- 
vonshire,) its fJBunous church and monastery, XI. 12. 

Bassianus, having killed his brother Geta, succeeds in the 
kingdom, V. 2. Is slain in battle by the treachery of the 
Picts, V. 3. 

Bede quoted, I. 1. 

Bedver is, by Arthur, made governor of Neustria, IX. 1 1 . Per- 
forms the office of butler at Arthur's solenmity at Legions, IX. 13. 
Is sent in quest of a Spanish giant, X. 3. Is killed in the battle 
by Boccus, king of the Medes, X. 9. 

Belinus gains the crown by right of inheritance. III. 1. Seizes 
upon Northumberland, III. 2. Routs his brother Brennius in 
battle. III. 3. Makes Dacia tributary to him. III. 4*. Confirms 
the Molmutine laws. III. 5. Makes several highways, ib. His 
reconciliation with Brennius, III. 7> Assists Brennius in the 
conquest of Gaul, III. 8. Makes the Romans tributaries. III. 9. 
Surprises the Romans in their march with a great slaughter, ib. 
Assists Brennius in the taking of Rome, ib. His return to 
Britain, III. 10. His public buildings, ib. His death and 
burial, ib, 

Belinus, general of Cassibellaun's army, IV. 3. 

Bladud, king of Britain, builds Kaerbadus, and makes the 
baths there, II. 10. Being a famous magician he attempts to fly, 
but falls down dead, Uf, 

Blederic, commander of the Britons, killed in battle by Edelfrid, 
XL 13. 

Bleduno, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Blegabred, king of Britain, a famous musician, III. 19. 

Boccus, king of the Medes, having slain Bedver, is killed by 
Hirelgas, X. 9. 

Bolonia, Boulogne, France. 



INDEX. 263 

BorelluSy consul of the Cenomanni, killed by Evander, king of 
Syria, X. $. 

Boso's gallant behaviour against the Romans, X. 4. Takes 
Petreius Cotta, a Roman commander, prisoner, ib. 

Brennius quarrels with his brother Belinus, III. 1. Marries 
the king of Norway's daughter, Uf. Invades Britain, III. 3. Is 
defeated by Belinus and flies into Gaul, ib. Is made king of the 
Allobroges, III. 6. His return to Britain and reconciliation with 
Belinus, III. /. Assists Belinus in the conquest of Gaul, III. 8. 
And in the taking of Rome, III. 9. His tyranny in Italy, III. 10. 

Bretagne, V. 12. 

Brian's speech to Cadwallo upon his treaty with Edwin, XII. 2. 
His strange entertainment of him in the island of Gamareia, 
XII. 4. In a disguise kills Pellitus, Edwin's soothsayer, XII. 7. 

Britael, a king of Demetia, and attendant on Gassibellaun, 
IV. 3. 

Britain described, I. 2. Its inhabitants, ib. When divided 
under the power of five kings, II. 16. Its grandeur in King 
Arthur's time, IX. 13. During a famine and pestilence lays de- 
solate for eleven years, XII. 16. 

Britons destroy the giants that first inhabited this island, I. 16. 
Their valour praised by Lucan, IV. 9* Revolt from the Romans 
upon the death of Lucius, V. 1. Being distressed by the Picts, 
are relieved by a Roman legion, VI. 1. Their distress caused by 
the folly of Maximian, VI. 2. They are most grievously infested 
by Guanius and Melga, VI. 3. Their letter to Agitius, a Roman 
consul, ib. Being relieved by Constantine, they make him king, 
VI. 5. Are betrayed by the Saxons, and great numbers of them 
massacred, VI. 15. Make Aurelius Ambrosius king, VIII. 2. 
Keep up the custom of Troy at their public entertainments, 
IX. 13. Their gallant behaviour against the Romans, X. 4, 5. 
Are upbraided for their degeneracy by the historian, XL 9. Retire 
in great distress into Cornwall, Wales, and Armorica, XL 10. 
They lose the kingdom for a long time, XL 11. Being punished 
with famine and pestilence, they fiy into Armorica, XII. 1 5. The 
end of their government in the island, XH. 16. The time of their 
restoration foretold by an angel, XII. 1/. The reason of their 
name being changed into that of Welshmen, XII. 19* 

Brocinail, commander of the Britons, routed by Edelfrid, 
XL 13. 

Brutus, by his birth, causes his mother's death, I. 3. Unde- 
signedly kills his father in hunting, ib. His banishment into 
Greece, and acquaintance with the banished Trojans there, ib. 



264 INDEX. 

Is made general of the Trojans^ I. 4. His letter to Pandrastis, 
king of Greece, ib. Defeats Pandrasus by surprise, I. 5. With 
menaces obliges Anacletus to betray the Grecian camp, I. 7. 
Surprises the camp, and takes Pandrasus prisoner, I. 9. Marries 
Ignoge, daughter of Pandrasus, and departs from Greece, I. 11. 
Consults the oracle of Diana in the island Leogecia, ib. His 
Yoyage at sea, and arrival at Aquitaine, I. 12. Defeats Goffariua 
Pictus, king of Aquitaine, I. 13. Destroys that country with fire 
and sword, I. 14. Is worsted in a second engagement by Goffa- 
rius, I. 15. Gains a victory of the Gauls, ib. Arrives in 
Britain, ib. Calls this island after his name, Britain, I. 16. 
Builds Trinovantum, I. 17. His death, II. 1. 

Brutus, sumamed Greenshields, succeeds Ebraucus in the 
kingdom, II. 9. 

Budec, king of Armorica, gives a princely education to Aure- 
lius Ambrosius and Uther Pendragon, VI. 8. 

Cador, duke of Cornwall, by a sudden assault defeats Baldulf, 
IX. 1. Pursues the Saxons after the battle of Bath, and forces 
them to surrender, IX. 5. His speech to Arthur upon the 
Romans demanding tribute, IX. 15. 

Caduan being made king, by a treaty with Edelfrid possesses 
all Britain on this side the Humber, XII. 1. 

Cadwallader, after a peaceful enjoyment of the crown, falls into 
a fit of sickness, XII. 14. His lamentation in his vo3rage to 
Armorica, XII. 15. Is forbid by an angel to return to Britain, 
XII. 17. Goes to Rome to be confirmed, and there dies, XII. 18. 

Cadwallo is educated by Salomon, king of Armorica, XII. 1. 
Upon Brian's representation breaks ofi* a treaty with Edwin, 
XII. 3. Being routed by Edwin, he flees into Ireland, XII. 4. 
Meets with a grievous storm at sea in his voyage to Armorica, ib. 
His strange repast in the island of Gamareia, ib. His speech to 
Salomon, XII. 6. Returns with forces from Salomon and defeats 
Peanda, XII. 8. His great success against Edwin, and other 
kings of the Angles, XII. 8, 9* Celebrates the Feast of Pentecost 
with great pomp, XII. 11. His death and interment in a brazen 
statue, XII. 13. 

Caerosc, now Newport, III. 10. 

Caesar, Julius, speech concerning the Britons, IV. 1. His first 
invasion of Britain and defeat by Cassibellaun, IV. 3. His en- 
counter with Nennius, ib. His abject behaviour to the Gauls, 
IV. 5. The distress of his fleet, and his second defeat by Cassi- 
bellaun, IV. 7. His advantage over Cassibellaun by the con- 



, INDEX. 265 

spiracy of Androgeus, IV. 9. Is compelled, by the menaces of 
Androgeus, to a reconciliation with Cassibellaun, III. 10. His 
return to Rome, ib. 

Cains is by Arthur made governor of Andegavia, IX. 11. Per- 
forms the office of sewer at Arthur's solemnity at Legions, IX. 13. 
Is mortally wounded in battle with the Romans, X. 9. 

Calaterium, Galtres, in Yorkshire, III. 17. 

Caledon, Wood of, according to Higden's Polychronicon, near 
Celidon Wood, near Lincoln, IX. 3, though elsewhere it may mean 
perhaps the Caledonian Wood in Scotland. 

Calibum, the name of Arthur's sword, IX. 4. 

Cambula, the river Camel, or Alan, in Cornwall. 

Camus, or Cadmus, now Caen, in Normandy. 

Cap, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Capoir, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19* 

Caradoc, duke of Cornwall, his advice to Octavius about a suc- 
cessor to the crown, V. 9* Recommends Maximian to Octavius, 
V. 7. 

Carausius, by wicked practices, gains the kingdom of Britsdn, 
V. 3. Is killed by AUectus, V. 4. 

Careticus, king of Britain, is dnven into Wales by Gormund, 
king of the Africans, XI. 8. 

Carguit or Warguit, probably Warwick. 

Cassibellaun made king of Britain on account of the minority 
of his nephews. III. 20. His letter to Julius Caesar, IV. 2. Gains 
a victory of Caesar, IV. 3. By a stratagem drowns Caesar's ships, 
IV. 6. Defeats and repulses Caesar a second time, IV. 7. Makes 
a great sacrifice to his gods for his success, IV. 8. Quarrels with 
Androgens, duke of Trinovantum, t&. Is by reason of the revolt 
of Androgens defeated by Caesar, IV. 9- His message to Andro- 
gens in his distress, ib. His reconciliation with Caesar, ib, 

Catellus, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Cathness, II. 15. 

Catigern and Horsus in an encounter kill each other, VI. 13» 

Cenomania, Maine, in France. 

Cheldric brings over a vast fleet from Germany, IX. 1. Is 
killed by Cador, duke of Cornwall, IX. 5. 

Cheldric, a Saxon leader, assists Modred against Arthur, XI. 1. 
Is killed in battle with him, XI. 2. 

Cberin, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Cheulphus, general of the Morines, repulsed by Brennius, 

in. 1. 

Cirecestre, Cirencester, in Gloucestershire. 



266 INDEX. 

CUttdiuf , city of, now Gloucester. 

Claudius CseMur invades Britain, IV. 12. Is defeated by Anri- 
ragus, IV. 13. Besieges Winchester, IV. 14. Is reconciled to 
Arriragns, ib. Clonquers the Orkney and other i s l an d s, ib. 
Builds Gloucester, IV. 15. Returns to Rome, ib. 

Cledaucus, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19* 

Cletonus, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Cligueillus, king of Britain, his good character. III. 19. 

Cloarius, a hill on the Wye. 

Cloten, king of Cornwall, father of Dunwallo Molmutius, 
II. 17. 

Coel makes insurrection against Asclepiodotus, V. 6. His sub- 
mission to Constantius, and death, ib» 

Coillus, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Coillus, king of Britain, his amity with the Romans, and good 
character, IV. 18. 

Colgrin, a Saxon commander, defeated by Arthur, and besieged 
in York, IX. 1. Killed at the battle of Bath, IX. 4. 

Comet, a, of wonderful magnitude and brightness, appears at the 
death of Aurelius Ambrosius, VIII. 14. 

Conan kills Constantine, and succeeds to the crown, X. 5. 

Conan Meriadoc being ready to fight Mazimian, grants him 
peace at the instance of Caradoc, V. 10. His war with Maximian, 
and reconciliation with hiro, V. 1 1. Is made king of Armorica by 
Mazimian, V. 12. Vanquishes the Gauls and Aquitans, V. 15. 

Constans, a monk, is by Vortegim made king of Britain, VI. 6. 
His incapacity for government makes him the instrument of Vor- 
tegim's ambition, VI. 7. Is by Vortegim's contrivance assassi- 
nated by some Pictish soldiers, VI. 8. 

Constantine the Great, king of Britain, his noble character, V. 6. 
Is desired by the Romans to assist them against the tyranny of 
Mazentius, V. 7. Gains the Roman empire, V. 8. Sends Trahern 
to reduce Britain, ib, 

Constantine, the Armorican, having routed the enemies, of the 
Britons, is made king, VI. 5. Is assassinated by a Pict, ib, 

Constantine, Arthur's successor, is disturbed by Modred's sons, 
XI. 3. He puts them to death in their sanctuaries, XI. 4. Is 
killed by Conan, ib, 

Constantius made king of Britain by the marriage of Helena, 
V. 6. 

Conwenna's speech to her son Brennius, III. 7. 

Cordeilla loses her father Lair's affection for her sincerity, II. 11. 
Is married to Aganippus, king of the Franks, ib. Her great kind- 



INDEX. 267 

ne88 to ber father in his distress, II. 12, 13. Succeeds him in the 
kingdom, II. 14. For grief at the loss of her kingdom kills her- 
self, II. 15. 

Corineus, his character, I. 12. Kills Imbertus, the ambassador 
of Goffarius Pictus, ib. His great bravery against the Aquitans, ib. 
Kills Subardus and many others, I. 13. His stratagem against 
the Gauls, I. 15. Chooses Cornwall for his share of the island, 
I. 16. His encounter with Goemagot, a monstrous giant, ib. 
His resentment against Locrin for breach of covenant, II. 3. 

Cornish people, so called from Corineus, their leader, I. 12. 

Cridious, king of Albania, and attendant on CassibeUaun, IV. 3. 

Crocea mors, the name of J. Caesar's sword, IV. 4. 

Cunedagius kills his brother Margan, and gains the monarchy 
of the whole island, II. 15. 

Dabutius reproaches Merlin with his birth, VI. 17. 

Dacia (Denmark) made tributary to Belinus, III. 4. 

Daneian wood, the forest of Dean, in Gloucestershire. 

Danius, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 14. 

David, Arthur's uncle, made archbishop of Legions, ix. 15. 
His death, XI. 3. 

Deira, a province of Northumberland. 

Demetia^ South Wales, IV. 1. 

Diana's answer to Brutus, I. 11. 

Dianotus, king of Cornwall, sends Ursula and" her virgins for 
wives to the Armorican Britons, V. 16. 

Dioclesian's persecution of the Christians, V. 5. 

Dinoot, abbot of Bangor, his answer to Augustin, the apostle 
of the English, XI. 12. Occasions great troubles to the Britons 
by it, XI. 13. 

Dorobellum, probably Deal, in Kent, IV. 3. 

Dorobemia, Dover, III. 9. 

Doldavius, king of Godland, makes his submission to Arthur, 

IX. 9. 

Dubricius is made archbishop of Legions, VIII. 12. At the 
instance of the British nobility, crowns Arthur, IX. 1. His speech 
to the British army before the battle of Bath, IX. 4. The efficacy 
of his prayers towards curing the sick, IX. 12. Has the order- 
ing of Arthur's solemnity at Legions, IX. 13. Resigns his arch- 
bishopric and turns hermit, IX. 15. 

Duglas, River, Lancashire. 

Dunwallo Molmutius kills Ymner, king of Loegria, II . 17. 
By a stratagem defeats the kings of Kambria and Albania, ib. 



268 INDEX. 

Makes himself a golden crown^ and reduces the island again to a 
monarchy, II. 17* Institutes the famous Molmutine laws, ib, 

Duvanus sent with Faganus to preach the Christian faith to the 
Britons, IV. 19. 

Eagle, an, is said to have spoken at the building of the walls 
of Shaftesbury, II. 9. 

Ebraucus, king of Britain, his conquests in Gaul, II. 7. Builds 
several towns, ib. His twenty sons and thirty daughters, II. 8. 

Edelfrid, king of Northumberland, having routed the Britons, 
kills two hundred monks at Legecester, XI. 13. Is in another 
battle defeated and wounded by the Britons, ib. By a treaty with 
Caduan possesses all Britain beyond the Humber, XII. 1. Di- 
vorces his wife and marries another, ib. 

Edwin is educated by Salomon, king of Armorica, XII. 1. De- 
sires leave of Cadwallo to wear a crown, XII. 1. Upon his re- 
fusal, joins battle with him and routs him, XII. 4. Is killed in 
the battle of Hevefeld, XII. 8. 

Eldad, bishop of Gloucester, buries the British nobility massa- 
cred by the Saxons, VI. 15. Advises the Britons to kill Hengist 
when taken prisoner, VIII. 7. And to show mercy to Octa upon 
his surrendering himself, VIII. 8. 

Eldadus, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Eldol, duke of Gloucester, his noble exploit against the Saxons 
upon their maslkcring the Britons, VI. 16. His speech to Aure- 
lius Ambrosius before the battle with Hengist, VIII. 5. After a 
sharp encounter with Hengist, takes him prisoner, VIII. 6. And 
after consultation beheads him, VIII. 7* 

Eldol, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Eleutherius (Pope), at the request of Lucius, sends Faganus and 
Duvanus into Britain to preach the Christian faith, IV. 19. 

Eli, high priest, I. 18. 

Elidure, surnamed the Pious, resigns the crown to his deposed 
brother, Arthgallo, III. 17. Is a second time made king of 
Britain, and then imprisoned by his brothers. III. 18. His ad- 
vancement to the throne the third time, ib. 

Eliud, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 1 9. 

Elsingius, king of Norway, his daughter married to Brennius, 
III. 1. 

Enniaunus, king of Britain, deposed for tyranny. III. 19. 

Epiffrod, called by Nennius and others Epifford, and thought by 
Camden to be Ailesford, in Kent. 

Erir, Snowdon, in Wales. 




INDEX. 269 

Estrildis, concubine of Locrin, her great beauty, 11. 2. Is, with 
her daughter Sabre, drowned in the Severn, by Guendoloena's 
command, II. 5. 

Evander, king of Syria, is killed in battle by the Britons, X. 5. 

Evelinus, nephew of Androgens, kills Uirelglas, IV. 8. 

Eventus succeeds Augusel in the kingdom of Albania, XI. 1. 

Fag AN us is sent with Duvanus to convert Britain to the Chris- 
tian faith, IV. 19. 

Ferrex is killed by his brother Porrex, II. 16. 

Flamens, in Britain, made bishops, IV. 19. 

FloUo, a Roman tribune, besieged in Paris by Arthur, IX. 11. 
He challenges Arthur to a single combat, and is killed by him, ib, 

Friday, so called from the Saxon goddess Frea, VI. 10. 

Fulgenius, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Fulgenius carries on a war against Severus, V. 2. Goes to 
Scythia to raise forces, ib. Is mortally wounded in a battle with 
Severus, ib. 

Gabius, a Roman consul, taken prisoner by Belinus and Bren- 
nius. III. 9. 

Galabes, fountain, VIII. 10. 

Gallus, Livius, and the Romans besieged in London by the 
Britons, and killed without quarter to any, V. 4. 

Gania, the Wye. 

Gamareia, probably Guernsey. 

Genoreu, a village of the same name, on the Wye, according to 
Usher. 

Genuissa, daughter of ^Claudius, married to Arviragus, IV. 15. 
Procures a reconciliation between Arviragus and Vespasian, IV. 
16. 

Geoffrey of Monmouth's Epistle Dedicatory to Robert, Earl of 
Gloucester, I. 1. His Preface to Merlin's prophecy, VII. 1. His 
letter to Alexander, bishop of Lincoln, VII. 2. His conclusion 
of the history, XII. 20. 

Gerion, the augur that attended Brutus, 1. U. 

German, St., and Lupus restore the Christian faith that had been 
corrupted in Britain, VI. 13. 

Geruntius, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Geta, son of Severus, killed by his brother Bassianus, V. 2. 

Giant, a, from Spain having stolen Helena, is killed by Arthur, 
X. 3. 

Gildas, L 1,17. 



C\ 



270 LNDKX. 

Gillomanius, king of Ireland, is defeated by Uther Pendragon, 
VIII. 12. Enters into confederacy with Pascentius and invades 
Britain, VIII. 14. But is a second time defeated by Uther Pen- 
dragon, VIII. 16. 

Gloucester, by whom built, and on what occasion, IV. 15. 

Godbold, king of the Orkneys, killed at the battle of Hevefeld, 
XII. 8. 

Godlans, Gothland, in the Baltic. 

Goemagot, a monstrous giant, killed in an encounter with Cori- 
neus, I. 16. 

Goffarius, Pictus, king of Aquitaine, makes war against the 
Trojans, I. 12. Is routed by them, I. 13. His second and third 
batUe with them, I. 15. 

Gombert, king of Norway, V. 18. 

Gonorilla's flattering answer to her father Leir, II. 11. Her 
barbarous ingratitude to him, II. 12. 

Gorbogudo, one of the ancient kings of Britain, II. 16. 

Gorbonian, a very just king of Britain, III. 16. 

Gorlois, duke of Cornwall, advises the Britons to fall upon the 
Saxon camp by surprise, VIII. 18. Upon Uther's falling in love 
with his wife, retires from court, and prepares for war, VHI. 19. 
Is killed by Uther's men at the siege of DimiUoc, VIII. 20. 

Gormund, king of the Africans, drives Careticus into Wales, 
and grievously infests Britain, XI. 8. Gives Loegria to the 
Saxons, XI. 10. 

Gratian Municeps forces Guanius and Melga to flee over to Ire- 
land, V. 16. Seises the crown of Britain, and is for his t3rranny 
murdered by the common people, VI. 1. 

Guanhumara, the wife of Arthur, IX. 9. Has, in conjunction 
with Modred, the government of Britain in Arthur's absence, 
XI. 20. Her wicked marriage with Modred, X. 13. Upon Mo- 
dred's defeat, retires into a monastery, XI. 1. 

Guanius, king of the Huns, and Melga, their cruelty to the 
virgins that accompanied Ursula, V. 16. They invade and griev- 
ously oppress Britain, ib. Are forced by Gratian Municeps to flee 
over to Ireland, ib. They a second time oppress Britain, and are 
driven out by a Roman legion, VI. 1. They a third time most 
grievously oppress Britain, VI. 3. 

Guendoloena, wife of Locrin, being divorced, makes war against 
him and kills him, II. 5. Her cruelty to Estrildis, ib, 

Guerthaeth, king of Venedotia, an attendant on Cassibellaun, 
IV. 3. 

Guethelin, archbishop of London, his speech to the Britons, 



INDEX. 271 

VI. 2. Desires succours for the Britons of Aldroen, king of Ar- 
morica^ YI. 4. His expressions of joy upon his success, ib, 

Guicthlac, king of Dacia, in a sea-fight seizes the wife of 
Brennius, III. 2. Is taken prisoner by Belinus, ib. His release, 
III. 4. 

Guiderius, refusing to pay tribute to the Romans, occasions the 
invasion of Claudius Caesar, IV. 12. Is killed in battle by the 
treachery of L. Hamo, IV. 13. 

Guillamurius, king of Ireland, attempting to relieve the Scots 
and Picts, is repulsed by Arthur, IX. 6. Is again defeated by him 
and taken prisoner, IX. 10. 

Guitard, commander of the Pictavians, is defeated by Hoel, IX. 

II. Sustains the Britons against the Romans, X. 5. 
Guithelin, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 13. 
Gunfasius, king of the Orkneys, makes his submission to 

Arthur, IX. 10. 

GurgintiuB, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Gurgiunt Brabtruc, king of Britain, his character. III. 11. He 
reduces Dada, that had refused to pay him tribute, ib. His kind- 
ness to Partholoim and other Spaniards, III. 12. 

Gurgustius, one of the ancient kings of Britain, II. 16. 

Hamo, L., commander of Claudius Caesar's army, besieges 
Portcestre, IV. 12. Treacherously kills Guiderius, IV. 13. Is 
killed by Arviragus at Hamo's Port, ib, 

Hamo's Port, Southampton, III. 13. 

Hedelbert, king of Kent, stirs up the Saxon kings against the 
Britons, XI. 13. 

Helena, a most accomplished British lady, wife of Constantius" 
and mother of Constantine the Great, V. 6. 

Helena, niece of Hoel, is stolen away by a Spanish giant, X. 3. 
Has a mausoleum erected for her upon Mount Michael, ib, 

Heli, king of Britain, father of Lud, Cassibellaun, and Nennius, 

III. 20. 

Hengist and Horsus arrive with the Saxons in Britain, VI. 10. 
Hengist gives Vortegim an account of the occasion of their coming, 
and of the religion of their countrymen, ib. By a crafty petition 
gets leave of Vortegim to build a castle, VI. 11. In consideration 
of giving him his daughter Rowen, obtains the province of Kent, ib. 
By his authority over him invites over more and more Saxons, to 
the terror of the Britons, VI. 13. Brings from Germany a vast 
army of them, VI. 15. By his treachery causes a massacre of the 
Britons, ib. Encourages his men to stand a battle with Aurelius 



I 



272 INDKX. 

Ambrotiut, VIII. 4. Being overthrown by him, he flees to Kaer- 
conan, where he loses a second battle, and is taken prisoner by 
Eldol, VIII. 5, 6. Is beheaded by Eldol, VIII. 7. 

Henuinus, duke of Cornwall, joins with Maglaunus to depose 
Leir, their father-in-law, II. 12. 

Hergin, Herefordshire. 

Hevefeld, probably Haledon, in Northumberland. 

Hider sustains the Britons when pursued by the Romans, X. 4. 

Hirelgas, Bedver's nephew, revenges his death on Boccus, king 
of the Medes, X. 9. 

Hirelglas, nephew of Cassibellaim, killed by Evelinus, IV. 3. 

Hoel, king of Armorica, brings forces to assist Arthur against 
the Saxons, IX. 2. By Arthur's command reduces Aquitaine and 
Gascony, IX. 11. His speech to Arthur upon the Romans de- 
manding tribute, IX. 17. Sustains the Britons when near van- 
quished by the Romans, X. 9* 

Holdin, king of the Ruteni, killed in battle by the Romans, 

X. 9. 

Horsus, brother of Hengist, killed by Catigem in an encounter, 
VI. 13. 

Hudibras, king of Britain, composes a civil dissension, and 
builds several towns, II. 9. 

Humber, king of the Huns, kills Albanact, II. 1. Is defeated 
by Locrin, and drowned in the river that bears his name, II. 2. 

Jagg, one of the ancient kings of Britain, II. 16. 

Idwallo, a just king of Britain, III. 19* 

Igema, a wife of Gorlois, her beauty captivates Uther Pendragon, 
VIII. 19. Being deceived by the false shape he put on, she 
admits him to her embraces, ib. Marries him after the death of 
Gorlois, VIII. 20. 

Ignoge, daughter of Pandrasus, is married to Brutus, II. 11. 
Her sorrow at departing from Greece, ib. 

Imbertus, ambassador of Goffarius Pictus, is killed by Corineus, 
I. 12. 

Inbaltus, commander of the Gauls, killed in battle with Maxi- 
mian, V. 12. 

Isembard joins with Gormund, and renounces the Christian 
faith to gain the kingdom of Gaul, XI. 8. 

Julius, a British martyr in Dioclesian's persecution, V. 5, 

Ivor and Ini in vain attempt the restoration of the Britons, 
XII. 19. 



) 

V 



INDEX. 273 

Kabrbadus, Bath, built by Bladud, its baths and wonderful 
fire, II. 9, 10. 

Kaercaradoc, Salisbury, VIII. 9. 

Kaercolvin, Colchester, V. 6. 

Kaercorrei, Thong Castle, VI. U. 

Kaerebrauc, the city of Ebrauc, II. 7. 

Kaerconan, Conisburgh, in Yorkshire. 

Kaerglou, Gloucester, IV. 15. 

Kaerguen, or Winchester, II. 9. 

Kaerlem, or Canterbury, II. 9. 

Kaerleir, or Leircestre, now Leicester, II. 11. 

Kaerliudcoit, Lincoln. 

Kaerleil, in the north of Britain, now Carlisle, II. 9. 

Kaer-Lud, the town of Lud, now London, I. 17« 

Kaermerdin, Caermarthen, in Wales. 

Kaerpenhuelgoit, Exeter, III. 16. 

Kaerperis, Portcester, IV. 14. 

Kaicester, probably Chichester. 

Karitia, perhaps Calais, in France. 

Killaraus, Mount Kildare, in Ireland, VIII. 10. 

Kamber, son of Brutus, gives name to Kambria, and the Kam- 
bri, II. 1. 

Kimarus, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 14. 

Kinmarcus, one of the ancient kings of Britain, II. 16. 

Kinocus is made archbishop of Legions, XI. 3. 

Kymbelinus, king of Britdn, maintains friendship with the 
Romans, IV. 11. In his time our blessed Saviour was born, ib, 

Labienus, a Roman tribune, killed by Nennius, IV. 3. 

Lam-goemagot, Goemagot's Leap, the Haw, near Plymouth. 

Lampatem, lian-badam-vawr, in Cardiganshire. 

Legecester, Chester. 

Legions made an archiepiscopal see, IV. 19. The great magni- 
ficence of that city, IX. 12. It is chosen by Arthur for the place 
of his great solemnity, ih, 

Leil, a good king of Britain, builds Kaerleil, II. 9> 

Leir, king of Britain, builds Kaerleir, II. 11. Having no male 
issue, he divides his kingdom between his two eldest daughters, ib. 
His resentment of his daughter Cordeilla's plain dealing, ib. Is 
deposed by his two sons-in-law, and ungratefully used by his eldest 
daughters, II. 12. His grievous distress and complaint, ib. He 
is honorably received by Cordeilla, II. 13. Regains his king- 
dom, II. 14. 



274 iNiiFx. 

Ij«ircei)tre, now Leicester, II. 11. 

I^ngria, Lanf^rcK, in France. 

Leogesia, island, I. 11. 

Lepidus, Marius, a Roman senator, killed in battle nrith Arthur, 
X. 10. 

Letaira, or Armorica, VI. 4. 

Lindesia, Lincolnshire. 

Linligwan, the wonders of that pond, IX. 6. 

Locrin, eldest son of Brutus, gives name to Loegria, IL 1. 
Defeats Humber, king of the Huns, II. 2. Falls in love with 
Estrildis, his beautiful captive, ib. Marries Guendoloena, hut car- 
ries on a private amour with Estrildis, II. 4. Is killed in battle 
with Guendoloena, I. 5. 

Loegria, the southern and central parts of England, II. 1. 

Loire, river in France, I. 12. 

London, so called from Lud, by whom it was beautified, IIL 20. 
Is made an archiepiscopal see, IV. 19. 

Londonesia, or Lodonesia, Lothian, in Scotland, VIII. 21. 

Lot commands the British army against the Saxons with various 
success, VIII. 21. Is made consul of Londonesia by Arthur, IX. 
0. Is advanced by him to the kingdom of Norway, IX. 11. 

Lucius, the first king of Britain that embraced the Christiaii 
faith, IV. 19. Is a benefactor to churches, V. 1. 

Lucius Tiberiu8*s letter to Arthur, IX. 15. Summons all the 
Eastern kings to his assistance against Arthur, X. 1. For fear of 
Arthur enters Lengrise with his army, X. 6. His speech to his 
commanders before his battle with Arthur, X. 8. Draws out his 
army in order of battle, ib. His encounter with Walgan, X. 11. 
Is slain in a great battle with Arthur, by an unknown hand, t6. 

Lud, beautifier of London, and builder of other cities, is buried 
at Ludgate, III. 20. 

Lumond, (Lough Lomond,) the wonders of that lake, IX. 6. 

Lupus, bishop of IVoyes, restores the purity of faith when cor- 
rupted in Britain, VI. 13. 

Maddan is advanced to the throne by his mother Guendoloena, 
IL6. 

Magicians foretell the birth and success of Brutus, I. 3. Advise 
Vortegim to build a tower for his security, VI. 17. 

MaglaunuB, duke of Cornwall, assists in deposing Leir, his father- 
in-law, II. 12. 

Maisuriam, V. 8. 

Malgo, a king of Britain, of great accomplishments, but guilty 
of sodomy, XI. 7. 



INDEX. 275 

Malim is treacherously murdered by his brother Menpricius, 
II. 6. 

Malva, the river Malvia, in Africa, rising in Mount Atlas, 
I. 12. 

Malvemia, now Malvern, in Worcestershire. 

Marcellus Mutius killed by Walgan, X. 4. 

Margadud, king of Demetia, his advice to Cadwallo, XII. 12. 

Margan and Cunedagius take Cordeilla prisoner ; they divide 
the kingdom between them ; Margan is routed and killed by 
Cunedagius ; gives name to a town in Kambria, II. 5. 

Margan, king of Britain, his good reign. III. 19. 

Marius, king of Britain, defeats and kills Rodric, king of the 
PictSy IV. 17. His good character, ib, 

Martia, queen of Britain, author of the Martian law. III. 13. 

Maugantius, a philosopher, his speech to Yortegirn concerning 
Merlin's burth, VI. 18. 

Mauritania, now Barbary, in Africa. 

Mauricius is sent to Maximian to offer him the kingdom, V. 9. 
His advice to Maximian when in fear of the Britons, V. 10. His 
apology for Mauricius to Conan Meriadoc, ib, 

Maxentius's tjrranny over the Romans, V. 7. 

Maximian is invited to take the crown of Britain, V. 9. His 
policy to prevent a war with the Britons, V. 10. Is made king of 
Britain, V. 11. His war and reconciliation with Conan Meriadoc, 
ib. Conquers Armorica and gives it to Conan, V. 12. Subdues 
Gaul and Germany, and gains the empire from Gratian and Valen* 
tinian, V. 14. Is killed at Rome by Gratian's friends,V. 16. 

Maximianus Herculius, a persecutor of the Christians in Britain^ 
V. 5. 

Mempricius advises the Trojans to depart from Greece, I. 10. 

Menevia, now St. David's, in Pembrokeshire, VIII. 16. 

Menpricius murders his brother Malim, and obtains the go- 
vernment, II. 6. His t3rranmcal reign and untimely end, ib, 

Mercia, Saxon kingdom of. 

Merianus, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Merlin's wonderful birth, VI. 17, 18. His conference with 
Vortegim and his magicians, VI. 18. He discovers the reason 
why Vortegim's tower would not stand, ib. His prophecy, VII. 
3, 4. He foretells Vortegim his sad fate, VIII. 1. His discourse 
with Aurelius Ambrosius concerning the Giants' Dance in Ireland, 
VIII. 10. 11. By his wonderful skill in mechanics, he removes 
and brings to Britain the Giants' Dance, VIII. 12. Prognosticates 
Uther's success by the appearance of a comet, VIII. 15. Trans- 



276 IN DUX. 

forms Uther Pendragon into the shape of Gorlois to gain bim 
access to Igerna, VIII. 19. 

Michael's (St.) Mount, on the coast of Normandy. 

Miciptay king of Babylon, killed in battle with Arthur, X. 9. 

Milvius, QointuSy a Boman senator, killed in battle with Arthur, 

X. 9. 

Modred, Arthur's nephew, is made gOTemor of Britain by him, 
during his wars with the Romans, IX. 20. He usurps the crown 
and marries Guanhumara in Arthur's absence, X. 13. Being de- 
feated by Arthur, he flees to Winchester, XI. 1. He is a second 
time defeated by him, and flees into Cornwall, XI. 2. Loses a third 
battle and is killed, Uf, 

Molmutine laws, first instituted by Dunwallo Molmutius, II. 17. 
Are revived by Belinus, III. 5. Are translated into English by 
King Alfred, ib, 

Morini, now the Boulonnais, in France, or perhaps a tribe so 
called in Britain, III. 1, 15. 

Morvid, consul of Gloucester, his great service to Arthur towards 
the total defeat of the Romans, X. 11. 

Morvidus, a most cruel tjrrant of Britain, is devoured by a 
monster. III. 15. 

Mureif, probably Murray, in Scotland. 

Nautgallim, or Gallembome, now Walbrook, in London. 

Nennius quarrels with Lud for changing the name of Trinovan- 
tum, I. 17. Encounters Julius Csesar, and wrests his sword from 
him, IV. 3. Kills Labienus and many others, ib. His death and 
pompous funeral, IV. 4. 

Neustria, Normandy, in France, III. 7. 

OcTA, son of Hengist, after his father's defeat retires to York, 
VIII. 6. Being besieged there, he surrenders himself to the mercy 
of Aurelius, VIII. 8. Raises fresh disturbances and besieges 
York, where he gains a victory over the Britons, VIIL 18. Is 
afterwards defeated by a stratagem of Uther Pendragon, and taken 
prisoner, ib. He and Eosa escaping out of prison, they renew the 
war with the Britons, VIII. 21. By their contempt of the Britons 
they let them gain great advantages over them, VIII. 23. Are at 
last totally defeated and killed by Uther Pendragon, ib, 

Octavius rebels against the Roman proconsuls, and gains the 
kingdom, V. 8. His war with Trahern, ib. Consults about his 
successor in the kingdom, V. 9' Bestows his kingdom and 
daughter on Maximian, V. 1 1 . 



INDKX. 277 

Odoea, tower of» near Boulogne, IV. 7. 

Oenus, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Olbrict, king of Norway, killed in battle with Modred, XL 2. 

Orkney Islands, III. 14. 

Osric, king of Northumberland, killed in battle with Cadwallo, 
XII. 9. 

Oswald, king of Northumberland, routs Peanda at the second 
battle of Hevefeld, XII. 10. But is afterwards killed by him in a 
battle with Cadwallo, ib, 

Oswin, successor of Oswald, makes his submission to Cadwallo, 
XII. 11. Kills Peanda in battle, XII. 13. 

Paladur, Mount, Shaftesbury, in Dorsetshire, II. 9. 
Pandrasus, king of Greece, is by surprise routed by Brutus, 

I. 5. Besieges Sparatinum, I. 6. Is taken prisoner by Brutus, I. 
5. His speech to the Trojans, I. 11. Furnishes them with neces- 
saries for their voyage, and is set at liberty, ib, 

Parthlud, Ludgate, III. 20. 

Partholoim, a Spaniard, by leave of Gurgiunt Brabtruc, settles 
in Ireland, III. 12. 

Pascentius, son of Vortegim, brings in the Saxons and is de- 
feated, VIII. 13. Enters into alliance with Gillomanius, king of 
Ireland, and again infests Britain, VIII. 14. Encourages Eopa to 
poison Aurelius Ambrosius, ib. Is routed by Uther Pendragon, 
and killed, VIII. 16. 

Patrick, St., founder of an abbey at Menevia, XI. 3. 

Peanda, king of the Mercians, besieges Exeter, XII. 7. Being 
routed by Cadwallo, he becomes his auxiliary, XII. 8. Is defeated 
by Oswald in the battle of Hevefeld, but kills him in another battle, 
XII. 10. Endeavours to incense Cadwallo against Oswin, XII. 

II. Is slain in battle by Oswin, XII. 13. 

Pelagian heresy destroyed in Britain by the preaching and mi- 
racles of German and Lupus, VL 13. 

Pellitus, a soothsayer, gives Edwin notice of Cadwallo's attempts 
against him, XII. 4. Is killed by Brian in the habit of a beggar, 
XII. 7. 

Peredure and Vigenius depose Elidure, and divide the kingdom 
between them. III. 18. By the death of Vigenius, Peredure gains 
the whole kingdom, ib, 

Petreius Cotta forces the Britons to retreat when in pursuit of 
the Romans, X. 4. Is taken prisoner by Boso, ib, 

Philsenian altars, in Africa, between Carthage and Cyrene, I. 11. 

Philistines, 1. 18. 



278 INDBX. 

Pictaviant, inhabitants of Poitou» 1. 13. 

Picts, by permission of Marius, inhabit Albania, IV. 17. Their 
treachery to Bassianus* V. 3. They endeavour to revenge the in- 
jury of their countrymen on Vortegim, VI. 9^ They are defeated 
by him, VI. 10. 

Fir, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19* 

Polytetes, king of Bithynia, killed in battle by Arthur's own 
hand, X. 11. 

Porrex, king of Britain, procures aid of Suard and kills his bro- 
ther Ferrez, II. 16. Is torn to pieces by his mother Widen, ib, 

Porrez, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Porsena, a Roman consul, killed in battle with Belinus and 
Brennius, III. 9. 

Portcestre, once a port near Portsmouth. 

Princes, their names that attended at Arthur's solemnity at Le- 
gions, IX. 12. 

Priwen, the name of Arthur's shield, IX. 4. 

Pyramus, Arthur's chaplain, made archbishop of York, IX. 8. 

QuiNTiLiANUS, for reflecting on the Britons, is killed by Wal* 
gan, X. 4. 

Redbrchius, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Redion, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Redonum, now Rennes, in France, taken by Maximian, V. 13» 

Regan's flattering answer to her father Leir, 11.11. Iler bar- 
barous ingratitude to him, II. 12. 

Riculf, king of Norway, defeated and slain by Arthur, IX. 11. 

Ritho the giant, a ridiculous story of his encounter with Arthur, 
X. 3. 

Rivallo^ king of Britain, a great mortality happened in his reigrn^ 
11.16. 

Robert, earl of Gloucester, his praise, I. 1 . 

Rodric, king of the Picts, invades Britain, and is defeated and 
killed by Marius, IV. 17. 

Romans pay tribute to Belinus and Brennius, III. 9. Are tvnce 
defeated by them, ib. Take their farewell of the Britons, VI. 2. 
After a total overthrow by Arthur, surrender themselves for slaves, 
X. 12. 

Rome taken by Belinus and Brennius, III. 9. 

Ron, the name of Arthur's lance, IX. 4. 

Rowen, daughter of Hengist, having captivated Vortegirn with 
her beauty, is married to him, VI. 12. Poisons Vortimer,her son- 



INDEX. 279 

in-law, VI. 14. Sends intelligence to her father of the designs of 
the Britons, YI. 15. 

Rndaucus, king of Kambria, killed in battle by the policy of 
Dunwallo Molmutius, II. 17. 

Runno, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19* 

Rascicada, in Africa, by some thought to be Stora, or Estora, in 
Tunis, I. IJ. 

Ruteni, the ancient inhabitants of Rovergue, in Guienne,but Bri- 
tain cannot be seen from thence, as Geoffrey states, IV. I. Also 
of the city of Rhodes, in France. 

Rutupi, probably Richborough, in Kent, III. 9. 

Sabre, daughter of Estrildis, being thrown into the Severn, 
gives name to that river, II. 5. 

Salinse, in Africa, probably Salines, in Tripoli, I. 11. 

Salomon, king of Armorica, his speech to Cadwallo, XII. 5. 

Samuilpenissel, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19> 

Sanxo made archbishop of York, VIII. 12. 

Saxons, their first arrival in Britain, and reception by Vortegirn, 
VI. 10. They assist him in the conquest of his enemies, ib. More 
of them come over upon Vortegim's invitation, VI. 12, 13. After 
loss of four battles they are driven back by Vortimer into Germany, 
VI. 13. Their massacre of the Britons, VI. 15. They seize the 
fortifications in Britain, VI. 16. Retire beyond the Humber, f<M' 
fear of Aurelius Ambrosius, VIII. 3. Treacherously poison Uther 
Pendragon and many others, VIII. 24. Are reduced to be tributa- 
Ties to Arthur, IX. 3. Break treaty with him, and cruelly infest 
the Britons, ib. Are overthrown by Arthur at Bath, IX. 4. Are 
defeated by Wortiporius, XI. 6. Invite over Gormund, king of 
the Africans, against the Britons, XI. 8. Gain the possession of 
Loegria, XI. 10. Possess themselves of the island when it was 
deserted by the Britons, XII. 16. Their full establishment in the 
island, XII. 10. 

Scseva, son of Androgens, sent as a hostage to Julius Caesar, IV. 9. 

Seginus, duke of the Allobroges, his kindness to Brennius, III. 6. 

Senones, the Senonais, in Champagne. 

Sertorius, king of Libya, killed by Arthur's own hand, X. 11. 

Severus is sent to reduce Britain under the Roman power, V. 2. 
His war with Fulgenius, ib. Builds a wall between Deira and AU 
bania, ib. Is killed in battle with Fulgenius, ib, 

Silcestre, IX. 1. 

Sisitius, three of this name kings of Britain, II. 16, III. 14, 
III. 19. 



280 INDEX. 

Sore, now the Soar, in Leicestershire, II. 11. 

Southampton, or Hampton, IV. 13. 

Sparatinum, a town in Greece, besieged by Pandrasus, I. 6. 

Stanheng, Stonehenge, in Wiltshire. 

Staterius, king of Albania, killed in battle by the policy of Dun- 
wallo Molmutius, II. 17. 

Sture, river in Britain, II. 5. 

Suard, king of the Franks, assists Porrex against his brother 
Ferrex, II. 16. 

Sylvius, father of Brutus, marries a niece of Lavinia, I. 3. Is 
accidentally slain by Brutus in hunting, ib. 

Syrens surround the Trojan ships, I. 12. 

Tenuantius made duke of Cornwall by Cassibellaun, III. 20. 
Succeeds Cassibellaun in the kingdom, IV. 1 1 . 

Terivand, now Terouanne, in the Netherlands. 

Thong Castle, in Lincolnshire, whence so called, VI. 11. 

Tintagel, in Cornwall, the great strength of that place, VIII. 19- 

Totness, the place of Brutus's arrival, 1. 15. 

Tours, in France, built by Brutus, 1. 14. Whence so called, 1.15. 

Trahem, uncle of Helena, sent by Constantine to reduce Octa> 
vius, V. 8. Is killed by a conspiracy, ib. 

Tremounus, archbishop of Legions, recommends Merlin to Au« 
relius Ambrosius, VIII. 10. 

IViers made the imperial seat of Maximian, V. 14. 

Trigeria, perhaps Treguier, in Bretagne. 

Trinovantum, or New Troy, the ancient name of London, built 
by Brutus, I. 17. 

Turonus, nephew of Brutus, kills in one day six hundred men 
with his own hand, I. 15. 

Tyrrhenian Sea, I. 12. A doubtful reading; some read the 
Pyrenean Sea. 

Vbnbdotia, North Wales, IV. 1. 

Venedotians (inhabitants of North Wales) make a general 
slaughter of the Romans in London, V. 4. 

Verolam,or Verulam, St. Albans, in Hertfordshire, V. 5, VIII. 23. 

Vespasian is sent to Britain against Arviragus, IV. 16. His re- 
conciliation with him, ib. 

Vigenius and Peredure imprison their brother Elidure, and di- 
vide the kingdom between them. III. 18. 

Ulfin of Ricaradoch's advice to Uther Pendragon upon his love 
to Igerna, VIII. 19. 



INDEX. 281 

Vortegim promotes Constans the monk to be king of Britain, 
VI. 6. His management of him when king, VI. 7* With a trea- 
sonable design invites some Picts into his service, ib. His crafty 
speech to incense them against Constans, ib. Is suspected to be 
the contriver of his assassination, VI. 8. Upon the murder of 
Constans he usurps the crown, and is distressed with fears on every 
side, VI. 9. His discourse with Hengist and the S^ons at their 
first landing, VI. 10. Defeats the Picts by the assistance of the 
Saxons, ib. After a conference with Hengist, gives him leave to 
build a castle, VI. 11. Being entertained at a banquet by Hengist, 
he falls in love with his daughter Rowen, VI. 1 2. Displeases his 
sons and nobility by marrying her, ib. For adhering too much to 
the Saxons is deserted by the Britons, VI. 13. Being restored 
again to his kingdom, he invites Hengist and the Saxons to return 
to Britain, VI. 15. Is in a treaty with Hengist betrayed and taken 
prisoner, ib. Retires into Cambria, VI. 16. By the advice of ma- 
gicians builds a tower for his defence, VI. 17. Discourses with 
Merlin's mother concerning the birth of her son, VI. 18. Inquires 
of Merlin the time of his own death, VIII. 1. Is burnt in a tower 
byAurelius Ambrosius, VIII. 2. 

Vortimer, son of Vortegim, gains four victories of the Saxons, 
and forces them back to Germany, VI. 13. Is poisoned by his 
stepmother Rowen, VI. 14. His magnanimity at his death, ib, 

Urian is honoured by Arthur with the sceptre of Mureif, IX. 9. 

Urianus, one of the ancient kings of Britain, III. 19. 

Ursula, and the virgins with her, in their voyage to Armorica, 
are all drowned, murdered, or made slaves, V. 16. 

Uther Pendragon routs Gillomanius, and brings to Britain the 
Giants' Dance, VIII. 12. Gains a complete victory over Gilloma- 
nius and Pascentius, VIII. 16. Is advanced to the kingdom, VIII. 
17. The reason of his being sumamed Pendragon, ib. After being 
defeated by Octa and Eosa, he gains a victory of them by sur- 
prising their camp, VIII. 18. His severe administration of justice 
among the Scots, VIII. 19. He summons his nobihty to a festival 
at London, where he falls in love with Igema, ib. His resentment 
at Gorlois, her husband, and invasion of his provinces, ib. By 
Merlin's magical operations he is transformed into the shape of 
Gorlois, and enjoys Igema, ib. Resumes his former shape and re- 
turns to his army, VIII. 20. Marries Igema, by whom he has Ar- 
thur, ib. Falls into a lingering distemper, VIII. 21. Reproves his 
nobility for their pride and cowardice, VIII. 22. Is carried in a 
horse-litter to fight the Saxons, VIII. 23. Besieges them in Ve- 

u 



282 INDEX. 

rolam, VIII. 23. Entirely defeats them, and kills Octa and £o8a,t&. 
Dies upon drinking spring water poisoned by the Saxons* VIII. 24. 
Vulteius Catellus, a Roman commander, killed in battle by the 
Britons, X. 5. 

Walgan, Arthur's nephew, by killing C. Quintilianus, occa- 
sions a ddrn^sh between the Britons and Romans, X. 4. Kills 
Marcellus Mutius, ib. His noble exploits against the Romans, 
X. 9, 10. His encounter with Lucius Tiberius, X. 11. Is slain 
in battle with Modred, XL 1. 

Wall, a, built between Deira and Albania for the defence of the 
Britons, VI. 1. 

Walter, archdeacon of Oxford, desires Geoflfrey of Monmouth to 
translate the British History, I. 1. Brought over this History from 
Armorica, XII. 20. 

Wednesday, so called from the Saxon god Woden, VI. 10. 

Westmorland, whence so called, IV. 17. 

Widen tears to pieces her son Porrex, II. 16. 

Winchester, III. 14. 

Winned, supposed to be the river Are, in Yorkshire. 

Wisseans, or Gewisseans, perhaps the same as the Wiccii, who 
inhabited Worcestershire and some adjoining counties. 

Wulfred, king of the Mercians, by Cadwallo's command makes 
peace with Oswin, XII. 13. 

Wortiporius, king of Britain, conquers the Saxons, XL 6. 

Ymnbr, king of Loegria, killed in battle by Dunwallo Molmu" 
tins, n. 17« 
York is made an archiepiscopal see, JV. 19. 



ERRATA. 

P. 29, 2 lines from the bottom, for Albani, read Albania ; p. 54» 
I. 8, for Omkey, read Orkney. 



William Stevens, Printer, Bell Yard, Temple Bar. 



