LIBRARY OF 
WELLESLEY COLLEGE 




FROM Ti£E FUN J Oi' 
■iBEN NOHTON HORSFOKI) 



f 



f 



^v*O^A^,CL^^ -^ \j <i**uz^ e»>A 



(*L.<t.tJ.'' 



BOHN'S ANTIQUAEIAN LIBRAEY. 



ORDERICUS VITALIS. 



THE 



ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY 



ENGLAND AND NORMANDY, 



ORDERICUS VI TALIS. 



translated, with notes, 

and the introduction of guizot, 

By THOxMAS forester, M.A. 



VOL. III. 



LONDOIS": 

HENRY G. BOHN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN. 

MDCCCLIT. 



J". HADDOX AND SON, PKINTEllS, CASTLli JsTllKET, FIXSiiUiiY. 

1 1 GSia 



v3 



THE 

ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY 
ORDERICUS Y'l TALIS. 



BOOK VIIL 

Ch. XTX. Prince Henry obtains possession of iJie castle of 
Domfront — Singular escape of a prisoner from the dungeon. 

In the year of our Lord 1092, the fifteenth indiction, 
Henry, son of King "William, by God's help and the sup- 
port of his friends, obtained possession of the castle of 
Domfront, and began from thence to urge strong claims to 
his hereditary rights. This prince, being the youngest, did 
not receive fraternal treatment from his brothers, but was 
compelled to seek the aid of foreigners, such as the Erench 
and Bretons, as if he had been himself an alien, and was 
harassed by many vicissitudes of fortune during five years. ^ 
At length, by God's providence, the inhabitants of Dom- 
front, pitying the misfortunes of the illustrious exile, sent 
one Harecher ^ to invite him out of Erance, and, giving him 

^ Reckoning from the death of William the Conqueror. 

^ " This person," says M. Le Prevost, " was not called Harecher, but 
Achard." Mr. Stapleton thinks that our autiior was correct in writing it 
Harecherius, and considers that word synonymous with Archarius, which 
frequently appears in the Rolls of the Exchequer. We find there a Richard 
Archarhcs, or Archer, and a Richard de Domfront, whom he considers the 
same person. This inhabitant of Domfront received from the gratitude of 
Henry 1. seven manors in Berkshire. This grant is made to him under 
the name of Robert the Archer, and Henry calls him magisier mens. 
Wace, who calls him Haschier, adds that it was to Paris he went to give 
the invitation to the young prince. He was descended from another 
Achard, who appears as witness to the charter of foundation of Lonlai in 
1026, with this description: Achardus dives, miUs de Donnif route. 
' YOL. III. B 



2 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b.VIII. CU.XIX. 

an honourable reception, threw off the yoke of Eobert de 
Belesme, by whom they had been long grievously oppressed, 
and declared Henry their lord. The prince forthwith took 
arms against Hobert, count of Normandy, and made repri- 
sals for his own banishment by pillaging and burning the 
country; taking many captives, and throwing them into 
prison. Among these was a man named Eualed from the 
territories of St. Evroult, who was lodged in the ca&tle of 
Domfront. The prisoner, sitting by the fireside, for it was 
in the winter, began to invoke St. Evroult in his tribulation, 
thus addressing him : " I beseech thee, holy Evroult, the 
friend of God, to deliver me from this captivity. Thou 
knowest that I have always served thee faithfully." Having 
said this, he suddenly fell asleep, when, lo ! he felt some one 
take his hand and begin to pull him. Upon his waking, he 
found himself entirely free from pain, for he was so feeble 
that he could not walk without some one's help, having 
received injury by falling from the horse on which he was 
bound. He began now to consider what he could do to 
escape from his prison. He had noticed that the knight 
who brought him there had firmly closed the gate which led 
to the garden with a bolt. But faith giving him courage, he 
approaclied the gate and seized the bar which fastened it, 
when, strange to say, the bolt, which was so strongly fixed, 
fell to the ground. Having opened the gate, he proceeded 
to the end of the little garden, but on arriving there he saw 
a number of soldiers standing in the courtyard. However, 
he stretched out his hand, saying, "St. Evroult, be my guide," 
and so, -wdth bare feet and having only his shirt and cloak 
on, passed through the crowd of soldiers, as if they had lost 
their sight. None of them asked who he was, or whither 
he was goiugi^ think that they were prevented seeing him 
by the power of the most blessed saint. About six o'clock, 
the fugitive, looking back, perceived the knight who had 
made him prisoner galloping after him ; whereupon, being 
much terrified, he concealed himself in a thicket of under- 
wood, which happened to be in sight. The knight riding 
up to the spot, inquired of some husbandmen who were 
ploughing a neighbouring field, if they had seen any one 
running that way, but they, fear putting them on their 
guard, denied having noticed any one, although they had 



A.D. 1093.] PHILIP I. MARKTES THE COUNTESS OF ANJOU. 3 

seen him well enough. The knight having left the spot, the 
captive rose from his lurking place, and, with the help of 
God and St. Evroult, reached his home in safety, where ho 
lived till my time. I heard what I have related from his 
own mouth, and as he was an honest and worthy man, I 
have no scruple in crediting it. 

Ch. XX. PJiilip L of France carries off and marries Ber- 
trade, ivife of the cotmt of Anjou, repudiating his queen 
Bertha — He is excommunicated — Bhilip and Bertrade 
reconciled to the count — His children — List of French 



About this time a disgraceful and troublesome affair 
happened in Erance. Bertrade, countess of Anjou, appre- 
hensive that her husband would treat her as he had done 
two other wives, and abandon her to shame like a vile harlot, 
in the conscious pride of her high birth and great beauty, 
sent a confidential messenger to Philip, king of Erance, 
disclosing to him what was passing in her mind. She pre- 
ferred leaying^er^usbajid voluntarily, and taking another, 
to being repudiated by him and exposed to contempt. The 
dissolute king, on learning the lascivious woman's desires, 
consented to her proposals, and received her on her arrival 
in Erance, after having escaped from her husband, with open 
arms.^ In short, he divorced his noble and excellent wife 
Eertha,^ daughter of Elorence, duke of Erisia, who had 
borne him two children, Lewis ^ and Constance, and married 
Bertrade, who had lived nearly four years with Eulk of 
Anjou.* Odo, bishop of Bayeux, celebrated this execrable 
marriage,^ and received from the adulterous king the churches 

' Bertrade withdrew privately from the church of St. John at Tours 
during the ceremony of consecrating the holy water on Saturday, June 4, 
1093, and hastened to join the king who was waiting for her at a short 
distance. 

^ Bertha, daughter of Florence, count of Holland, and Gertrude of 
Saxony, was married to Philip about the year 107'2. 

' Lewis the Fat. 

* In 1089. 

' It is not exactly known who celebrated this marriage. According to 
William of Malmesbury it was William Bonne- Ame, archbishop of Rouen, 
which might account for his suspension by Pascal II. This solution would 
be perfectly satisfactory, were it not for the long interval which elapsed 
between the fault and its punishment, very different from the practice of 

b2 



% 



4 OEDERICUS YTTALIS. [u. YIII. CH.XX. 

4>f the city of Mantes, which he held for some time as the 
reward of his ill-omened service. No French bishop could 
be persuaded to consecrate so detestable an union, but, 
adhering to the rules of ecclesiastical discipline, they all 
chose to please God rather than man, and concurred in one 
universal anathema against the shameful marriage. Thus 
the bold harlot left one adulterous husband, the count of 
Anjou, and clung to another, the king of France, to the hour 
of his death. Thus, alas! the throne of France was dis- 
graced by the abominable sin of adultery, and violent threats 
and great preparations for war between these powerful 
rivals were the consequence. But the feud oetween them 
was allayed by the dexterity of female cunning, Bertrade's 
ready wit finding means to effect a reconciliation so perfect 
that she brought them together at a splendid banquet,^ in 
which she served them with her own hands with consummate 
grace, to their great catisfaction.^ Pope Urban sent legates 
from the apostolical see into France, and both by letters and 
the remonstrances of the priests, rebuked the erring king, 
censuring him severely for having repudiated his lawful wife, 
and united KimiSelf to an adulteress, against the laws of God.* 

the court of Rome at this period. On the other hand it is not more easy 
to explain the pope's indulgence to the bishop of Bayeux, if he was the 
guilty person. But Urban II., in a letter to Reynold, archbishop of 
Rheims, dcscjjbes this marriage ceremony to have been performed by 
Ursion, bishoff of Senlis. In that case we may suppose that the archbishop 
of Rouen, and bishop of Bayeux, only sanctioned it with their presence. 

' Amhosrpte simul ad mensam discumbere faceret et node sequenti 
ambobus in vnd conclavi stratd prcBpararet. Tins curious addition 
is supplied by the MS. which belonged to Cliristina, queen of Sweden. 

^ The count of Anjou, whose indignation was at first exhibited in the 
grossest manner, treated the affair, in the end, very differently. Philip 
and Bertrade paid him a visit at Angers on Wednesday, October G, 1106, 
and were received by him with great honours, in whicli not only the laity, 
but, what is more extraordinary, the clergy, took part. M. Le Prevost, 
however, is of opinion that Bertrade did not descend from her royal 
dignity to serve at table the vnssal she honoured with a visit ; and he 
observes that there is no other instance of a queen of France having given 
such service, even to her husband. 

^ The first excommunication against the adulterers was pronounced at 
the council of Autun (October IC, 1094) by Hugh, archbishop of Lyons, 
legate of the holy see ; and the second at the council of Clermont (Nov. 
18 — 26, 1095) by Urban II. in person. It was removed by the same 
pope at the council of Nisnies (beginning of July, ]()9()), on the promise 
inade by Philip to repudiate Bertrade, and again issued by the two legates 



A.D. 1099 — 1110.] KINO PHILIP EXCOMMUNICATED. 5 

But Kiiif^ Philip, hardened in his iniquity, and like the deaf 
adder ^hich shuts her ears to the voice of the charmer, 
treated with contempt the exliortations of the fathers who 
corrected him, and remained sunk in the foul pit of adultery 
for a long period; two sous, Philip and Ploruy,^ being the 
fruit of this illicit intercourse. He was therefore placed 
under an interdict for nearly fifteen years, while Urban and 
Paschal were popes of Eome.* During all this time, he 
never wore his crown or royal robes, nor celebrated any 
festival in kingly stafe. "Wherever he went, in every city 
and town of Prance, as soon as the clergy received intelli- 
gence of his arrival, the bells ceased to be rung, and the 
regular chants of the clergy were suspended. In consequence 
there was general mourning, and divine worship was per- 
formed in private as long as the princely sinner sojourned in 
the diocese. However, in deference to his royal dignity and 
by licence from the bishops, whose sovereign he was, a 
chaplain was allowed him, by whom he heard mass performed 
with his household. 

About this time Prance was famous for several pious and 
learned bishops. The aged Leuter ^ filled the metropolitan 
see of Bourges, and Daimbert that of Sens.* The illustrious 
^Reynold was archbishop of Pheims,^ and at his death was 
succeeded by Ealph, surnamed Le Yera.^ The learned Ivea 

at the council of Poitiers, the 18th of November, 1 100. Nothwithstanding 
the promise of separation given at the council of Beaugenci (July 30, 1 104), 
absolution was not renewed until the fourteenth council of Paris (Dec. 2, 
1110), where the promise was confirmed on oath. 

^ Philip, count of Mantes, and lord of Meun in Berri. Florus (Fleuri) 
married the heiress of Nangis. To these must be added Cecilia, first 
married to the famous Tancred, and afterwards to Pons, count of Tripoli. 

"^ Without even counting the period during which the excommunicatioa 
was suspended, our author commits an error of nearly four years. 

3 Read Leodegar, 1097— March 31, 1120. 

* March, 1098— November 28, 1122. 

» Revnold du Bellai, archbishop of Rheims, 1083 — January 21, 1096. 

^ Ralph Le Vert, archbishop of Rheims, October 25, 1 1 08— July 23, 
1124. It is singular that our author should omit in this enumeration 
Manasses, the pious and learned archbishop of Rheims, who filled the uoe 
between Reynold du Bellai and Ralph Le Vert. Gregory VII. called 
him, long before he was a bishop, his beloved in Christ Jesus, and givc^ 
him the title of zealous defender of the catholic faith. Manasses, the 
second of that name, of the house of Chatillon, flourished 1046 — Sept. 18, 
1106. 



6 OHDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.YITI. CH.XXT. 

was bishop of Chartres,^ to whose merits a good life and 
sound doctrine bore clear testimony. Walo was bishop of 
Paris ; ^ and other bishops were eminent in their several 
dioceses, whose piety and holy teaching filled France with 
joy. King Philip, however, obstinately rejected their exhor- 
tations that he should amend his life ; and, contaminated by 
his adultery, persisted in his crime, so that he was deservedly 
afflicted vrith tooth-ache and scurvy, and many other infirm- 
ities and ignominies.^ In consequence, with the consent of 
the French, he gave up to his son, Lewis, Pontois, Mantes, 
and the whole county of the Vexin, with the entire adminis- 
tration of the aff'airs of the kingdom, at a time when he 
had scarcely reached the age of manhood.^ He espoused 
his daughter to Hugh, count of Troyes, and she was after- 
wards married at Chartres to Bohemond, the illustrious 
duke of Antioch. This duke came to France in the year of 
our Lord 1106, and was everywhere received by the nations 
of the west as the principal standard-bearer of the forces of 
Christendom. Constance, the king's daughter, accompanied 
him on his return to the East, and many thousands of the 
people of the West enlisted under his command in the wars 
against the Infidels.^ But that Crusade did not in all things 
turn out as they expected. 

Ch. XXI. A legend of some eoctraordinary appearances in 
the church of St. Peter at Coutances. 

In the year of our Lord 1108,® the first indiction, William 

* Ives, bishop of Chartres, end of November, 1091 — December 23, 1116. 
2 Walo or Galo, bishop of Paris, 1 105— February 23, 1116, 

' M. Le Prevost remarks, that Ordericus is the only writer who mentions 
these two chastisements of the divine wrath. Toothache, he savs, is too 
common a pain (at least in our days) for us to look to so high a quarter 
for its infliction, and there is some difficulty in believing that a king of 
France, even so little exemplary as Philip I., could have been subject to 
the disgusting disease which our author attributes to him. 

* The exact time at which Lewis the Fat was associated in the govern- 
ment is not known. This prince, so different from his fiither, displayed so 
much activitv, that he had the surname of Non Dormiens, The Sleepless 

^ See before, vol. ii. p. 223. 

*» It is impossible to account for our author's abruptly stopping the 
course of his narrative to introduce a legend so little worthy of finding a 
place in serious history as the account of the prodigy given iii this chapter. 



A.D. 1108.] PROPIGIES AT COUTANCES. 7 

the archbisbop ^ assembled a synod of bishops and abbots at 
lloiien, and during several days held consultations with his 
suffragans on urgent ecclesiastical affairs. At that time 
Ralph, bishop of Coutances,^ came to the lodgings of Serlo, 
bishop of Seez, who was the wiser of the two, and con- 
versing with him on various subjects, received full explana- 
tions. At last, among other things, the bishop of Coutances 
said : " We have in our city a church built in ancient times, 
and dedicated to St. Peter the Apostle,^ where many miracles 
were formerly wrought by divine power. Health was 
frequently restored to the sick, and lighted candles were 
often seen to fall from on high, A certain nun, who passed 
for being eminently pious, daily frequents this church, and 
relates that she was a constant witness of these prodigies. 
In order to furnish an undoubted proof of her story, on one 
occasion, when she was keeping solitary watch in a chapel 
[within the church], and she saw a lighted candle let down 
from above without human aid, she reverently approached 
the high altar, and extinguishing the candle, wrapped it in a 
clean napkin, and deposited it in her chest. At a suitable 
time she told what she had seen, and opened her chest to 
exhibit the token, but she found only ashes to show that the 
candle had been lighted, for it was entirely burnt out with- 
out injury to the napkin and other things contained in the 
chest. 

Lately, also, while the people were celebrating the feast 
of St. Peter the Apostle in the same church, and the clergy 
assembled in the choir were performing vespers, all present 
saw three wax candles, burning brightly, descend from above 
upon the altar, and were struck with wonder at so strange a 
prodigy. The candles burned until the end of matins, and 
were not entirely consumed until the dawn of day. The 
tapers stood in due order upon the altar, but did not touch 
the altar cJoth. The centre one was large and square, the 
two others were less and round. The news of this occur- 
rence was spread throughout the city, and almost all the 

^ William Bonne- Ame, archbishop of Rouen, July, 1079 — February 9, 
1110. 

2 Ralph, bishop of Coutances, April 3, 1093—1110. 

•* There is still a parish church of this name at Coutances, to the soutA of 
the cathedral. 



8 OKDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.YIII. CK.XXII. 

clergj and laity flocked after vespers were over to see the 
extraordinary spectacle. No one ventured to toucb the 
candles, but on the square one the clerks read the following 
writing : on the first side, " Send, Peter, wrath from 
heaven ; " on the second, " . . . .^ the people from sin ; " on 
the third, " Have mercy on them ; " on the fourth, " Tears." 
The letters were well formed and could be read with ease, 
und the learned carefully inquired the meaning of the 
inscription ; and, adding words understood, which were 
necessary to complete the sense, they interpreted it according 
to the best of their judgment. It appeared to them that 
Grod thus spoke to Peter, who is the governor of the earth, 
the judge of the world, and the bearer of the keys of the 
celestial kingdom : " Peter, send thy wrath from heave.n, that 
it may be poured forth on the . . . people (that is, the 
people totally lost in sin). I should have mercy on them if 
they offered me the tears of a true penitence." The words 
of God, indeed, are not subject to the rules of grammar, 
and cannot be forced to follow the idioms of human, 
language. We have been much terrified at Coutances by 
this revelation; and feel that perils are impending over us 
in these plagues and storms of war, and are apprehensive 
that still worse may happen in future." 

Halph, bishop of Coutauces, relating this story, his hearers 
were struck with astonishment, and soon afterwards many- 
calamities ensued from wars, and tempests, and famine. 
The bishop himself died soon afterwards, and a destructive 
pestilence raged throughout his diocese. 

Cn. XXII. Buptnre with Malcolm, king of Scots — and tlie 
expedition of William Bifiis to the borders — Peace made 
hy the mediation of Robert CuHhose — Death of Malcolm 
and Queen Margaret — Affairs of Scotland — Disputed 
succession to the throne. 

In the year of our Lord 1089, the tenth indiction, the 
venerable Lanfranc, archbishop of Canterbury, departed 
this life, and the estates belonging to the metropolitan see 

^ Tarisum, a word perfectly unintelligible, is found in the text ; but the 
biihop of Coutanccs informs us, a few lines afterwards, that divine revela- 
tions are not to be subjected either to rules of grammar or language. 



A.D. 10S9 — 1092.] KING Malcolm's iieyolt. 9 

were treated for three years as part of the royal domains. 
At last, the blessed Anselm, abbot of Bee, by God's provi- 
dence, was appointed his successor, and governed the 
church seventeen years, during v^hich he suffered severe 
trouble and adversity. 

At that time much wickedness began to prevail, and 
greatly increased in violence. The men attached to military 
service first set the example of departing from the habits of 
their fathers in their dress and manner of wearing the hair, 
which was soon followed by the burghers and country folk, 
and almost all the common people. Offences against the 
laws of God becoming flagrant, the divine judgments 
severely punished the guilty with a vaidetjL-.Q£__calamjties 
which they well merited. 

At that time,'' Malcolm, king of Scotland, revolted against 
the king of England, and refused to render him the hoiiiage 
he_owed him. But King William having, as before related, 
been reconciled with his brother Eobert in Normandy, he 
brought him over on his return to make head against 
the faitMeiiS- traitors who had conspired against their roya) 
master. Assembling the whole military force of England,^ 
he led them as far as the great river which is called in the 
Scottish tongue, Watra;^ but finding it impossible to cross, 
he encamped on the shore. The king of Scots held the 
other bank with his troops ready for battle, and sent envoys 
with this message to the king of England : " King "William, ' 
I owe you nothing except war, if you provoke me to it by 
your outrages. But if I see Eobert, the eldest son of the 
late King AVilliam, I am ready to pay him the homage which 
is due to him." This message being delivered, a council 
was held, in consequence of which Duke Eobert crossed 

^ During the vacancy of the see of Canterbury, May 24, 1089 — Dec. 4, 
10.f»2. 'Ihe invjision of Northumberland by Malcolm occurred in the 
month of May, 1091. 

* It was in the month of September that William Rufusand his brother, 
the duke, undertook the expedition against the Scots. A considerable 
fleet, which sailed before Michaelmas, and was to have acted in concert, 
was shipwrecked, and a number of knights perished by cold and hunger. 

^ The Water. It is evident that t!ie Firth of Forth is meant. The 
disaster mentioned in the preceding note probably deprived the king of the 
me.ms of transporting his army across the Firth, and disposed him to 
amicably adjust the quarrel. 



10 ORDEEICTJS VITALIS. [b.VIII. Cn.XXII. 

over with a small retinue.^ The king of Scots received him 
with great courtesy, and entertained him amicably three 
days. He then conducted the duke to the top of a lofty 
hill, from whence, on a plain below, a large body of men was 
to be seen ; he then led him to a spot between two hills, 
and pointed out a still larger army on the level ground. 
" Supported," he said, " by these numerous bands of my 
Scottish subjects, I am prepared to give a good reception to 
your brother, if he dares to cross over the Firth. I wish 
lie may attack us, that he may feel the points of our spears. 
I am willing to confess that when King Edward gave me his 
niece Margaret in marriage, he conferred on me the county 
of Lothian.^ King William afterwards confirmed what his 
predecessor had granted, and commended me to you as his 
eldest son. The engagements made with you I am ready to 
keep, but I promised nothing and I owe nothing to your 
brother. ' No man,' as Christ says, ' can serve two 
masters.'" Eobert replied, "What you say is true; but 
there have been changes in the state of affairs, and my 
father's former arrangements have been much shaken. Now, 
therefore, illustrious king, be persuaded by me ; return with 
me to my brother, and you will receive from him kindness and 
many benefits ; he is a nearer neighbour to you, and more 
powerful and rich than I am." The king of Scots trusted in 
these promises, and having had several conferences with 
William Rufus, made peace with him. Having disbanded 

* The Saxon Chronicle associates Edgar Atheling in this mediation ^vith 
Malcolm, his brother-in-law, at whose court he had taken refuge when 
William Rufus seized the domains in Normandy granted him by Robert 
Curthose. The duke also at this time reconciled the king to Edgar. 
Robert quitted England on the 23rd of December, in great dudgeon at his 
brother's refusal to perform the conditions of their treaty. 

Though the name of Lothian is now restricted to some fertile districts 
m the south of Scotland, all the country between the Tweed and the Firth 
of Forth was so called in early times. It was formerly held under the 
crown of England, and formed during the Heptarchy part of the kingdom 
of Northumbria. The union of this part of Scotland with England, as well 
as its being held in fealty by the kings of Scots, commenced as early as the 
reign of King Edgar (956 — 975). The Firth of Forth, mentioned in a 
preceding note, was the proper boundary between the two kingdoms. The 
Saxon Chronicle, in recording the transactions of this year (1091), says, 
" Malcolm went with his army out of Scotland into Lodene or Lothene in 
England." 



A.D. 1093.] XlXCr MALCOLM ASSASSINATED. ll 

their armies, the two kings then departed for England 
together.' 

After a time, King Malcolm wishing to return to his own 
kingdom, and having received magnificent presents from 
King William,^ he was met on the road^near theT)orders by 
Robert de Mowbray and his nephew Morel with some men- 
at-arms, who lay in ambush for him, and murdered him.^ 
The king of England and his great nobles hearing of this, 
were deeply distressed, being ashamed that so foul and cruel 
a deed should be done by Normans,:)^ An old crime was re- 
newed in modern times, for as Abner son of Ner, returning 
in peace from David's house, was treacherously slain by Joash 
and Abisha, so King Malcolm peaceably returning from the 
court of King William, was assasinated by the family of 
Mowbray. 

Margaret, the queen of Scotland, alarmed at the distress- 
ing intelligence conveyed to her of her husband's death, 
summoned an assembly of all the great men of her realm, 
and presenting to them her sons Edgar, Alexander, and 
David,* entreated them to give them the honours due to the 
king's sons. The council receiving her supplication with 
great favour, she ordered great numbers of the poor to be 
assembled, and distributed among them all her treasures, for 
the love of God, beseeching them all to pray earnestly to 
the Lord for her own and her children's welfare, and for the 

* The two kings again swore to their treaty of peace at Gloucester on St. 
Bartholomew's day, the 24th of August, 1092. 
O. 2 William of Malmesbury says that Malcolm got nothing from the king 
of England but a safe conduct to return to Scotland, p. 333 in Bohn's 
Antiq. Lib. 

3 Malcolm was not assassinated on his journey home on the present 
occasion, but on the 13th of November, 1093, St. Brice's day, near the 
river Alne, while, irritated at the way in which he had been treated at 
Gloucester, he was returning for the third time to ravage England, His 
eldest son, Edward, reached Scotland, though he had received severe 
wounds at the same time, of which he died three days afterwards. Morcar, 
their assassin, was viscount of Northumberland, and in that capacity 
generally resided at Alnwick, which probably gave rise to the account that 
Malcolm had laid siege to that place. It appears that he fell victim to an 
ambuscade, and Morcar surprised him unarmed. His corpse would have 
remained unburied if two countrymen had not conveyed it to Tynemouth, 
and interred it there. 

■* Edward, the eldest son, was mortally wounded at the same time as his 
father, as mentioned in the preceding note. 



V 



OllDEEICTJS TITALIS. [b.YIII. CII.XXII. 



husband. Margaret was daughter of Edward 
igary, who was son of Edmund, surnamed Iron- 
Biaes, Drotlier of Edward, king of England ; the exiled 
Edward having married the daughter of Solomon, king of 
Hungary, and ascended the throne in right of her.^ This 
distinguished princess, descended from a long line of kings, 
was still more eminent for her great worth and the sanctity 
of her life. Having arranged the affairs of state, and 
<\distributed her wealth to the poor, she entered a church 
and commanded her chaplains to celebrate mass. Having de- 
voutly assisted at the holy office, and received herself the 
consecrated host, she expired before the prayers were 
ended.' 

Among the other good deeds of this illustrious lady, she 
restored the monastry of lona," which Colnmba, the servant 
of Christ, erected in the time of Brute, son of Meilocon 
king of the Picts ; it had fallen to ruin in the storms of 
M^ar and the lapse of ages, but this Christian queen rebuilt 
it, and placed in it monks, with an endowment for performing 
the Lord's work. 

She had entrusted her two daughters Edith and Maiy, to 

' See vol. i. p. 147. 

2 Queen Margaret died three days after lier husband, the 16th of 
November. She was canonized in 1251 ; her feast was kept on the 10th 
of June. 

^ The celebrated monastery of lona, more anciently called I, or Hii, 
and afterwards I Comb-Kill, one of the Hebrides, was founded by St. 
Columba towards the end of the sixth century. He began his mission 
from Ireland, A.D. 56.5; Dcdes Eccl. Hist. Antiq. Lib. p. 113; Mr. Ste- 
phenson's calculations making it two years sooner. The island is very 
small, being only two miles long by one wide, and containing, according to 
the Saxon Chronicle, only five hides of land, enough to support five 
families. The venerable ruins of^the monastery still attract tourists. The 
island of Tona was also called Sodorensis^ a descriptive epithet borrowed 
from the Scandinavian language (^'odor-inch, the southern island), whicli 
was also applied to the whole group by its Norwegian conquerors, and 
even the Isle of Man was comprised in it. In consequence the bishop, 
who resided in the monastery of St. Columba, took the title of episcopus 
Sodorensif!, or more rarely, episcopus MannicB et insnlarum. This bi- 
shof>ric, founded by the Norwegians, was sufl^"ragan to the metropolitan see 
of Drontheim until, in 1260, Magnus IV. of Norway ceded these islands 
to Alexander III. king of Scotland. In the reign of Edward III. the Isle 
of Man was taken from the Scots, and raised to a kingdom, and the bishop 
became a suffragan of York, Every one knows that the bishop of Man 
takes the title of bishop of Sodor and Man. 



KING Malcolm's daughter. 13 

her sister Christiana, a nun of the abbey of Ramsey/ to be 
brought up and instructed in sacred learning. They re- 
mained long with the nuns, among whom they were educated 
both in literature, and good principles and conduct, and 
becoming marriageable, these devout virgins still put their 
trust in God; for being orphans, having lost both their 
parents, and having no support from their brothers and other 
relations and friends, they found. ready help in the merciful 
care of the all-disposing providence of Grod. Alan the Eed, 
count of Brittany, demanded in marriage from king Eufus,*Jv 
Matilda, who was before called Edith, but the union was ' 
prevented by his death. After that, William de AVarrenne, 
earl of Surrey, made proposals for her,^ but by God's will, 
she was reserved for a more illustrious union; for when 
Prince Henry ascended the throne of England, he married 
Matilda,'* by whom he had William the Etheling,'^ and Matilda 
the empress.^ Mary became the wife of Eustace, count of 
Boulogne, to whom she bore an only daughter, who was 
given to Stephen, earl of Morton, with her father's hereditary 
states. 

• The abbey of Ramsey in Hampshire, founded in 907, by King Edgar. 
This princess took the veil about the year 1067, and died there in the 
odour of sanctity about 1100. She is sometimes called Christina by con- 
temporary writers. 

" Alan the Red, third son of Eudes, count of Brittany, and of Agnes of-^ 
Cornouailles, died in 1 089. As Malcolm was then living, it does not appear v 
how Alan could have demanded his daughter in marriage from William 
Rufus. 

^ William de Warrenne, the second of that name, married Elizabeth de 
Vermandois, and died in 1118. 

* Matilda was married to Henry I. the 11th of November, 1100, and 
died on the 1st of May, 1 1 18. See the character and epitaph of this good 
queen in Henry of Huntingdon s History, pp. 246, 247, Bohn's Antiq. 
Lib. 

^ This title, which was especially appropriated by the Anglo-Saxons to 
the heir-apparent to the throne, seems to have been affected by the Norman 
princes. See note, vol. i. p. 147. William, the Etheling, perished by ship- 
wreck. Matilda is better known as the Empress Maud, the pretender to 
the til rone in the troublesome times of King Stephen. 

^ Mary of Scotland, the youngest daughter of Malcolm and Margaret, 
married Eustace, count de Boulogne. Their daughter Matilda, who con- 
veyed that county to Stephen de Blois, afterwards king of England, died 
the i>rd of May, 1151, and was buried in the abbey of Feversham in Kent, 
which she founded jointly with her husband in 1048. Stephen, and their 
eldest son Eustace, were also interred there. 



14 OllDERICUS TITALIS. [b.YIII. CH.XXII. 

On the death of Malcolm, king of the Scots, great divi- 
siona arose among them, in reference to the succession to the 
croNA-n. Edgar, the king's eldest son, assumed it as hia 
lawful right, but Donald,' King Malcolm's brother, having 
usurped authority, opposed him with great cruelty, and at 
length the brave youth was murdered by his uncle. Alexan- 
der, however, hia brother, slew Donald, and ascended the 
throne ; being thus the avenger as w^ell as the successor of 
his brother, he reigned for some years, and married a daughter 
of Henry, king of England, by a concubine.^ On his death 
without issue, he left the kingdom to his brother David. 
Thus all the three brothers were successively kings of Scotland, 
Q being distinguished for their good conduct and love of God, 
. ' and living worthily according to their circumstances as young 
princes, and men of the world. 

David, the youngest of the three brothers, prudently 
escaping from the fierce attacks of the Scots, came to the 
court of Henry, king of England. "While his countrymen 
were harassed with civil wars, and were destroying their 
own bowels with implacable rage, David remained constantly 
at his brother-in-law's court, and being educated with the 
young lords in the royal household, as he grew in years 
merited the intimate friendship of that wise and powerful 
king. He received from him the distinguished honour of 
knighthood, and gifts of every kind were heaped upon him. He 
married the daughter of Earl Waltheof, and Judith the 
king's cousin, and possessed the two counties of Northamp- 
ton and Huntingdon, which Simon de Senlis held as earl 
in her right.'' She bore him a son, named Henry, and two 

•■ Donald-Bane usurped the throne on the death of Malcolm, but six 
months afterwards was driven from it by Duncan, who was probably 
Malcolm's eldest son by a former wife, Ingeburge, widow of Torfinn, earl 
of Orkney. Duncan was killed after a reign of eighteen months by the 
partisans of Donald, who again reigned till 1098. It was not till then 
that Edgar, the third son of Malcolm, showed himself on the borders with 
succours from William Rufus, and was immediately acknowledged by the 
iScots. Donald was thrown into prison, where he died shortly afterwards. 
Edgar died the 8th of January, 1107, without issue. 

* Alexander, suniamed The Severe, succeeded Edgar, and married 
Sybille, natural daughter of Henry I. by Sybille Corbet. 

' Simon bore the name of Senlis, not as count, but as having been born 
in that city, being a younger son of a person named Rondel-le-Richc. 
Having married Matilda, eldest daughter of Judith and Waltheof, ho 



A.D. 1125.] DAYID, KING OF SCOTS. 15 

daughters, Clarice and Hodierna. His eldest male offspring 
was barbarously murdered by the iron fingers of a wretch of 
a clerk, who for an abominable crime which he had perpe- 
trated in Norway, was punished by a sentence of mutilation, 
which deprived him of his eyes, and his hands, and feet 
In his own country he had plunged a long knife into the 
bowels of a priest who was celebrating mass, just after 
he had received the host, and the people were departing ; so 
that the priest fell dead, and his intestines were horribly 
exposed before the altar. This ruffian was afterwards housed 
by Earl David in England, for the love of God, and, witli 
his little daughter, sufficiently supplied with food and clothes, 
yet he cruelly tore with the iron fingers which he used 
because he was maimed, the bowels of the young son of his 
benefactor, only two years old, pretending to caress Him; 
and thus, at the devil's instigation, suddenly scattered the 
intestines on the lap of the nurse who was suckling the child. 
Such was the end of the eldest of David's ofispring. The 
wretched clerk was bound to the tails of four unbroken colts, 
and torn to pieces as they dashed asunder, to strike 
murderers with terror.^ 

In the year of our Lord 1125, Alexander, king of the 
Scots, died, and David his brother ascended the throne.^ 
However Malcolm, a bastard son of Alexander, attempted 
to deprive his uncle of the crown, and involved him in two 
rather severe contests, but David, who was his superior in 

assumed the English title of earl, in her right, in respect of the counties of 
Huntingdon and Northampton. He died at Charit^-sur- Loire, on his 
return from the Holy Land. 

Matilda was niece of Henry I., after the custom of Brittany. David 
of Scotland, her second husband, bereaved of her in 1131, was incon- 
solable for her loss. It appears by the Exchequer rolls that this prince 
retained the possession of the earldoms of Huntingdon and Northampton 
as long as he lived, though by right they ought to have passed to Simon 
de Senlis, the son, on the death of his mother, Queen Matilda. 

1 There seems no reason to doubt the truth of these accounts, although 
the wretched Scottish historians who were contemporary with these events 
omit "all notioa of them, and mention no other issue of his but Prince 
Henry, who died before him in 1152. David himself was found dead, in 
the attitude of prayer, on the 24th of May, 1 153. 

' It was in the year 1024 (April 24) that Alexander died, and was 
bucceeded by hia brother David. 



16 ORDEEICUS VITALTS. [b.YIII. Cn.XXlT. 

talent, as well as in Tvealth and power, defeated him and his 
party.^ 

In the year of our Lord 1130, while King David was ably 
applying himself to a cause in King Henry's court, and care- 
fully examining a charge of treason, which they say Geoifrey 
de Clinton- had been guilty of, Angus, earl of Moray, with 
Malcolm and five thousand armed men, entered Scotland with 
the intention of reducing the whole kingdom to subjection. 
Upon this, Edward, the son of Siward earl of Mercia, in the 
time of King Edward,^ who was a cousin of King David and 
commander of his army, assembled troops and suddenly 
threw himself in the enemy's way. A battle was at length 
fought, in which Earl Angus was slain, and his troops 
defeated, taken prisoners, or put to flight. Vigorously 
pursuing the fugitives with his soldiers elated with victory, 
and entering Moray,* now deprived of its lord and protector, 
he obtained, by God's help, possesion of the whole of that 

^ Malcolm Macbeth was not a son of Alexander, but called himself the 
eon of Angus, who will be mentioned in a succeeding note ; but his origin 
is really unknown. It does not appear that He raised the standard of 
rebellion more than once, on which occasion he assumed the natne of 
Wimuiul, as well as the quality of son of Angus. It is not, however, 
impossible that there may have been anothei Malcolm, a natural son of 
King Alexander, but not this Malcolm Macbeth, who caused troubles in 
Scotland at the commencement of his uncle's reign, as our author- relates, 
but we have no other account of him. 

*•* Roger de Hovedcn places this trial at Woodstock, where the king 
kept the feast of Easter, and not in 1130, but in 1131. The rolls of the 
ICxchequer, however, for 1 130 contain an account of the disbursements for 
King David's journey to England and return. 

^ Siward Barn, Edward's father, has been already mentioned, pp. 4 and 
19J5 of the second volume. The word barn, heurn, was a title of honour 
among the Anglo-Saxons somewhat corresponding to that of r/«/(/, rendered 
in Latin clilo, a prince. The relationship between Edward and King 
David, here referred to, has led to the supposition that Siward Barn was 
a younger son of Siward, earl of Northumberland and Huntingdon (Shake- 
speare's Siward, see before, vol. ii. p. 4.0), and David's great-uncle by his 
mother,sister of King Malcolm. Earl Waltheof {ib 755, 84, 103) was Siward's 
eldest son, and this would explain his near relationship to the royal family 
of Siotland. His domains at Lechlade, in Gloucestershire, and in the isle 
of Axholm in Lincolnshire, were part of the territory of the ancient king- 
dom of Mercia. 

* Morajia; formerly including not only Moray proper, or Elgin, but 
the county of Nairn and great part of Banff. It was also a bishopric. 



A.D. 1095.1 EEYOLT OF THE NOEMAN BAEOXS. 17 

large territory. Thus David's dominions were augmented, and 
his power was greater than that of any of his predecessors, 
while by his care Scotland became distinguished for the 
number of devout and learned men it possessed. I have 
somewhat prolonged this digression in consideration that 
the Scots adhered to the catholic faith from very ancient 
times,^ and willingly practised Christian simplicity ; but now 
I compel myself to return to the work I have in hand 
relative to our own country. 

Ch. XXIII. Conspiracy of the Norman harons against the 
king — They revolt under Mohert de Moivhray, earl of 
Northmnherland — He is iesieged in Bamborough castle — 
Made prisoner and confined for life — Punishment of the 
other conspirators. 

The great body of the Normans who, becoming rich in 
England with wealth gained by the labours of others, were 
filled with arrogance, were still urged onward by the incen- 
tives of an insatiable avarice and pride. It was to them a 
source of envy and grief that William Eufus was distinguished 
for his courage and merit, and fearing no one, governed all 
his subjects with a firm hand. In their insolence they 
leagued together and formed a foul conspiracy against the 
king, and disregarding the fealty which they had sworn to 
their lord, fell into the disgraceful crime of treason. 

E-obert, son of Eoger de Mowbray,' was distinguished for 
his great power and wealth ; his bold spirit and military 
daring caused him to hold his fellow nobles in contempt, and 
inflated with empty pride he disdained obedience to his. 
superiors. In person he was of great stature, size, and 
strength, of a dark complexion and covered with hair, his 
disposition bold and crafty, his features melancholy and harsh. 
He reflected more than he talked, and scarcely ever smiled 
wheu he was speaking. He possessed two hundred and 
eighty manors in England, which the great King "William 
had granted to Geoffrey, bishop of Coutances. This bishop 
plumed himself upon hisnoble birth, and was more distinguish- 
ed for military than clerical ability, better able to array armed 

^ Our author alludes to the pretensions of the church of Scotland to 
have received Christianity as early as the age of Pope Victor I., 193 — 202. 
* Nephew of Geoffrey, bishop of Coutances. 
VOL. III. C 



18 OEDEEICUS yiTALIS. [b.VIII. CK.Xilll. 

yoldiers for battle, than to teach cowled clerks in the chants 
of the church. He was therefore often engaged in the con- 
flicts against the English and Danes, and when the enemy 
was subdued obtained vast possessions, which at his death 
he bequeathed to his nephew ilobert, earl of Northumberland.^ 

In order to extend his territories, and that he might 
strengthen himself by alliances with the most powerful of 
his countrymen connected with him by ties of affinity, Bobert 
married a noble lady who was daughter of Eichard de Laigle,^ 
and niece of Hugh, earl of Chester, by his sister Judith. 
He therefore took the lead among his fellow conspirators in 
a fruitless project, and broke into open rebellion. 

Four large ships, called canards, sailed from Norway to 
England, and fa]ling into the hands of Eobert and his nephew 
Morel and their retainers, the peaceable merchants were 
stripped with violence of all they possessed. Having lost 
their goods, they went to court and in deep distress laid a 
complaint of their injuries before the king. William imme- 
diately commanded the earl in positive terms to restore 
to the merchants without delay all that he had abstracted 
from them ; but the order was treated with supreme con- 
tempt. The generous king then caused an inquiry to be 
made of the amount of their losses, and made it good out of 
his own treasury.^ He then summoned Eobert to answer in 
his court, but he refused to attend. 

The king being satisfied of the perverse temper of this 
fierce baron, collected troops and led a strong force against 
him. When he approached the borders of Eobert's territories, 
Gilbert de Tunbridge,* a wealthy and powerful knight, drew 

^ Geoffrey de Mowbray died the 2nd of February, 1093. 

* Matilda de Laigle, who was still living in 1130. 

^ A large share of the commerce of England had been in the hands of 
the Scandinavians, the great maritime power of the north of Europe, ever 
since their piratical enterprises had been exchanged for colonization in 
England. Their merchants were settled in London, Bristol, and other 
towns on the east and south coasts. In making this restitution, William 
Rufus, with a policy directed to the encouragement of trade which might 
not have been expected in a Norman sovereign, only adopted the principles 
of the enlightened maritime code of the Scandinavian nations, which 
enjoined it even in the case of losses by foreign merchants in consequence 
of shipwreck on their shores. See an essay On the Danes in England, in 
the Jubilee edition of King Alfred's works, and Warsaac's Danes, pp.99,&;c. 

* Gilbert de Tunbrjdge, lord of Clare. His father, Richard de Bienfaite. 



A.l). 109o.] BLOCKADE OF BAMBOEOUGII CASTLE. 19 

the king apart and falling at his feet, to his great astonish- 
ment, said: " I beseech you, my lord and king, to pardon my 
guilt, and I will reveal to you what greatly concerns your 
safety." The king being much surprised, hesitated a little 
while he deliberated in his own mind; at length he graciously 
pardoned the suppliant, and anxiously waited the fulfilment 
of his promise. Gilbert then said: " Stay your march, noble 
king, and do not enter this wood which lies before us. Tour 
enemies lie in ambush in it well armed, with the design of 
killing you. We have conspired against you and have sworn 
to compass your death." On receiving this intelligence the 
king halted, and learnt from the baron's information who the 
traitors were. 

Having outwitted the assasins who had undeitaken to 
murder the king, the troops passed the ambuscade without 
molestation, and laid siege to the strong castle of Bamborough. 
That fortress being impregnable, the marshes and waters and 
other impediments to a march with which it is surrounded, 
rendering it inaccessible, the king caused a new fortification to 
be erected for the defence of the province and to shut in the 
enemy, and placed a garrison in it well supplied with arms and 
provisions. Those who were in the secret of the conspiracy and 
theirpartisans, fearing detection, observed silence, andin great 
alarm mingled with the royal troops and gladly entered the 
service of the man whose destruction they had planned. The; 
king now held his troops ready for battle, and compelled his 
officers and the other English nobles to urge forward the works 
of the new fortification in which their people were employed 
with the utmost despatch; meanwhile Eobert saw from his 
battlements, in deep tribulation, the works which were being 
carried on against him, and called loudly on his accomplices by 
name,publiclyrecommendingthem to adhere faithfully to their 



also bore the surname of Tunbridge. It was one of the two under which 
he figured in Domesday-book, the other being Richard Fitz- Gilbert. 
Clare became ultimately the distinguishing name of the family. Baldwin 
Fitz-Gilbert was one of the barons who supported King Stephen, and 
addressed the troops as the king's deputy before the battle of Lincoln. — 
Henry of Huntingdon, p. 277, Antiq. Lib. Our author has related (vol. 
ii. p. 493) the tradition according to which the lordship of Tunbridge, 
given to Richard de Bienfaite as an equivalent for that of Brionne, was 
measured, acre for acre, with the latter. 

c 2 



20 OEDEETCUS TITALIS. [b.YIII. CH.XXIIT. 

traitorous league to which they had sworn. ^ The king and 
his faithful adherents only laughed at Robert's speeches, 
w^hile the consciousness that their guilt was discovered, 
tormented the conspirators with fear and shame. The king 
having now returned to his court, confident of success, in 
order that he might prudently consult with his friends on 
the government of the kingdom, Robert de Mowbray, dis- 
gusted and wearied with the long blockade came out by night, 
and attempting to pass from one castle to another fell into 
the enemies' hands. Being taken prisoner by the king's 
troops, an end was put to the war, and Eobert lived thirty 
years in confinement, and grew old while thus paying the 
penalty of his crimes. 

Matilda his wife, who had never enjoyed happiness with 
him, because their union was contracted at the very moment 
of the insurrection, and she had been led to the nuptial 
couch only three months before, trembling amid the clash of 
arms, was soon deprived of the consolations of marriage, 
and long exposed to deep sufiering. Her husband, as we 
said before, lived in prison, and during his life she could 
not according to the law of Grod marry again. At length, 
by licence from Pope Paschal," before whom the case was 

* Our author gives but a,n imperfect account of this rebellion, and of the 
vast conspiracy connected with it, for the purpose of placing Stephen 
d'Aumale on the throne, nor of the measures taken to stifle it. The 
king, after escaping the snare laid for him, took successively Newcastle 
and Tynemouth, making prisoners the brothers and bravest supporters of 
Robert de Mowbray, and then shut him up in Bamborough Castle, where 
he took refuge, building a fort opposite to it to shelter the besieging army, 
which he called Mal-Voisin. Having organized this system of blockade, 
the king crossed the Humber to wait the result, Robert, imprudently 
leaving his retreat, was pursued and obliged to throw himself into a 
monastery, where he made a desperate resistance during six days. At last 
he was wounded and taken prisoner. After Michaelmas the king, returning 
from his expedition into Wales, had his prisoner brought under the walls 
of Bamborough, where he was threatened with the loss of his eyes on the 
spot, if his countess and Morcal, who still held out, did not instantly 
capitulate. The threat having produced its effect, Robert was conducted 
to Windsor, where he was confined the rest of his life. These events took 
place in the year 1025, and, notwithstanding their importance, did not 
altogether withdraw the king's attention from the affairs of Normandy. Not 
being able to go there himself and scatterthe seeds of treason and devasta- 
tion, he committed the worthv undertaking to his brother, Prince Henry. 

* Paschal II., Jan. 15, 1090— June 21, 1118. 



1095 — 1096.] WILLIAM iiurus puis^isiies the hebels. 21 

laid by learned persons, after a long period, JSTigel d'Aubi<>-ni^ 
took her to wife, and for sometime treated her with respect, 
out of regard to her noble parents; but on the death of 
Gilbert de Laigle her brother,^ Nigel craftily sought a 
ground of divorce, and repudiated her because she had been 
Ids cousin's wife, and he then married Gundrede, sister of 
Hugh de Gournai.^ As foi Morel, when his lord was con- 
demned to perpetual imprisonment, he fled from England in 
great trouble, and wandering through many countries grew 
old in exile, poor and detested. 

Exulting in his triumph over the rebels, the king rewarded 
his friends, brought the factious to justice, and on conviction 
punished them in various ways. He entirely disinherited 
Eoger de Lacy,* expelled him from England, and gave his 
inheritance to his brother who had faithfully kept his fealty. 
Having had a private interview with Hugh, earl of Shrews- 
bury,^ he rebuked him sharply, and, making him pay 
three thousand pounds, wisely restered him to favour. 
So in many other cases, he punished the malcontents by 
imposing on them fines of large amount, and out of regard 
for their relations who might make reprisals in Normandy, 
he prudently dissembled his wishes. 

Then William d'Eu was publicly convicted of treason, 

* Nigel d'Aubigni (near Periers), cousin and successor of Robert de 
Mowbray, was brother of William d'Aubigni, grand butler of William trie 
Conqueror, the founder of the families of the earls of Arundel and Sussex 
of that name, both of which were descended from Roger d'Aubigni, who 
came over with the Conqueror, and his wife Avicia, who was probably 
aunt of Robert de Mowbray. The new earl of Northumberland was not 
distinguished for the purity of his morals, as one of his concubines figures 
in Domesday book. He died before the }ear 1130, when his son Roger 
de Mowbray was the king's ward as a minor. 

^ The time of his death is not exactly known, but it occurred before the 
year 1118. 

' Gundrede survived her husband as well as Matilda de Laigle, his first 
wife, to whom the Danegeld, for her estates in the counties of "Dorset and 
Stafford, was remitted in the year 1 1 30. Gundrede was daughter of Gerard 
de Gournai and of Edith, sister of William de Warrenne, first earl of Surrey. 

* He was son of Walter de Lacy, now called Lassi, on the road from 
Aulnai to Vire, who followed William the Conqueror to England, and was 
rewarded with the grant of more than 120 manors. We shall find him in 
1 102 at the head of the troops of Robert Curthose. 

* Hugh de Montgomery, earl of Shrewsbury, second son of Roger det 
Montgomery and the countess Mabel. 



22 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.TIII. CH-XXIT. 

and the king caused him to be deprived of sight and emas- 
culated. This punishment was inflicted on him at the sug- 
gestion of Hugh, earl of Chester, whose sister he married, 
but was unfaithful to her having since the marriage had 
three children by a concubine.^ 

The earls and men of the highest rank were privy to 
and promoted the treasonable conspiracy, but when it was 
detected, on further consideration, they became ashamed of 
it, and the most powerful among them having been crushed, 
they were apprehensive that the like ruin might fall on 
themselves. The king adroitly discovered this, and con- 
sulting his counsel pardoned persons of that class. He was 
unwilling to bring them to a public trial, lest their exaspe- 
ration should be increased, and they might be provoked to a 
general rising against the government, and much loss, 
destruction, and grief should be occasioned to the com- 
munity. ^ 

Ch. XXIY. Distracted state of Normandy, principally 
caused by tlie ambition of Robert de Belesme — His feuds 
ivith the neiglihouring lords, cruelties and exactions. 

In the year of our Lord 1094,^ the rebellion in England 
was suppressed, and the authority of William in his father's 
kingdom was firmly established, with no one able to resist 
it. But Normandy was miserably disturbed, and its inhabit- 
ants exposed to alarms and commotions in every quarter, 
and Duke Robert, while insurrection was rife, was sunk in 
despicable sloth. At this time^ sharp hostilities took place 
between William de Breteuil and Ascelin Goel, the origin of 
which was as follows. William, Goel's brother, a young 
knight, had insulted a female at Pacy ; on her complaint 
William de Breteuil, as became a just lord, gave an equitable 
decision against the insolent young knight. Upon this 

* William, second of the name, count d'Eu. The mutilation he suffered 
seems to have been more the result of an insulted wife's vengeance than a 
political punishment. It took place in 1096. 

' This date is not exact ; we have just seen that the rebellion and 
overthrow of Robert de Mowbray and the other conspirators occurred in 
the year 1095. 

' These events having preceded and caused the hostilities between 
Ascelin Goel and William de Breteuil, already assigned to the month of 
February. 1092, we caimot place them in 1094. 



A.T). 1094,] HOSTILITIES IT^ NORMANDY. 23 

Ascelin was incensed with his lord, because he had compelled 
liis brother to answer the charge in public. Not long 
afterwards he seized the castle of Ivri by an ingenious 
stratagem, and gave it to Robert duke of Normandy, from 
whom William de Breteuil redeemed it for a large sum of 
money. In consequence of this enterprise there was a 
great feud between them, and each tried to injure the other. 

In the month of February,^ Ascelin called to his aid 
E/ichard de Montfort and the retainers of King Philip, and 
engaging in battle with William, his lord, who advanced 
against him, defeated him and made him a captive, putting 
his troops to flight with the loss of some who were taken 
prisoners. Elated with this victory, he became exceedingly 
arrogant, and cruelly tormented his lord and Roger de Glos 
and his other captives. He kept them in close confinement 
in his castle of Breval for three months, and often in the 
severest weather, during winter, exposed them in their 
shirts, well soaked in water, at a window in the highest 
stage of the tower to the blasts of the north or south winds, 
until their only covering was frozen into a sheet of ice round 
their bodies. At length, by the interference of friends, 
peace was concluded between them, and William was let out 
of prison on these conditions ; — he gave his daughter Isabel 
in marriage to Groel, and delivered to him three thousand 
livres, with horses and arms and many other things, promis- 
ing also to surrender the castle of Ivri.^ On these terms 
William was liberated ; but the peace was of short duration. 

The year following,^ William, who could never rest, renewed 
his hostilities, and established a fortified post with a garrison 
in the convent of monks which Robert d'lvri had founded in 
honour of the Virgin Mary.* Upon this Goel who held the 
castle led a body of troops to the convent, now alas ! become 
a den of thieves, and the summer heat, about Whitsuntide,^ 

1 In the week between the 22nd and 29th Feb. 1092. 

* See before, vol. ii. p. 484. William de Breteuil did more than promis-^ 
the surrender of the castle of Ivri to Ascelin de Goel, he actually put him 
in possession' of it. The fierce lord of Breval was not a man likely to be 
contented with emptv promises. 

3 In 1093. 

* The abbey of Ivri, founded in 1071 by Roger d'lvri, cup-bearer to 
William the Conqueror, and son-in-law of Hugh de Grantmesnil. 

^ In 1095 Witsuntide fell on the 12th of May. 



2'i OEDEIilCUS VITALIS. [e.YIII. CH.XXIV. 

being excessive, in his sharp attack fire was thrown into the 
inclosure, and the church and dwellings of the monks, with 
their goods, became a prey to the destroying flames. On 
this occasion William Alls/ and Arnold son of Popelin,' and 
eight other soldiers were taken prisoners, who being thrown 
into Groel's dungeons, were a long time victims of his 
cruelty. "William de Breteuil made his escape with some 
difficulty, and used every effort to revenge himself for his 
great losses. This powerful lord experienced the greatest 
indignation that his own vassal should make such aggres- 
sions on his territories, and that his means were so much 
augmented during three years by the ransoms of his captives 
and the pillage of the country people. At length he engaged 
to pay Philip, king of France, seven hundred livres, as well 
as large sums of money to Eobert duke of Normandy, and 
many others, if they would faithfull}^ succour him, and the 
enemy's forces were subdued. 

In consequence, during Lent,^ the king of France and the 
duke of JSTormandy laid siege to Breval, and assaulted it for 
nearly two months. The priests, with their parishioners, 
brought their banners, and the abbots assembling their vas- 
sals joined the besieging army.* At the same time Eobert 
de Belesme furnished a most ingenious machine such as his 
talent for engineering had invented at the siege of Jerusalem, 
lie caused engines to be built which were impelled on wheels 
against the enemy's fortifications, he hurled vast stones as 
projectiles into the besieged place and among the garrison, 
instructed the besiegers in making assaults so as to destroy 
the trenches and the palisades surrounding a fortress, and 
to shatter the roofs of the liouses upon the inhabitants, until 
overwhelmed with calamities, the enemy should be forced 
to surrender. 

There was an old feud between Eobert and Goel, arising 
out of former occasions of offence, and Eobert, seeing that a 

^ William Alis, a vassal of the lords of Breteuil. This family gave its 
name to a mill situate in the domain of Breteuil. He is probably the 
same who appears as a tenant in capite in Domesday-book. See more of 
this person and his family, vol. ii. p. 191. 

'^ Another vassal of the lords of Breteuil. 

^ During the Lent of the year 1094. 

■* There appears to have been a general levy en masse on thia occasion. 



A.D. 1094.] CASTLE OF IVEI. 25 

fitting time for revenge was now come, assisted William de 
Breteuil with his counsels and his forces, more than all his 
fellows. Goel was a most desperate free-booter, daring and 
crafty, and a violater of churches. He had noble and brave 
kinsmen, by whose aid he had fortified the castle of Breval 
in an uninhabited forest country, and with their courage and 
succour he had manfully sustained the burden of such 
frequent hostilities. But now finding that so many great 
and valiant princes were firmly leagued against him, he sued 
for peace with his lord, who was also his father-in-law. His 
proposals were willingly acceded to by William de Breteuil, 
and in consequence Groel restored to him the castle of Ivri, 
which had so long been a cause of trouble to kings and 
dukes. 

This is the famous castle, of great size and strongly forti- 
fied, which was built by Alberede wife of Ealph, count of 
Bayeux,^ and which Hugh, bishop of Bayeux,^ and brother 
of John, archbishop of Eouen held for a long time against all 
the eff'orts of the dukes of Normandy. It is said that Albe- 
rede, having completed this fortress with vast labour and 
expense, caused Lanfred, whose character as an architect 
transcended that of all the other French architects at 
that time, and who after building the castle of Pithiviers ^ 
was appointed master of these works, to be beheaded, that 
he might not erect a similar fortress any where else. She 
also, in the end, was put to death by her husband on account 
of this same castle of Ivri, having attempted to expel him 
from it. 

. How frequent are the revolutions of unstable fortune, 
and how constant are the changes and disturbances in the 
state of worldly affairs ! The man is blinded by his folly, who 
sees such things passing under his observation, and does not 
reform his life, trusting in that which a turn of the wheel 

' Aubree, wife of Ralph, count of Evreux and Ivri, half-brother of 
Richard 1. There is a charter of hers dated in 1011, in favour of St. 
Ouen at Rouen. 

■"* Hugh, bishop of Bayeux, their eldest son. 

3 Built about the year 1190 by Avise or Helvise de Champagne, 
mother of Isembard, lord of Pithiviers, and of Odolric, bishop of Orleans, 
and Agnes mentioned in several charters. 



26 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.YIII. CH.XXIY. 

t 

will take from . him. Man drives man to destruction/ and 
follows in the same track the enemy he has sent before him 
to the grave, while alas ! he justly loses the opportunity of 
being able to benefit himself or others. 

Peace having been restored between these stubborn 
combatants, much to the satisfaction of their neighbours, 
Robert de Belesme only felt himself deeply aggrieved 
because he had not been invited to take part in the consult- 
ations, lest he should create difficulties, although he had 
taken the lead in the warlike preparations, in the hope that 
his fierce and determined enemy might be subdued and 
crushed. The skill and formidable power of Robert had 
given him the pre-eminence among the besiegers, and he had 
struck terror by his wonderful machines into the bold and 
crafty freebooter, who till that time had been used to laugh 
at kings and dukes in his secure retreat, and to mock the 
enemies he baffled by all sorts of manoeuvres. This knight 
finding concord restored among such discordant elements, 
collected his forces without delay, and letting no one know 
his crafty design, made a hasty countermarch, and fell 
suddenly on Robert Griroie at St. Ceneri.'^ The garrison of 
the castle, supposing that Robert was engaged with duke 
Robert in the general expedition against Breval, had gone 
forth from the place, and were scattered over the country in 
false security, according as each man's fancy led him. But 
when the wily master of stratagem suddenly appeared at the 
head of his troops, hoping by a sudden assault to effect an 
entrance into the castle and overpower those who were left 
within, by Grod's intervention Giroie was in time to meet 
the attack, having thrown himself and his retainers with 
great expedition into the place, so that Belesme was greatly 
mortified at being foiled in his expectation of taking it by 
surprise. He then converted his enterprise into a predatory 
excursion, killing one soldier, and doing much damage. 
His mischievous and perfidious designs being thus discovered 
open hostilities ensued. Giroie had auxiliary support from 

' Morlalis mortalem in mortem impellit an alliteration such as the 
writers of this age often indulged in. 
^ St. C6neri sur Sarthe. 



A.D, 1091.] CASTLE OF ST. CENERI TAKEX. 27 

Geoffrey de Mayeiine, William de Sille/ and several other 
lords, and ravaged the whole country about Alen9on for 
three months. At that time Henry, son of William the 
Great, king of England, possessed Domfront, and made war 
on Eobert de Belesme, from whom he had wrested that 
castle, as well as on the king and the duke, who had com- 
pelled him to become an exile from his native land. 

In the beginning of the month of July, Eobert Giroie, 
with Prince Henry's retainers and other troops, made an 
irruption into Belesme' s territories, and having swept off 
much booty, pursued the enemy at the head of his forces ; 
but as he was conducting his allies towards their home, and, 
absorbed in cheerful conversation with his friends and 
acquaintance, accompanied them to some distance from St. 
Ceneri, a sudden report was spread there that he was killed. 
Presently great lamentations and loud outcries were heard 
in the castle, the garrison were struck with terror, and lost 
their wits and powers of resistance. Paganus de Montdou- 
bleau,^ and Eotrou de Montfort,^ and some others who were 
charged with its defence, abandoned the place ; and, favouring 
Belesme, as some say, left the castle without any one to 
guard it, though no person molested them. Badegunde, 
Giroie' s wife, turned pale at the fearful rumour, but 
determined, while waiting for their confirmation, to remain 
in the castle with her attendants. What, however, could a 
lone woman do against stubborn men determined to have 
their o^ti way. Meanwhile, Bobert de Belesme' s attention 
was attracted by the disorderly shouts of those who were 
leaving the place, and immediately coming up and finding it 
deserted by its defenders, he easily forced an entrance, and, 
giving it up to pillage, then set fire to it. The assailants 
found within pots full of meat boiling on the fires, and the 
tables covered with cloths, and spread with dishes of food. 

' Sill^-le-Guillaume, at equal distances between Alenfon and Mayenne, 
took its surname from this lord or one of his predecessors of the same 
name. It must not be confounded with Silli-en-Gouffern, which must 
have belonged to some friend and vassal of Robert de Belesme. 

'^ Montdoubleau in the arrondissement of Vendome, formerly belonging 
to Maine. This Paganus de Montdoubleau appears before, vol. ii. p. 455, 
where our author has written the name more correctly, Mons-Dublelis. 

3 Montfort-le-Rotrou, near Mans. It took its surname from the third 
son of Rotrou, count de Perche, one of the ancestors of this lord. 



28 ORDERICUS VITALIS. [b.VIII. CH.XXIV. J 

•Some monks of Seez removed the arm of St. Ceneri from 
the church, and reverently translated it to their abbey of St. 
Martin. The rest of this saint's relics are preserved at 
Chateau Thierri, on the river Marne, and are venerated by 
the French with great devotion. 

Meanwhile, Giroie had parted from his friends in high 
spirits, and was engaged in meditating, alas ! in vain, on fresh 
inroads on his enemy's territories, when, as no human power is 
durable, he was suddenly shocked by the melancholy tidings 
he received. The noble knight had lost his inheritance by a 
sudden mischance, and was now compelled to seek an asylum 
among strangers. His wife, Eadegunde, a prudent and 
excellent woman, died the same year, and their son William, 
a child, soon followed his mother to the grave. The boy 
was retained as a hostage by Eobert de Belesme, who, it is 
reported, caused him to be poisoned by Eobert de Poille.^ 

Overwhelmed by so many calamities, Giroie took refuge 
with his friends, and receiving comfort and aid from his 
kinsmen and associates, hope for the future sprung up in his 
mind. The year following he fortified a castle at Montagu,''^ 
and took fierce revenge on Eobert de Belesme, who, in great 
fury, hastened to the duke, and prevailed with him by his 
complaints and promises to invest the castle of Montagu 
with the forces of Normandy. Then Geoffrey of Mayenne, 
and other nobles of Maine, presented themselves to the duke, 
and with smooth words interceded on Griroie's behalf. 
They succeeded in obtaining from him the terms, that on 
his demolishing the castle he had lately erected, his whole 
inheritance should be restored to him in peace : which was 
done accordingly. 

As the weather becoming fair, after violent storms, fills 
men with joy, so divine justice chastises the guilty, while 
mercy and loving kindness comforts the afflicted, sanctifies 
the penitent, and rewards them when cleansed from their 
sms. 

Taught by his severe misfortunes, Giroie returned thanks to 

1 Probably Poill^ in La Fleche. The name of Eudes de Poille appears 
as witness to a charter of Robert de Belesme, dated in 1092. 

^ Monte Acuto. See the note, vol. i. p. 393. But this castle is not 
situated near Bais, as there erroneously stated, but on the lands of La 
Pootd-des-Nids, half a league west of St. Ceneri. 



A.D. 1095.] ROEEET DE BELESME's TTllANNT. 29 

G-od, by whose aid after many trials he had recovered his 
ancient lordship ; he lived nearly thirty years afterwards 
through many changes of fortune, good and bad. He 
married Felicia, daughter of "Warner de Conneri,^ who bore 
him three sons, and as many daughters ; William, Eobert, 
and Matthew ; Agatha, Damata, and Aveline. 

The count de Belesme urged forward the demolition of 
the new castle, with all his influence, employing the peasants 
from all his own lordships and the neighbourhood in the 
compulsory duty^ of working at its destruction. The 
vassals of St. Evreux took no part in this labour, because 
they owed no service to the count, upon which he was greatly 
incensed with the monks, and did them great injuries for a 
whole year. He compelled by violence the tenants of St. 
Evroult to work at the fortifications of his own castles, 
carrying off the goods of those who shrunk from the labour ; 
and he even threatened tt) lay the abbey in ruins, unless they 
submitted to his will in all things as their lord. His fury at 
last grew to such a pitch, that he insolently ravaged all the 
domains belonging to the church in his neighbourhood. 
This so much impoverished the monks, that abbot E;obert 
was compelled to implore assistance in England from King 
William, for the support of the poor brothers who were 
deprived of their necessary food by the tyrant's ravages. 
His hand was also cruelly heavy on other households of God 
who lived under him or in his neighbourhood, and he often 
destroyed them by inflicting losses and ill treatment on them 
without mercy. This is witnessed by the monks of Seez, 
Troarne, and Mans, who by his cruelties and exactions were 
frequently made to tremble with anger and grief. 

Eobert de Belesme also grievously oppressed the bishop- 
ric of Seez against all right and justice, asserting that it 
was granted by Duke Eichard to his grandfather William de 
Belesme, on pretence of which he subjected its ecclesiastical 

^ A bourg in the department of the Sarthe. It appears that its present 
lord was not called Warner, but Avesguard de Connere. There is a 
charter of his in fovour of St. Vincent at Mans, dated May 1, 1100, 
in which he rnentions his wife Brille, and his daughter Felicia and Robert 
de Giroie his' son-in-law. 

- The corvee, that heavy burden on the French peasantry, under the 
feudal institutions, which was not abolished till the revolution. 



30 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.YIII. CH.XXIT. 

possesions to many vexatious claims and much loss. In con- 
sequence, the venerable bishop Serlo excommunicated the 
count, and laid all his territories under an interdict, forbid- 
ing the offices of holy worship to be performed, or even the 
burial of the dead. However, Kobert, who for his cruelty 
was justly surnamed Talvas,^ hardening his heart like Pharaoh, 
was softened neither by the bishop's stripes or emollients, 
but went on daily adding to the number of his iniquities, l 
Like Ishmael, he let loose his armed bands against all his 
neighbours, kept the monks and clergy and unarmed people 
in constant terror by his cruel tyranny, and miserably 
persecuted them by his frequent ravages and insults. In 
such times as those, the severest censure of the church could 
have no effect on a man who plumed himself on his secular 
power, and whose savage and infamous conduct rendered him 
insupportable to his associates, friends, and vassals. He 
thought little of depriving men of their sight, or mutilating 
them by amputating their hands or feet, but his great 
delight was, like Phalaris the Sicilian, to invent new and 
unheard-of modes of torturing his wretched victims. Those 
who were thrown into his dungeons on any charge he exposed 
to unutterable torments more cruel than Nero, Decius, or 
Diocletian, making their sufferings the subject of jest and 
laughter with his parasites.'-^ He gloried in the pain 
he inflicted on his prisoners, and was well pleased to be 
accused of barbarity for the excessive rigour of his punish- 
ments, preferring the pleasure of so doing, to the increase 
of his treasures by permitting the ransom of his captives. 
Many, by God's help, escaped from his dungeons and after- 
wards took severe revenge for their suiferings, from whom, if 
he had been accessible to reason and touched with humanity, 
he might have received large sums and honourable services. 
The terror of multitudes, he was himself afraid of them, and 
he liad suspicions of so many persons that his days and 
nights were passed in alarms, and he could hardly believe that 
any one was faithful to him. He was, indeed a brave and 

^ This name was given 1o an ancestor of Robert's on account of a 
particular kind of buckler worn by him, and was borne by the family 
generally as a surname without reference to individual character. 

^ See other contemporary notices of Robert de Eelesme's character, 
vol. ii. pp. 457, 458. 



A.D. 1091.] HOEEKT DE BELESME's CHAllACTER. 31 

daring soldier, and was distinguished for his genius and 
eloquence as well as his courage, but he spoilt all by his 
excessive ambition and cruelty, and clouded the gifts which 
God had bestowed on him with the blackest crimes. His 
insolence and covetousness involved him in frequent wars with 
his neighbours, but he was often defeated and escaped with 
loss and disgrace. This is well known by the inhabitants of 
the Corbonnois and Maine, by his Norman neighbours, and 
nearest of all by the people of Exmes, who remained the 
victors when the tyrant fled. This was happily experienced 
by Geofirey, earl of Morton, and his son Rotro, as well as by 
Elias of Maine, and other neighbouring lords, against whom 
he was always engaged in destructive hostilities, but at whose 
bands, by God's help, he suflered worse in return. He 
possessed thirty-four strongly fortified castles, and he had 
many thousand men under his dominion, yet Hugh de 
Nonant,^ his neighbour, the poor master of a small castle, 
resisted him many years, and frequently caused him great 
losses and injuries. 

Robert de Belesme had married Agnes, daughter of Guy, 
count de Pontbieu, by whom he had William Talvas the 
heir of all his domains. The cruel husband did not respect 
his noble wife as he should have done on account of this 
precious child; on the contrary, he overwhelmed her with 
afflictions as if she had been a despicable mistress ; and even 
confined her a long time like a thief, in the castle of Belesme. 
At length she secretly effected her escape from her prison, 
by the aid and contrivance of a faithful chamberlain, and fled 
to Adela countess of Chartres,^ and from thence sought refuge 
in Pontbieu, never to return to her tyrant. 

Normandy was often afflicted by the cruel enterprises of 
this butcher, and Maine, with its immediate neighbourhood, 
was a prey to the pillage, fire, and slaughter, which accom- 
panied his movements. The bishops and monks, on whose 
lands he erected castles, cried to the Lord of Sabaoth, when 
they saw the possessions of the saints diminished and wasted 
by his monstrous usurpations. At last the monks of St. 

' Hugh, lord of Nonant-sur-Q,uenge, now a village and thoroughfare on 
the high road from Rouen to Alen^on, and about nine English miles from 
the little city of Sdez, 

'^ Adela, countess of Blois, daughter of William the Conqueror. 



32 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b. YIII. CH.XXT. 

Evroult, after suffering much loss, difficulty, and alarm, were 
no longer able to bear his hostility. They therefore, by 
compulsion, raised a tax^ from the whole of their lands, which 
had till this time been free from all such unjust customary 
payrnents, and gave E-obert sixty livres of Maine of the rents 
of the farms to save the convent and its tenants from further 
vexations, and to secure to the servants of Grod permission 
to devote themselves with pious joy to his sacred worship.'' 
Other convents of monki, and unprotected clergy, redeemed 
themselves from his exactions in like manner, and conciliated 
the furious tyrant by payment of large sums of money, inas- 
much as neither kings nor dukes were then able to 
restrain his violence by their princely authority, and so give 
quiet to the church. 

Ch. XXy. Death of Roger de Montgomery, and some other 
■ of the Conqueror'' s old adherents — Their characters and 
descendants — Also the death and epitaphs of several abbots 
— The abhey of St. Stephen at Caen completed. 

At that time the old nobility, who had borne arms under 
Duke Robert or his son King William, were following the 
way of all flesh and taking leave of the world. Roger de 
Montgomery devoutly assumed the habit of a monk at 
Shrewsbury, and passed three days in pious discourse and 
prayer among the servants of Grod in the abbey of St. 
Peter the Apostle, which he had founded outside the walls of 
the town between the two rivers, the Mole and the Severn."^ 
At length he died on the sixth of the calends of August [tln^ 
27th of July], and was buried in the church of St. Peter." 
On liis death, his son, Hugh de Montgomery, succeeded to lii^ 

^ Dicam, a tally, a notched stick, which we remember in our younL^ 
days being used by bakers in towns, and have seen still more recent 
resorted to by persons in remote districts, who could not write, for keeping 
accounts. They were formerly used in the Exchequer in England, and in 
France the word taille became for the same reason synonymous with tax. 

^ Theusebia, a Greek word signifying the worship of God, Latinized I v 
our author. 

* Ordericus has given a full account of the foundation of this abbev, in 
which his own father Odelirius assisted, and where he assumed the 
monastic habit, in chap. xiv. of his fifth book. See vol. ii. pp. 197 — "2^0. 

'^ The date given in the chapter referred to in the preceding note is 
1094. M. Le Prevost thinks it ought to have been 1095. 



A.D. 1095.] FAMILIES OF MONTGOMERY AND BEAUMONT. S'i 

English earldom, and Robert de Belesme possessed all his 
domains in Normandy. Eoger of Poitou, Arnnlph, Philip, 
and Everard, had no share in their father's inheritance, the 
two eldest brothers having, aa I have said, divided the whole, 
as well on this side of the sea as the other. However, Roger 
and Arnulph, who ranked high among their countrymen as 
knights and men of worth, by their father's advice, "married 
noble wives,^ procured for them by him, and both were made 
earls, and for some time were distinguished for their power 
and wealth, but before their death, they forfeited for their 
treason the honours and estates they had acquired. Philip and 
Everard, who devoted themselves with ability to the pursuit 
of learning, met difterent fates in the course of their lives. 
Philip accompanied Duke Robert in his pilgrimage to 
Jerusalem, and died at Antioch,- but Everard, who was the 
son of the countess Adelaide,^ had some inferior employment 
as a clerk in the chapel of King Henry. 

Roger de Beaumont, a wise and discreet nobleman, who 
was always true to his fealty to his lords the dukes of 
Normandy, also bent his head under the monastic yoke, 
when his military career was ended, in the abbey of St. 
Pierre-de-Preaux. That house was founded by his father, 
Humphrey de Vieilles, on his own domains,* and he had 
enriched it after his father's death with large possessions 
and many ornaments. There Robert de Beaumont, son of 
Humphrey, W'ho was slain by Roger de Clare,^ was buried, 

^ Roger of Poitou, so called because he married the countess of March; 
Arnulph married the daughter of a king of Ireland. See the note, vol. ii. p. 
203, as to the titles and possessions of these young lords. The forfeiture was 
incurred by their having espoused the cause of Robert Curthose in 1102. 

^ We shall hear of this person again in the book following. 

' She was the daughter of Everard, lord of Puiset, and the second wife 
of Roger de Montgomery. 

* Now called Beaumont-le-Roger, on the left bank of the Risle. 
Beaumont, Vieillts, and other domains, ;ippe:;r to have been given to 
Humphrey de Vieilles by his brother Ralph, who managed the estates of 
the abbey of Bernai as steward before 104J], when he wo,s chosen abbot of 
Mount St. Michnsl. The example of Ralph was followed by his successor 
Theodore, a monk of Jumieges, who made over one moiety of the town of 
Bernai and anammense country district, to Roger de Montgomery, being, 
as it is said, his relation. 

^ Ro^er de Clare, or de Bienfaite, is the same person as is mentioned 
in a note, p. 18, and brother of Gilbert de Tunbridge, or Clare, also 

YOL. III. D 



34! OEDESICUS VITALIS. [b.YIII. CH.XXV. 

and Eoger himself, his brother, who was advanced in years, 
made a good end in that monastery, some years after his 
profession as a monk. He left his sons, Eobert and Henry, 
the appointed heirs of his domains, who by the grace of God 
have become very eminent in the present age. Distinguished 
by the friendship and intimacy of kings and powerful earls, 
they married noble and fruitful wives, and, surrounded by 
promising children of both sexes, they were loaded with 
riches and honours. Robert became earl of Mellent in the 
Vexin, as heir to Hugh, his mother Adeline's brother, and 
in England fortunately received from King Henry a grant 
of the earldom of Leicester with many other rich favours.^ 
His brother Henry earned the earldom of Warwick by his 
valour and loyalty,^ and obtained for wife the beautiful 
Margaret, daughter of Geoftrey, earl of Morton, whose 
character for piety and excellence is well known through 
all the neighbouring countries, and ranks her among the 
most eminent women. She bore her husband two sons, 
Eoger, and Eobert de Neubourg who became illustrious in 
England and Normandy during the reign of King Henry. 
These earls had naturally a great regard for the abbey of 
Preaux, which their ancestors had founded on an admirable 
situation near a sea-port,^ and not far from Pont-Audemer, 
where the Eisle flows in a rapid current towards the sea.^ 
Monks were assembled there lor the praise and w^orship of 
Almighty God, and piously instructed by wise and religious 
masters in regular discipline.^ 



there mentioned. He was still living in 1120, and bore indifferently 
the two names of Clare, his father's castle in Suffolk, and of Bienfaite, 
near Orbec. The church of St. John at Clare was given to the abbey of 
Bee in 1090 by his brother Gilbert. It is probable that Robert de Beau 
mont, or as he should rather have been called, de Vieilles, for Beaumont 
was his brother Roger's castle, was killed by Roger de Clare in some 
skirmish connected with the possession of Brionne. 

• In 1103. 
'^ In 1068. 
^ M. Le Prevost thinks Honfleur is meant; M. Dubois, Quillebceuf, at 

the mouth of the Seine. 

* The Risle does not properly discharge its waters into the sea, but into 
the estuary of the Seine, on its left bank, between the two places mentioned 
in the preceding note. 

® Our author has made such frequent digressions that he has forgotten 



ABBEY OF PREAUX. 3o 

The following epitaph which may be seen on a tomb in 
the cloister near the south door of the church points out 
to those who read it who was the first abbot of Preaux, and 
how he was distinguished : " Under this tomb rests Abbot 
Ansfrid, a good and pious man, a dove without spot. He 
zealously fulfilled the demands of the divine law, which was 
his rule and study. He was the support of the weak, the 
adviser of the doubtful, feet to the lame, eyes to the blind, 
and the pilgrim's staff*. The sun had blazed thirty days in 
the constellation of Pisces, when Abbot Ansfrid departed. 
God give him rest!"^ 

Ttichard de Eourneaux - governed this monastery in. later 
times,^ he was admitted to the profession of a monk in the 
abbey of St. Vigor at Bayeux by Robert de Tombelene. 
But bishop Odo, who founded the new monastery, becoming 
a sorrowful prisoner in the dungeon of King "William, and 
Robert the Philosopher being returned to the abbey at 
Mount St. Michael of which he was a monk — or rather as I 

to give any account of the military operations in Normandy in the year 
1094, though some of them occurred in his own neighbourhood. 

In the beginning of the year, Robert sent envoys to England to inform 
his brother that, chagrined by his refusal to execute the treaty they had 
agreed on, he should recommence hostilities. William went to Hastings 
on the 1st of February to attend the consecration of Battle Abbey, and 
crossed the channel in the middle of Lent. The barons who had sworn to 
the treaty offended William, who retired in dudgeon to Eu, while Robert 
returned to Rouen. The king, by largesses and ])romises, assembled a 
large body of troops, and renewed his understanding with some of the 
Norman lords. He then took by assault the castle of Bures, treating the 
garrison with great severity. In short, he left no stone unturned to drive 
his brother to extremity. Meanwhile Robert demanded aid from King 
Philip, who took the town of Argentan from William's partizans, and 
made a number of prisoners, while Robert reduced the strong castle of 
Homme in the Cotentin, where William Peverell commanded a garrison 
of eight hundred troops. This fortress did not belong to William, but to 
his brother Prince Henry, with whom he was then im terms of amity. 
The gold of the king of England, scattered freely, put an end to this 
prosperous career of his enemies, and induced the king of France to retire 
suddenly to his own dominions. It is very singular that the siege of 
Argentan should pass without notice by an historian who lived within ten 
leagues of it. 

1 Ansfrid, first abbot of Preaux, 1044 ?— March 17, 1078. 

^ Fourneaux, a lordship and hamlet near Faverolles and Portcs, in the 
canton of Conches. 

^ 1101— January 30, 1131. 

D 2 



f36 OEDEEICUS YITALI3. [b.TIII. CH.XXT. 

before related having migrated to Italy — the new and un- 
finished foundation was speedily dissolved, and the com- 
pany of the faithful which had flocl^ed there from different 
convents was soon dispersed for want of a ruler.^ Hichard, 
one of them, who was very learned in sacred literature, when 
the young flock was scattered, sought out a company of 
religious and learned men, in whose society he lived devoutly 
in the enjoyment of their useful teaching. 

At that time there flourished in Normandy, Anselm, 
abbot of Bee, Gerbert of Fontenelles, Gontard of Jumieges,^ 
and many others who were shining lights in the temple 
of God, by whom Richard was highly enlightened and 
enriched with the fulness of sound doctrine. On the death 
of Abbot Geofl'rey,^ Eichard was elected to succeed him at 
Preaux and, having governed the convent nearly twent}^- 
four years in the times of Duke E.obert and King Henry, 
then died. He was deeply read in the holy scriptures, from 
his youth he walked in the way of the ancient fathers 
chanting psalms, he kindly broke the mystical bread in the 
house of the Lord to the hungry children, and distributed it 
with joy freely to those who stretched out their hands, and 
used authority to make those partake of it who refused or 
were careless. He dedicated a Commentary on Genesis to 
Maurice the learned abbot of St. Lomer at Blois, and wrote 
another for Master* Adelehn, a very learned priest, who was 
also a monk of St. Germer, and grew old devoutly serving 
the Holy Trinity with the monks of Fecamp. He wrote an 
excellent exposition on the Parables^ of Solomon for Pontius, 
the illustrious abbot of Cluni, and lucidly commented on 
Ecclesiastes, the Canticles, and Deuteronomy, for other 
venerable persons, and composed several treatises on the 
allegories and types contained in obscure passages of the 
Prophets.^ 

* See vol. ii., p. 429. 

« St. Anselm, abbot of Bee. 1078— December 4, 1093. 
Gerbert, abbot of Fontenelles, 10G3— September 4, 1U89. 
Gontird, abbot of Jiimie^es, 1078— November 20, 1095. 
J» Geoft'rcy, third abbot of Preaux, I09G— August 30, 1101. 

* Domno; from whence the title oi Dom, given to French ecclesiastics. 
' Meanin;; the Proverbs. 

" For the works of Richard de Foumeaux, consult L'Histoirc LittCrairc 
de France, t. ix. p. 107. 



1036? — 1112.] ABBOTS OF ST. OUEN, AT HOUEN. 37 

Nicliohis, priest and abbot of the monastery cleclicat(Hl to 
the holy bishop St. Oueu, was third son of Eichard III., 
duke of Normandy, and distinguished for great benevolence, 
charity, and other virtues ; his eminence in the church of 
God continuing till four years after the death of his cousin 
King William. Compelled by his uncle, Duke Eobert, to 
embrace the monastic life, he made his profession when yet 
a boy in the abbey of Fecamp under Abbot John. Some 
years afterwards, while still young, he was advanced by 
Duke AV^illiam to the government of the same abbey. Peing 
raised to this eminence, he strove rather to be the benefactor 
than the superior of those who were under his rule both 
within and without the convent. Having undertaken a 
pilgrimage to Jerusalem and prayed at the sepulchre of our 
Lord, on his return, he died in the fifty-sixth year' of his 
government, on the fourth of the calends of March [27th of 
February] and being interred in the church of St. Peter the 
Apostle, which he founded himself, before the , altar of St. 
Mary, mother of Grod,^ there waits the better life of the 
resurrection. There is erected over his grave a beautiful 
tomb of painted wood, at the toj) of which Maurice the monk 
elegantly inscribed the following epitaph in letters of gold : — • 

" Nicholas, the flower and glory of monks, beloved and 
lamented, whose remains are here deposited, lives with the 
Lord. He governed his flock in love ; and built this church. 
This star set when the sun was glowing in the constellation 
of Pisces." 

Helgot, prior of Caen, eminent for his learning and good 
qualities succeeded the venerable Nicholas, and held the 
government of the abbey of St. Ouen nearly twent}^ years.^ 
IJnder him the convent of that church was worthily 
augmented in numbers and piety. At that time a layman, 

' Nicholas of Normandy, abbot of St. Ouen at Rouen, 10.36, or 1042, to 
the 27th or 28th of February, 1092 ; it being a question whether he held 
it fifty-six years, as here stated, or fifty, as the continuator of WilJiaai de 
Jurr,ieges says. 

2 It is supposed that the semicircular portion of the building which now 
stands between the present church and the hotel of the mairie, is the north 
ajsis of this building. St. Peter was originally the patron saint to whom 
the abbev was dedicated. 

3 Helgot, 1092— November 20, 1112. 



38 OE^ERICUS YITALIS. [b.YIII. CH.XXV. 

named Gilbert, came from Jerusalem to Eouen, and being 
admitted a monk by Abbot Helgot rendered great services 
to the convent ; for he undertook the charge of the works in 
the church, which on account of its vast scale of grandeur 
had been for some time suspended.^ He made large dona- 
tions to it from the fortune of Alberede la Grosse, in whose 
service he was, who having died on the holy pilgrimage 
bequeathed her wealth to him. "With this and the aid of 
other pious and charitable gifts, he laboured towards the 
completion of the noble work. Abbot Helgot died on the 
twelfth of the calends of December [20th of November], and 
having been interred before the altar of St. Stephen the 
protomartyr which stands in the vestibule on the north side, 
"William Balot,^ who had been a monk of the same convent 
from his childhood, succeeded him in the government and 
held it for nearly fourteen years. In his time the great 
church, of which Abbot Nicholas had laid the foundation, 
was at length, after great difficulty, completed at the end of 
seventy years, and consecrated by Archbishop Geoffrey, 
with many others of the prelates and inferior clergy on the 
sixteenth of the calends of November [17th October]."^ 

The same year Abbot "William died, and Eagenfrid, a 
monk of the same house, succeeded him,* in whose time the 
cloisters and other buildings for the use of the monks were 
completed with great magnificence. At the same period 
Eulbert, archdeacon and dean of Eouen, fell sick, and 

* It is very possible that part of the church now standing was the work 
of Gilbert. It is true that the abbey was destroyed by fire in 1136, but 
it can scarcely be supposed that it was entirely laid in ruins, and the 
existing portions of the church appear to present rather the character of 
the eleventh century than that of an advanced period of the twelfth. The 
north chapel, in the vestibule which led to the cloisters, alluded to a i'ew 
lines further on, and which now bears the name of Chambre aux Clercs, 
may have been part of the building erected by Gilbert. This precious 
architectural relic is evidently the apsis, in two ranges, of a chapel at the 
end of the north transept. Its exterior appearance is very plain, and it is 
almost lost between the two immense structures which tower above it to 
the ri^ht and left, but within it has the chaste and simple character of the 
early Norman or Romanesque architecture. 

2 William Balot, 1112-1126. 

^ The new church was consecrated on the 17th of October of the year 
11 "26, as is more clearlv stated in our author's twelfth book. 

4 Raginfroi, 1126—1141 or 1142. 



CO>-TEOVERSY AT MOLEME. 39 

devoutly assumed the monastic habit. On his death he was 
interred in the cloisters of St. Ouen, at the entrance of 
the chapter-house, where his grave is covered with a white 
slab. The following inscription engraved on it shows who 
he was : — 

" The glory of the metropolitan church, the crown and 
honour of the clergy departed when Fulbert died, and his 
eloquent tongue was silenced, from which flowed inex- 
haustible streams of profound wisdom. He was first a 
canon, then a monk, and afterwards archdeacon of Eouen. 
This great pillar of the church, who was second to no one 
in piety, was levelled with the ground on the fourth day 
before that of Christ's glorious nativity by the blessed 
Virgin." 

Ch. XXYI. Controversy hetween the abhot and monhs of 
Moleme regarding the rule of St. Benedict — Questions as 
to the habit, labour, and discipline — The Cistercian order 
founded with a stricter rule — The first abbots of the new 
order. 

The happy decease of the fathers who depart in Christ 
fills their loving children on earth with sorrow ; for notwith- 
standing the undoubting belief that they are* exalted to the 
heavenly kingdom, their removal is afiectionately lamented 
from apprehensions of the excessive desolation of those who 
are left exiles here below. But the divine mercy often 
visits the church, consoling it by the invisible influences of 
God's loving kindness, and sending it courageous champions, 
daily strengthens it for the conflict. Thus the prophet says, 
"Instead of thy fathers, thou shalt have children."^ When 
the apostles were translated to heaven, they were succeeded 
by apostolical doctors, who were eminent for their acts and 
words in the courts of Jerusalem, and still ofler to Grod the 
acceptable fruits of their labours. Iniquity abounding in 
the world, the devotions of the faithful in religion still more 
increased, and the harvest was multiplied in the field of the 
Lord. Monasteries were built everywhere in the woods 
and the fields, and tribes of cowled monks, with new rites 
and clad in vestments of various fashions, traverse the world. 
Their dress is generally white, to distinguish themselves 
1 Psalm xliv. 17. 



40 OEDEEICUS VITALTS. [b.VIII. CILXXYI. 

from other men and make themselves remarkable. Black 
denotes humility in several places of the Holy Scriptures ; 
and therefore the religious in their zeal have hitherto joy- 
fully adopted that colour. But now black, which the old 
fathers used as a token of their humility, the regular clergy 
in their copes, and the monks in their cowls, is rejected by 
the moderns, in ostentation of greater righteousness, and 
they try to distinguish themselves from others by the 
peculiar cut of their garments.^ I believe that voluntary 
poverty, contempt of the world, and true religion inspire 
the greater part of them, but many hypocrites and seducing 
pretenders are miugled with them, as tares amoiig the 
wheat. Paganus, a canon of Chartres, surnamed Bolotinus, 
has lately published a fine poem in Adonic verse," in which 
he has cleverly and fully exhibited their superstitions veiled 
with hypocrisy. I propose myself to unfold in the present 
history how and by whom the changes in the ancient fashion 
began lately to spread, because I think that these details 
may be acceptable to my readers in future times. 

There is a place in Burgundy, called Moleme,^ of which 
E-eynold, bishop of Langres* said : " The love of Moleme 
almost conferred the grace of baptism."^ 

In the time of Philip, king of Prance, the venerable abbot 
Eobert built a monastery there,^ and inspired by the grace 
of the IToly Spirit, assembled disciples of devoted piety, 
and instructed them with kindness in the pursuit of virtue 
in a state of holy poverty, according to the usage of other 
religious houses. After some years he studied carefully the 
rule of St. Benedict, and having also examined the writings 
of other holy fathers, he assembled the brethren, and thus 
addressed them, " My dear brethren, we have made our 
profession according to the rule of St. Benedict, but it 
appears to me that we do not observe it in its integrity. 
We follow many practices which are not found there, and 

' Ordericus himself, as a Benedictine monk, wore the black habit of 
tliHt order. 

'^ This poem is lost. Query, read Belotinus, or Balofenus ? 

^ ivioleme, near Chatillon. 

* Reynold, of the family of the counts of Bar-sur-Seine and Tounerre, 
bishop of Langros, end of lOer) — beginning of April, 1085. 

^ Eat quasi baptismus, quibus est in amore Molismns. 

° In 1075. 



THE MONASTIC DISCIPLINE. 41 

we negligently omit many which it ha,3 enjoined. "We do 
not labour with our hands as we read that the holy fathers 
did. If you do not believe what I say, my friends, read the 
acts of St. Anthony, Macarius, Pacomius, and, above all, 
of the doctor of the Gentiles, Paul the apostle. We are 
supplied with an abundant maintenance in food and clothing 
from the tithes and oblations of the churches, and, either 
by address or violence, we appropriate what belongs to the 
priests. I therefore should wish that we keep the entire 
rule of St. Benedict, being careful to deviate from it neither 
to the right hand or the left. Let us procure what is 
necessary for food and raiment by the labour of our hands. 
Let us give up the use of coverings for the thighs, and 
linen aud furs, and relinquish tithes and oblations to the 
clergy who serve the parishes. Thus, treading in the steps 
of the fathers, we shall labour with zeal to follow 
Christ." 

The convent of monks did not agree to these proposals ; 
they objected to innovations which would alter their usages, 
the examples and precepts of their predecessors, whose lives 
were rendered illustrious by evident miracles, and who trod 
in the footsteps of venerabkj men. They said : " We have 
long followed the way of life, in which the holy fathers 
formerly lived religiously in France, whose sanctity was 
testified to be well pleasing to God, by miracles both during 
their lives and after their interment. As to your rebuke, 
venerable father, because we have departed from the rigour 
of the monastic rule, and do not walk in the rough path of 
the Egyptian monks who dwelt in the Thebaid and the Holy 
Land, among barbarous nations in ancient times, reflect care- 
fully on the sufficient reason. 

" No doctor can justly require the faithful to endure in 
times of tranquillity, all the sufferings which the holy martyrs 
were compelled to undergo in the heathen persecutions, 
since they themselves did not voluntarily submit before 
those persecutions to the same suffering which afterwards 
they necessarily endured when contending for their faith. 
This was plainly intimated by our Lord to St. Peter, 
' When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself and walkedst 
w-hither thou wouldest ; but when thou shalt be old, thou 
shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, 



42 ORDEEICUS VITALIS. [b. Till. CH. XXVI. 

and carry thee whither thou wouldest not."^ Consider well, 
according to the precepts of the divine law with what 
discretion you ought to direct those in the way of Grod, 
who have voluntarily quitted the depraved world, and desire 
to lead a better life under your government. AVith what 
reason can it be approved that those who of their own free 
will are seeking to change their evil courses for good, should 
be driven to the dens of Paul or Anthony. To escape from 
being put to death, and in terror even of their own relations, 
these hermits fled from their parental homes. A prudent 
physician gives his patient soothing prescriptions, for fear that 
if he should torment him in his weakness with severe 
medicines, instead of being cured, he should escape altogether 
out of his hands. No considerate persons will lay an 
insupportable burden on weak shoulders, lest the weary 
bearer, sinking under his load, perish in the way." 

The monks making this open resistance. Abbot Hobert 
said to them; "I mention the inimitable life of the 
Egyptian hermits as an example of excellence, but I do not 
thence impose on you any violent exactions ; I only propose 
it in the way of salutary persuasion. But I invite you to 
observe the rule of St. Benedict in all its parts, which I 
know you to transgress in many things, notwithstanding 
you profess it. I therefore dread lest the wrath of the 
supreme Judge should be let loose upon us in the last 
judgment for our short comings." 

To this, the monks replied, " Our blessed father Benedict, 
as is known to all, sent into France St. Maur, the prior of 
his monastery, whom he had educated from childhood, and 
gave him the book of discipline which the servant of Grod 
had written with his own hand, and he granted to the French 
monks through him a pound of bread and half a pint of 
wine. St. Maur meeting with a kind reception from King 
Theodebert, spent the rest of his life in France, and, by the 
aid of Florus, a counsellor of the king's, built a monastery 
at a place called Grlanfeuil,^ where he instructed one hundred 
and forty monks in the rules of his order. The discreet 

* John xxi. 18. 

^ St. Maur arrived at Glanfeuil in 543. It is not clear how Anjou 
could have belonged to Theodebert, king of Austrasia, but the fact seems 
certain from the testimony of a contemporary biographer. 



THE EULE OF ST. BENEDICT. 43 

father St. Maur did not imitate the usages of the monks in 
Egypt, who are exposed to the excessive heat of the climate, 
but kindly took into consideration the habits of the French, in- 
habitants of the west, who often shudder in the frosts of winter. 
And so he was instructed by his spiritual master ; for thus 
saith St. Benedict: — 'Let the garments given to the monks 
be suitable to the nature of the place they inhabit, and the 
temperature of the air. Those who live in cold climates 
require more, those in warm climates less. This is left to the 
abbot's discretion.' So also he makes prudent and con- 
siderate regulations respecting food and drink, and other 
human wants, that all may be done according to measure, 
with due regard to the weak, and without murmurings. 
He also expressly admonishes the abbot to make allowance 
for infirmities ; he ordains that such work or employment 
should be enjoined on the weak and delicate, that they shall 
neither be idle, nor worn and overdone by excessive labour. 
Paul and Anthony, and many others, who first retired into 
the desert, and built themselves monasteries in the recesses 
of the wilderness, driven to it by fear of the heathen, as 
we said before, chose an extremely rigorous course of life, 
and, assisted by God's grace, converted the necessity into 
an act of free will. Afterwards their laudable example 
increased the number of those who renounced the world, 
and founded various institutions according to the difierence 
in places and men's habits. But, says St. Gregory, w^here 
the faith is one, diversity of customs in the holy church 
matters not. Men in general, where the climate is warm, 
wear no trowsers, but, like women, wear loose robes which 
reach to the ankles. The convents of monks which rose 
and became established in those countries do not reject this 
habit, but on the contrary adopt it. But in the climate of 
the west, all men wear trowsers, and they cannot be dispensed 
with, neither on account of the cold nor for decency's sake. 
!Por these reasons that is the custom in our order, nor can 
we consent, as it is becoming and serviceable, to depart from 
it. So of all the rest, learned doctors, our predecessors in 
this holy discipline, have supplied us with good reasons for 
their obsei'vance. In Italy and Palestine, and some other 
countries, olive trees abound, and men making use of the 
fruit are not obliged to have recourse to fat in cooking their 



44 ORDERTCUS YITALIS. [E. YIII. CII.XXTI. 

food, Avliich is here considerately allowed to us, wlio have no 
oil of olives. 

" Further, it is made a subject of severe rebuke by many 
persons that we are not daily employed in working with our 
hands ; but we boldly set against this our devoted labour in 
the offices of divine worship, w'hich we were taught on our 
profession by duly authorized masters, experienced in the 
daily services of our holy religion. The kings, Dagobert and 
Theodoric, and the emperor Charlemagne, and other kings 
and emperors, in their devotion, founded monasteries, and 
made ample provision from their revenues for the food and 
raiment of the servants of Grod ; attaching to these institu- 
tions a sufficient number of servants for the full performance 
of exterior offices, while they assigned to the monks the 
duty of being entirely devoted to reading, to prayers for 
their benefactors and the celebration of the divine mysteries. 
In consequence, the practice is in France, both from the 
foundations of the kings and long custom, that the peasants 
should carry on the works of husbandry, as it is their 
business to do, and servants perform all ministerial offices, 
while the monks, who have voluntarily withdrawn from the 
vanities of the world, should serve as militants the King of 
kings, shut themselves up in their cloisters, free from intru- 
sion, like king's daughters, penetrate the mysteries of the 
divine word by diligently reading it, and making it the 
subject of their constant meditations, observe a profitable 
silence, closing their mouths against a depraved and idle con- 
versation but chanting day and night the Psalms of David 
and other mystical songs to the Creator's praise; and be daily 
engaged, according to the precepts of the fathers, in other 
decent and fitting employments, as circumstances require. 
Hitherto such are the labours of the monks in the west, and 
every one sees and knows that such ought ib be the nature 
of their occupations. God forbid that the peasants, whose 
proper lot is daily toil, should abandon themselves to sloth, 
and with lascivious indolence spend their time in laughter and 
idle merriment ; on the other hand, far be it from illustriouy 
knights, acute philosophers, and accomplished scholars, 
because they have renounced the world, to be bound to 
occupy themselves in servile and unbeseeming pursuits and 
occupations, like vile slaves. The tithes and oblations of the 



CISTEECIAN OIIDER TOUNDED. 45 

faithful are by common consent appropriated to the clergy 
aud ministers of God for their own sustenance, as St. Paul, 
the apostle said to the Corinthians : ' They which minister 
about holy things live of the things of the temple, and thev 
which wait at the altar are partakers with the altar.' ^ So 
the Lord has ordained that those who preach the gospel 
should live by the gospel. As for us, we belong to the 
clergy by our order and office, and we offer service, as 
ministers, to the great High-priest, who has entered into the 
heavens, that we may obtain the lot of our heavenly inhe- 
ritance, through his mediation. We therefore have a right 
to hold ecclesiastical benefices, and by common agreement, 
we are determined to retain them. It is perfectly well 
known to your holiness, reverend father, that we have learnt to 
preserve these rules from former monks who lived religiously, 
and we possess them as heirs to their order and profession. 
As long as w^e find the monks of Cluni and Tours, and the 
other clergy maintaining these institutions we shall not 
depart from them ; for we are unwilling to be condemned 
by our brethen, far and wide, as reckless innovators and 
inventors of novel practices." 

The monks constantly repeating these declarations and 
others of the same description, the abbot, persisting in his 
opinion, withdrew from them with twelve " of the number 
who agreed with him, and was a long time before he could 
find a suitable place for himself and his companions wliere 
they might observe the rule of St. Benedict to the letter, as 
the Jews kept the law of Moses. At last, Eudes, duke of 
Burgundy, son of Henr}^, took pity on them, and gave them 
an estate called Cisterce in the diocese of Chalons.^ Abbot 
Eobert and his select brethren, dwelt for some time in this 
desert, and beginning to build a monastery in which they 
might live a religious life under the strictest rule, found, by 
God's grace, in a short time, many who became emulous of 

» 1 Cor. ix. 13. 

^ Robert withdrew from Moleme with only six monks, whose names are 
preserved, to consult the archbishop of Lyons, the papal legate; but 
having returned to his monastery, he left it again, accompanied on this 
occasion by twenty monks, having received and published the letter which 
gave him authority to retire and found a new esfablishment. 

^ Citeaux, near Nuits, in the diocese of Chalons. 



46 OEDERICUS yiTALIS. [b,viii. CII. X?i:YI. 

such sanctity.^ As the monks of Molerae were left for some 
time without a pastor, and by the secession of the man of 
Grod they were less esteemed by their neighbours and 
acquaintance, they applied humbly to Pope Urban, and laying 
before him the whole course of affairs implored his advice 
and aid. The pope, with paternal kindness, took the case of 
both parties into consideration. In virtue of his apostolical 
authority he enjoined Abbot Robert to return to his first 
convent and to govern it according to its rule, to prevent its 
dissolution, appointing a substitute in the new monastery 
he had begun, selected from those he thought qualified. He 
further decreed that every monk should at the commence- 
ment of his profession, choose the institutions under which 
he proposed to live, and should adhere to them without 
change ever afterwards. 

That able pope issued on this occasion a decree to the 
following effect : " The utmost care must be taken lest a 
horrible schism be nourished in the house of G-od and it 
should grow and be spread abroad to the general injury ; and 
on the other hand, that the grace which is given from on 
high for the salvation of souls be not impiously extinguished. 
We therefore provide from our fatherly affection, and ordain 
by our apostolical authority, that the monks of Moleme who 
prefer the general rules of the monastic order shall inviolably 
observe them, and not presume to desert their own convent 
and adopt other customs. As for the Cistericans who make 
a boast of keeping the rule of St. Benedict in all particulars, 
let them not by another change return to a system which 
they now hold in contempt. Steadfastness in a convent, and 
perseverance in every good way are most laudable and to be 
firmly maintained, because they are acceptable to the Creator 
who requires in sacrifice even the rump of the victim,- and 
is agreeable to men who are roused to excellence by having 
before their eyes models of holiness." 

Thus compelled. Abbot Eobert returned to Moleme' and. 
there served G-od worthily to the end of his days.* He 

' The infant society was organized, and the new statutes adopted, on 
Palm Sunday, March 21,, 1098, the feast of St. Benedict. 

^ Lev. iii. 9. 

3 In 1099. 

* He died at a very advanced age in 1110, probably on the 17th of 
April, that being the day of his feast. 



ABBOTS OF CITEAUX. 47 

chose as his vicar for the affairs of Citeaux, Alberic, a man 
of deep piety, and appointed him abbot, to govern John and 
Ildebode/ both of Arras, and the rest of the twenty-two 
Cistercian brothers. He dwelt there ten years in great 
penury, and, with his fraternity, laboured painfully in the 
service of Grod, from whom he confidently expected an ines- 
timable recompence. On his death he was succeeded by 
Stephen, an Englishman of great religion and learning, who 
for more than twenty-four years was eminent for his doctrine 
and good deeds.^ In his time the monastery in the wilder- 
ness received a great increase. Guy, abbot of Trois-Fontaines'* 
was chosen abbot of Citeaux, while Stephen was still living, 
and by his desire ; and not long afterwards the venerable 
Stephen departed this life. Gruy, having accepted the office, 
performed it with little credit for two years, at the end of 
which he as foolishly resigned it." Thereupon the young 
Eeynold, son of Milo, count of Bar-sur-Seine, was elected 
abbot, and consecrated by "Walter, bishop of Chalons. 

It is now thirty-seven years since Abbot Eobert settled at 
Citeaux,^ and in this short time so great a concourse of 
monks has been drawn thither, that sixty-five monasteries 
have been founded, all subject with their abbots to the 
superior abbot of Citeaux. All the monks of the Cistercian 
order wear neither trowsers nor robes of fur ; they abstain 
from fat and flesh-meat, and by their worth shine like lights 

' John was one of the six monks who quitted Moleme in 1098 -with 
Abbot Robert. 

Tldebode was one of the fourteen who joined them after their return to 
that abbey. 

2 Alberic died in 1109, and was immediately replaced by Stephen 
Harding, an Englishman, who had been a monk at Slierbourne. He 
resigned his office in 1133, and died the 28th of March, 1134. 

' Guy, abbot of Trois Fontaines (Haute Marne) in 1127, was not the 
person elected, as our author supposes, but a monk bearing the same 
Christian name. 

* The monk Guy, who was elected in 1133, during the life of his 
venerable predecessor, was deposed and expelled with disgrace for an 
abominable crime, with the mention of which the annalists of the Cister- 
cian order did not choose to pollute their pages. This expulsion took 
place not at; the end of two years, but of the first month. Guy was 
replaced by Rainard, a monk of Clairvaux, the particular friend of St. 
Bernard. 

^ This paragraph was therefore written in the year 1135. 



48 OEDEEICUS VITALTS. [b.YIII. ClI. XXTI. 

iu a dark place. They maintain perpetual silence, use no 
garments which have been dyed, and labouring ^yith their 
own hands provide their food and raiment. From the ides 
[13th] of September to Easter they fast every day except 
Sunday ; their doors are always shut close, and they bury 
themselves in profound secrecy, admitting no monks belong- 
ing to any other religious house into their cells, nor allowing 
them to be present in the chapel at mass or other divine 
offices. Multitudes of noble champions and learned men 
joined their society from the novelty of its institutions, and 
voluntarily submitting to their canonical rigour, rejoiced to 
chant triumphant anthems to Christ in the right way. 
Monasteries were erected in the wastes and woods by their 
own labour, and the names given, were, by a wise provision, 
of a sacred character, such as Maison-Dieu, Clairvaux, Bon- 
mont and L'Aumone,^ and others of the same sort ; the very 
sound of which invited the hearers to hasten to places 
whose names bespoke the blessedness to be found in 
them. 

Thirsty souls, without number, flocked to drink at the foun- 
tain-head, from whence numerous streams were diverted into 
all parts of Trance ; and zealous followers of the new rule 
were dispersed through Aquitaine, Britain, Gascony, and 
Ireland. Pretenders to piety, however, have become mixed 
with the genuine members of the society, and, clothed in 
W'hite robes or other varieties of dress, impose upon man- 
kind, and present an attractive exhibition to the people. 
Por the most part they imitate the true worshippers of God 
rather in their exterior forms than their virtues ; their very 
numbers disgust those who remark them, and, in the mis- 
taken views of human ignorance, bring their worthier 
brethren into contempt. 

* Maison Dieu, nfterwards called Noirlac, near La Celle Bruy^re in the 
department of the Cher ; Damns Dei supra Carum, postca Nif/er Lact/s, an 
abbey of the Cistercian order, foundoii about the year 1136. Robert, 
nephew of St. Bernard, was the first al)b()t. 

C/airvajix, founded in 1] 15 by St. Bernard, at a pHce called the valley 
of Absinthe. 

Bon Mont, affiliated to Clairvaux, situated in the diocese of Geneva, 
and founded the 7th of June. 1131. 

VAiimone, or Le Petii-Citcaiix, four leagues S.S.E. of Chateaudun, 
founded by Theobald IV., count de Blois. 



NEW ABBEYS IN TRANCE. 49 

Ch. XXVII. Account of several monasteries founded in 

France — And of eminent ahhots and other ecclesiastics. 
At the same time flourished Andrew, a venerable monk of 
Vallambrosa/ who built the abbey of Chezal-Benedict, in 
the territor}' of Bourges, teaching his disciples to serve God 
in great poverty and continence of life. He was a native of 
Italy, of profound learning, and well fitted to gain souls for 
Christ, through his grace. 

Aldebert, abbot of Dol, was now promoted to the arch- 
bishopric of Bourges," a prelate endowed with great virtues, 
who by word and deed bore testimony of holiness to those 
who desired to become followers of Christ- Garnier de 
Montmorillon, this archbishop's brother,^ was a gallant 
knight, who afterwards enlisted in the service of God, and 
was nearly sixty years a monk of Maison-Dieu.^ AVhile he 
was yet in the world, in his military career, he was on one 
occasion returning from a pilgrimage to the shrine of 
St. James, when, on entering a wood in company with his 
squire only, he suddenly encountered a sick mendicant who 
asked for alms. The knight not having any money ready at 
hand, piously gave him his rich gauntlets, which were a 
present from his mistress. Some time afterwards, as a de- 
vout servant of God was praying in his oratory after matins, 
an angel appeared to him in a vision, and gave him special 
directions for a mission he was to undertake. The monk 
making particular inquiry by whose authority the command 

' Valle Bntciorum ; softened by the Italians into Val-ombrosa, a name 
very significant of its delightiul situation among the forests which clothe 
the base of the Appennines. 

Thick as autumnal leaves that strew the brooks 
In Vallombrosa, where the Elrurian shades 
High over-arched embower. 

Par. Losl, b. i. 303. 

Andrew, a monk of Vallombrosa, founded the abbey of Chezal-Benedict, 
three leagues from Stoudun, in 1093. 

2 Audebert, archbishop of ii, urges, 1092 or 1093—1096. 

' Garnier de Montmorillon, in the department of Vienne. These two 
noble persons were cousins of Judith, daughter of Robert II., count 
d'Auvergne, who married Simon, count de Ci^pi and Valois, and was 
conducted by them, a short time after her marriage, to the abbey of Val- 
Dieu, where she took the veil. See before, vol. ii. p. 407. 

^ According to the biography of Bernard, abbot of Tiron this nobleman 
made his profession at St. Cyprian's in I'oitiers. 
VOL. III. E 



50 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.YIII. Cn.XXYII. 

was given him: "He it is," replied the angel, "who has 
sent me to you with this commission whom Martin clothed 
with part of his mantle, and to whom Garnier gave his 
gloves." The brother related this to his abbot, and it was 
plain to the older monks that the message had reference to 
the story of St. Martin, who, when only a catechumen at 
Amiens, rent his cloak and gave part of it to a poor man 
for Christ's sake ; but as to Garnier's gauntlets, no account 
of the circumstance had as yet got abroad. At last he told 
with great simplicity to some persons who asked him about 
it, how he had done the good deed to a poor man for the 
love of Christ ; and, upon learning from them the revelation 
which had been made, gave thanks to God, who is never 
wanting to those who act aright. 

About this time Bernard, abbot of Quince,^ retired from 
Poitiers, because he had refused to subject his monaster}^ 
which had been independent to that time, to the abbey of 
Cluni. Being, as the scripture says of the just man, " bold 
as a lion,"^ Bernard pleaded the cause of his independence 
against Pope Paschal before a council at Borne, and 
because the pope did not grant him perfect redress, appealed I 
to the judgment of God. The pope reverenced his deter- | 
mined conduct, and begged him to remain at Bome to assist 
in the administration of ecclesiastical affairs. The abbot 
however chose to withdraw from all worldly cares,^ and 
travelled through many countries in company with some 
monks whose zeal led them to follow him.* At last, after 
much journeying, he visited the venerable bishop Ives, who 
graciously received him, and settled him and his monks on 
the territory of the church of Chartres, where he built a 
monastery dedicated to St. Saviour in a woody district Ip 

^ Bernard, a native of Ponthieu, was abbot of St. Cyprian at Poitiers 
«in 1100. 

^ Proverbs xxviii. 1. 

^ The pope having at last done him justice, he returned to his abbey of 
St. Cyprian. 

^ Our author might have mentioned among the places visited by 
Bernard, the island of Chaufei, near Granville, where he had resided 
before he w;is raised to the dignity of abbot ; then the neighbourhood of j| 
Fougcires ; then Arcisses, near Nogent-le-Rotrou ; then, finally, he settled If 
at Tiron, in the commune of Gardais, first temporarily in 1107, and at last f 
permanently in lliO. 



ABBEYS OF TIRON A^^D SAYIGIs'r. 51 

called Tiron. A multitude of the faithful of both orders 
flocked to him, and father Bernard received in his loving 
embraces all who vrere ready to make their profession, 
enjoining them to practise in his new monastery the occu- 
pations which each of them had learnt. In consequence 
there readily assembled about him workmen, both smiths 
and carpenters, sculptors and goldsmiths, painters and 
masons, vine-dressers and ploughmen, with skilled artificers 
in various branches of labour. They diligently employed 
themselves in the tasks assigned them by the abbot, and 
turned their gains to the common advantage. Thus where 
lately robbers sheltered themselves in a frightful forest, and 
cut the throats of unwary travellers, on whom they rushed 
unawares, a stately abbey was, by Grod's help, quickly 
reared. Theobald, count palatine, and his m. other, Adele, 
Eotro, count de Mortain, and his mother, Beatrix,^ with 
many natives of Chartres, Dreux, and the Corbonnois, both 
gentle and simple, as well as the Christian people of the 
neighbourhood, finding the simplicity and worth of the good 
monks, paid them great respect, in the fear of the Lord, 
and rendered them effectual aid, both by their encourage- 
ment and their contributions, in adding strength to the 
citadel which they had begun to build in the cause of God. 
The venerable Vitalia,^ who was formerly chaplain of 
E-obert, count de Mortain,^ and a canon of the church of 
St. Evroult at Mortain,^ divested himself of the burden of 
worldly cares and riches, and resolving to bear Christ's easy 
yoke in -the footsteps of the apostles, retired for some time 
into a desert with some devout recluses. In this solitude 
he got rid of his fbrmer habits of indulgence, and learnt to 
submit to strict discipline. At last he remarked the village 
of Savigni,^ where he found vast ruins of some ancient 
buildings, and began to erect® a monastery to the honour of 

1 Theobald IV., count de Blois ; Ad^le of Normandy, his mother; 
Rotrou, count du Perche ; Beatrix de Rouci, his mother. 
' Vitalis, a native of Tierceville, near Bayeux. 
^ Robert, count de Mortain, half brother of William the Conqueror, 

* A collegiato church founded in 1082 by Robert, count de Mortain, 
and Matilda de Montgomery, his wife. 

* Savigni-le-vieux, near Mortain. 

* In 1105. 

E 2 



52 OHDEETCTJS YITALIS. [b. YIII. CH.XXVIT. 

the holy and undivided Trinity in a neighbouring wood, 
choosing it for the abode of himself and his disciples. He 
determined not to adopt the customs of the monks of Cluni, 
or others who had been long subject to the monastic rule, 
but embraced the institutions of the new societies, so far as 
he approved of them. A^italis was deeply imbued with erudite 
learning ; his courage and eloquence were remarkable ; and 
he was firm in carrying into effect whatever he proposed. 
Sparing neither high nor low^ in his public discourses, he 
raised his voice like the trumpet spoken of by the prophet 
Isaiah, showing the people of the Lord their transgressions 
and the house of Jacob their sins.^ Kings and dukes 
showed him honour, and multitudes hastened at the dawn 
of day to listen to his words, and hearing from his mouth 
the sins they had secretly committed, retired in sorrow and 
confusion from his presence. Every rank in society was 
pricked to the heart by his just reproofs ; all the world 
trembled before his rebukes ; and crowds of both sexes were 
filled with shame at the misdoings he revealed. He laid 
bare the inmost recesses of vice, and awakened the conscience 
by his strictures to a sense of the most secret faults. It 
was thus that he subdued the pride of the great, and 
softened the obduracy of the vulgar crowd, while he made 
ladies of rank who were vain of their delicate robes of silk 
and the fine wool of Canusa,^ to tremble before the sword of 
God's word which threatened their vices, smote their con- 
sciences stained with sin, and struck them with alarm by 
the awful thunder of the divine justice. Multitudes profited 
by the admonitions of the accomplished preacher, and many 
were led to become his disciples in the monastery he built 
and in which he waged the fight of faith for seven years,' 
making a good end of an excellent life. After lying sick 
for a short time, he was carried into his oratory, where he 
made faithful confession, and received the viaticum of the 
holy communion, at the matins of the Virgin Mary: when 
the reader affectionately asked for his blessing, he gave it, 

* Tsa. Iviii. 1, 
' The flocks of the neighbourhood of Canusa, in Apulia, were anciently 

celebrated for the fine wdoI of their fleeces, from wnich fabrics of the most 
delicate texture were woven. 

* The reading should iirobably be seventeen. 



SCnOOL OF ST. COLCiiEAN. 53 

and as all present were repeating the Amen, bis spirit lled.^ 
On bis deatb, lie was succeeded by (leoffrey of Bayeux, a 
monk of Cerisi, wbo made very unreasonable innovations, 
and imposed a beavy yoke on the necks of his disciples." 

I have recorded for the benefit of posterity, these accounts 
of the modern institutions, the founders of which prefer 
their new inventions to the traditions of their predecessors, 
calling other monks secular, and presuming to condemn 
them as transgressors of the ancient rules. AV^ben I reflect 
on the zeal and strictness of their lives, I cannot severely 
condemn them, nor do I esteem them above our old and 
tried fathers. They are ignorant, I think, that St. Columban 
a native of Ireland, was a contemporary of St. Benedict,^ 
and quitting bis home and country, crossed over to France 
with some eminent monks, and being hospitably received by 
Cbildebert, king of the Franks, son of Sigebert, built the 
monastery of Luxeuil in Burgundy.* Being afterwards 
expelled by Queen Brunicbild, be retired into Italy, and 
being received by Aigilulpb, king of the Lombards, founded 
the abbey of Bobbio.^ The labours of this holy father 
were most eminent ; and gloriously crowned with miracles 
in the sight of the people, and inspired b}^he Spirit of God, 
be published a monastic rule, and was the first to introduce 
it into France. Many monks of great celebrity issued from 
that school, and shed light on the world by their virtues, 
like stars in the firmament. Eustace of Luxeuil, Agilus of 
Bebais, Faro of Meaux, Omer of Boulogne,^ and Philibert of 
Jumieges,'' witb several other bishops and abbots of 

^ The 16th of September, 1122. 

2 Geoffrey, second abbot of Savi-ni, 1 122—1 1 38, or July 15. 1 139. 

^ St. Columban, who died in 6" 15, cannot be considered a contemporary 
of St. Benedict, who died in 543. 

* Luxeuil, in Franche-Comte (590). St. Columban was expelled from 
this monastery in 610. 

* The monastery of Bobbie, an episcopal city of Lombardy on the 
Trebia(613). 

" St. Eustace, abbot of Luxeuil, 610— March 29, 625. 
St. .'\gile, abbot of Rebais in I3iie, 636 — August 30, 650. 
St. Faro, bishop of Meaux, 626— October 28, G72. 
St. Oirer, bishop of Terouanno in Artois, founder of the abbey of St. 
Bertin at St. Omer, about 660, died the 9th of September, 667. Our 
author gives him the title of bishop of Boulogne, because that city formed 
part of the diocese of Tdrouanne, and the bishops often made it their 
residence, and took their name from it. 

7 St. Filibert, or as it is commonly written, St. Philibert, the founder oi 



54 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b. VIII. CH.XXYIII. 

distinguished piety were of this number ; whose sanctity 
was divinely authenticated by evident miracles, and by whose 
zeal the church was gloriously enlarged. These men, I 
think, must have been acquainted with St. Martin, his 
companions and disciples, inasmuch as they were neighbours 
and received from them the rule of St. Benedict, as well as 
the precepts of other doctors, written for edification ; so far, 
however as they were not contrary to the statutes of their 
own master the excellent Columban. From him, indeed, 
they learned the forms and order of divine service, and the 
prayer for all conditions of men in the church of God, and 
assumed the black dress and other distinctions which they 
used for the sake of religion and decency, and which 
their successors to the present day desire to regard with 
respect. 

What was the character of this great doctor, St. Columban, 
in the sight of God and man, the book containing his life, 
full of signs and miracles, sufiiciently exhibits. Frequent 
mention is made in his acts of St. Ouen, archbishop of 
Bouen, of Eloi, bishop of Noyon, and of other persons who 
gathered around him, and by his instructions obtained the 
tranquillity whic|| virtue gives. 

Although recently occupied in writing the history of 
the abbey of St. Evroult, I have now taken a survey, as if 
I had been wrapt in a vision, of the vast kingdoms of the 
earth, so that, wandering far and wide in my discourse, and 
embracing many subjects, I have made an extensive digression. 
Wearied by this long excursion, I now return to my home 
at St. Evroult, and shall close the present book by relating 
briefly somewhat of our own aftairs. 

Ch. XXVIII. Death of Hugh de Grantmesnil, tlie founder 
of St. Evroult — Buried there, with his coimtess — His 
epitaph — Three of his sons join the crusade — His grand- 
daughter marries the Earl of Leicester, who succeeds to 
what was left of the great estates of the family. 

Ix the year of our Lord, 1098, the first indiction, Hugh de 
Grantmesnil, the illustrious lord, took to his bed in England, 

the abbey of Jumi^ges in Q^6, died the 20th of August, about the year 
684. His residence at Luxeuil and Bobbie was merely temporary. He 
received the monastic habit, not from St. Columban, but from St. Agile at 
Rebais. 



I 



A.D. 1098.] nuGii DE geantmesnil's epitaph. 55 

worn out with age and infirmitj, and his end approaching. 
He then received the monastic robe from Greoffrey of Orleans, 
prior of St. Evroult, who had been lately sent by Abbot 
Koger to England, to give him succour ; and he died six days 
afterwards, that is, on the calends of March [the 22nd 
February].^ His body, preserved in salt, and well sewn up 
in an ox-hide, was conveyed to Normandy by Bernard and 
David, monks of St. Evroult, and honourably interred by the 
abbot and convent, on the south side of the chapter house, 
near the tomb of Abbot Maimer. Arnold of Ehuddlan,^ 
his nephew, caused a marble slab to be laid over his grave, 
and Vitalis^ furnished the following epitaph in heroic 
verses : — 

With years and glory compassed, Hugh the brave 
Beneath this marble finds an honoured grave; 
Granton's ancestral towers supply a name 
Blazoned with lustre on the rolls of fame. 
Foremost among the Conqueror's valiant peers. 
Fair England's shore he sought in early years ; 
And high above the tide of battle rose, 
Shield of his friends, and terror of his foes. 
Here he, with gifts and lands, and service due, 
Decked and enriched the shrine of St. Evroult. 
In monkish cowl, with penitence and prayer, 
When holy church kept feast of Peter's chair. 
The good old knight prepared himself to die; 
God give him peace among the blest on high ! 

Adeliza, wife of Hugh de Grantmesnil, had died at Eouen 
seven years before, on the fifth of the ides [11th] of July,'* 

^ Probably at Leicester, in 1093, not 1098, which seems to be an error 
of the copyist. 

2 This person should have been called Arnold de Tilleul, or Arnold, 
son of Umfrid (Humphrey), instead of giving him the territorial qualifica- 
tion of his brother Robert, who was long since dead, and with which 
Arnold had nothing to do. 

' The author ; it has been remarked in the preface that he never uses 
his baptismal name of Ordericus, it being superseded by that of Vitalis, 
which he adopted on his profession as a monk. The modern union of the 
two names is therefore incorrect. 

* Ante septem annos obierat ; so that the date of Adeliza's death may 
have been either 1085 or 1089, according to the version given to the text. 
Obierat seems to indicate that she died before her husband, and the 
position of her grave in the place of honour, the right side, leads one to 
suppose she died first. On the other hand, Abbot Mainier lived till 1089, 



56 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [u.YIII. CH. XXVII I. 

and was Interred in the chapter house at St. Evroult on the 
right of Abbot Maimer. This lady was daughter of Ivo, 
Count de Beaumont, by Judith, her mother. She bore her 
husband six sons and as many daughters, whose fates were 
subject to the fleeting changes of human affairs. 

liobert, the eldest, was thrice married^ before he advanced 
in years, but the ample patrimony he inherited from his father 
slipped through his hands. At last he died on the calends 
of June,'-^ thirty eight years after his father, and was buried 
with his two wives, Agnes and Emma, in the chapter house 
at St. Evroult. His brother William stood high at the court 
of King AViliiam, by whom he was so much beloved that 
he offered him his niece, daughter of Eobert, earl of Morton,^ 
that he might attach the young man to him by the honour 
of so near an alliance. But the proud youth rejected the 
royal offer, and from love of change went to Apulia, 
with Eobert Giffard, and several others, and marrying 
Mabel, surnamed Courte Louve, daughter of Eobert 
Guiscard,* received fifteen castles as her dowry. He died 
there after liis return from Antioch, leaving two sons, 
William and Eobert, heirs of his estates.^ 

Hugh, a brave and excellent knight, died young, and 
was interred with honour in the chapter house at St. 
Evroult.'^ 

Ivo held for some time his father's domains in England, 
but afterwards in the time of King Henry, he pledged them 

and yet she is said to have been interred by his side. The author may, 
however, have spoken of the state of things existing at tlie time he wrote ; 
and Adeliza's death in ] 11(5,5 is rather confirmed by the circumstance of the 
manor of Brockbourne in Hertfordshire, Avhich she held directly from 
King William, liaving been j;iven to the monks of Bermondsey by her son 
Ivo before his departure in the crusade and consequently anterior to the 
year 109.0. 

' See before, vol. ii. book viii. c. \G, p. 505 

2 June ], 1126. 

' Robert, earl of Morton (or count de Mortain), had three daughters; 
it is supposed that the one here referred to v.as the eldest, who married 
Andrew, lord of Vitrt-, in Brittany, and son of Robert de Vitre, who was 
at the battle of Hasr.ings. 

■* Sf'e vol. ii, p. 506. 

* We shall hear more of this William de Grantmesnil in the succeeding 
book. 

" See vol. ii. p. 42G. 



FAMILY OP GEATfTMESNlL. 57 

to Eobert earl of Mellent, and went twice in pilgrimage to 
Jerusalem. In the first crusade he suffered much, as well 
as his companions, at Antioch ; and in the second he 
died.^ 

Alberic, the youngest son, had his youth devoted to the 
study of letters, but when he grew up, he renounced the 
profession of a learned clerk, and embraced the career of arms, 
in which he endeavoured to distinguish himself by actions 
of signal bravery." He wounded Tancred, son of the Good 
Marquis, a hero illustrious for his great achievements ; who 
was lame, in consequence, the rest of his life." 

All these sons of Hugh de Grantmesnil, were in person tall 
and handsome, as well as of great courage ; but fortune 
persecuted them, and neither of them, except Eobert, enjoyed 
a long life, nor a continuance of peace and prosperity. 

' The disgraceful manner in which he withdrew from the dangers and 
privations of the first Crusade is described in book ix.; and it is surprising 
that with his painful experience, he should have embarked a second time 
in such an enterprise. He left two sons, ivo and Hugh. Petronilla, 
Hugh's daughter, and great grand-daughter of the founder of the abbey of 
St. Evroult, married the earl of Leicester, Avho in her right had all that 
remained of the inheritance of tliis family in ^^ormandy and England. 
Robert, earl of Leicester, son of the Countess Petronilla, made a charter 
m favour of the abbey, which is still extant, though it has never been 
printed. 

•^ Whatever our author may say, Alberic, or Aubrey, did not -establish a 
more honourable character in the crusades than his brothers. 

^ Tliis circumstance is not related by any other historian, and M. Le 
Prevost remarks that its authenticity m^ay be suspected, particularly as 
Rulph of Caen, Tancred's biographer, omits to menticn it as an additional 
complaint against the three Grantmesnils, whose cowardice at Antioch he 
severely stigmatises. But may not the biographer have been unwilling to 
admit that his hero was seriously wounded by one of these cowards 1 



I 



58 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.I. 



BOOK IX. 

Cn. I. Introduction to tlie ninth hoolc — Its stihject, the 
history of the first crusade — Former nai^ratives. 

The Eternal Creator wisely orders the revolutions of time 
and of human affairs, not disposing and altering them at the 
pleasure of senseless mortals, but his providence preserves, 
and his strong hand, and stretched-out arm, fitly carries for- 
ward and dispenses all. This is plainly seen in the changes 
of winter and summer, and not less felt in cold and heat ; we 
perceive this in the origin and decay of all things, and the 
infinite variety of the works of God. Hence arise the 
numerous narratives of events which are daily occurring in 
the world, and materials are abundantly offered for eloquent 
historians to dwell upon. I reflect profoundly on these 
things, and commit the result of my meditations to writing ; 
because in our days we have an unexpected revolution, and 
a noble theme for marvellous tales is offered to the pen of 
the writer. 

Lo ! the crusade to Jerusalem is entered on by the inspi- 
ration of Grod ; the people of the West miraculously flock 
together from many nations into one vast body, and are led 
in one united army to fight against the infidels^ in the East. 
The holy Sion is delivered by her sons who have hastened to 
her rescue from distant lands, and have conquered the 
aliens,' who had trodden under foot the holy city, 
and foully polluted the sanctuary of Grod. The execrable 
Saracens^ had, by permission of divine Providence, long since 
crossed the border of Christendom, seized on the holy places, 
murdered the Christian inhabitants, and defiled with their 
abominations all that is sacred ; but after a long period they 
received the punishment they merited from the arms of the 
Cisalpine nations.* 

1 Ethnicos; Ordericus calls the Mahomedans, indifferently, Gentiles 
and Pagans. Sulpitius Severus also uses the word " ethnicis " to express 
pasan; hiitoricis ethnicis, in opposition to sacris. 

^ A/lophilis ; the word occurs again towards the close of c. 15 of this 
book, where a note will be found respecting it. 

' Affureni, (descendants of Hagar?) an Arabian tribe. Dion Cassius 
has given an account of Tmjan's expedition against them. 

* Writing at St. Evroult, this phrase, often used by our author, would 



THE riEST CRUSADE. 59 

Never, I think, was a more glorious subject presented to 
those who are well informed in military affairs, than that 
which is divinely offered to the poets and writers of our age, 
in the triumph of a handful of Christians, drawn from their 
homes by the love of enterprise, over the pagans in the East. 
The God of Abraham renewed his ancient miracles, when, 
actuated only by their zeal to visit the Messiah's tomb, and 
without the exercise of the authority of kings, or any worldly 
excitement, but by the simple admonition of Pope Urban,^ 
he assembled the Christians of the "West, from the ends of 
the earth, and the isles of the sea, as he brought the Hebrews 
out of Egypt by the hand of Moses ; and led them through 
strange nations until he conducted them to Palestine, and 
gave them victory over kings and princes, and the assembled 
forces of many nations, and enabled them gloriously to con- 
quer strongly-fortified cities, and to reduce towns under 
subjection to their arms. 

Eulcher of Chartres, chaplain to Godfrey duke of Lorraine, 
who partook of the toils and perils of the expedition, has 
published a faithful and accurate volume on the laudable 
enterprise of the army of Christ.^ Likewise Baldric, arch- 
bishop of Dol,^ wrote four books in which he has described 

include all the western nations on this side the Alps, but he generally 
means the French, including the Normans. 

^ Urban II. (March 12, 1088— July 29, 1099), born on the territory of 
Rheims, was first a canon of that cathedral, afterwards a monk of Cluni, 
and eventually bishop of Ostia. Gregory VII., just before his death, 
named him one of the three cardinals he thought qualified for the 
papacy. However, he was not raised to it until after the death of Victor 
111., who was also on Pope Gregory's list. 

^ Fulcher of Chartres, born in 1059, was not chaplain to Godfrey de 
Bouillon, but to his brother and successor, Baldwin. His history of the 
Crusades is entitled, Gesta peregrinorum Francorum cum armis Hierusa- 
lem pergerithim. It is supposed that he died about the year 1127, the 
period at which his narrative ends. It will be seen hereafter that there 
were no less than four individuals in the first Crusade who bore the same 
name and surname. 

* Baldric, or Baudri, born at Meun-sur- Loire, about the middle of the 
eleventh century, was made abbot of Boigueil in 1079, and archbishop of 
Dol in 1107. After the year 1120 he frequently resided in Normandy, 
particularly at. the monastery of St. Samson, standing at the mouth of the 
Risle, it being a dependency on his see; indeed, it was the seat of an exempt 
jurisdiction belonging to Dol till the time of the revolution. He con- 
secrated the church of St. Samson the 16th of December, 1129, and that 



60 OBDEIIICUS TITALIS. [b.IX. CH.I. 

with truth of eloquence, all the details from the beginniugof 
the journey to the first battle after the taking of Jerusalem. 
Many other writers also, both Greek and Latin, have giveu 
accounts of this remarkable event, and recorded in lively 
characters the heroic deeds of illustrious men for the benefi^t 
of posterity. I too, though the least of all the followers of 
the Lord in a religious rule of life, for the love I bear to the 
brave champions of Christ, and the desire I have to celebrate 
their valiant achievements, am ambitious to include in the 
work I have undertaken on ecclesiastical affiiirs some account 
of this Crusade. I shrink from the task of writing a com- 
plete history of the expedition, but though I cannot venture 
to promise that, I know not how I can pass by so grand a 
theme without any notice. I feel the weight of years, being 
now a sexagenarian,^ and having been brought up in the 
strict rule of the cloister, a monk from my childhood, I am 
unable to undergo the severe labour of writing with my own 
hand, and have no penmen to take down what I wish to 
dictate.^ Consequently I hasten to complete my work. I 
will therefore now begin the ninth book, in which I shall 

Du Mtirais- Vernier, in the same place, on the succeeding day, and died 
the 7tn of January followirg. He wrote his history of the Holy War in 
1110. Baldrici, archiepiscupi Dolotsis IJ'tstoria Ilieroso/i/mitana. 

' Our author has told us at the beginning of his fifth book (vol. ii. p. 
113), that he was burn the IGih of March, 1075; this part of his history 
was, therefore, written in 113.5, a rather memorable epoch in the annals of 
England and Normandy, as Henry I. died on the 1st of December of that 
year. Ordericus, towards the close of the twenty-sixth chapter of his 
eighth book (see before, p. 47), incidentally furnishes us with the djite in 
which that part of his work was written; so that it would appear the eighth 
and ninth books were composed consecutively. 

We might be inclined to amuse ourselves with our author's rem.ark, 
that his \\\ ight of years, as a sexagenj'.ri-m, interfered with the prosecution 
of his literary avocations, if the conclusion of the sentence did not give rise 
to a very 'litterent feeling. But it may be well supposed that in the case 
of so conscientious a recluse, even a robust constitution may have been 
broken by the austerities of a long monjistic life, and the rigid performance 
of ])is duties in the choir, as well by night as by day, and through the rigours 
of a winter in Normandy (such as he describes, vol. ii. pp. IIU and 244), 
without the addition of his indefatigal)le devotion to his voluminous work. 

^ Either this lack of qualified penmen must have been temporary, or 
there was a sad falling off during the last seventy or eigiuy years in the 
education and industry of the younger members of the society of St. 
Evroult, of which our author has given so pleasing an account in thy 
earlier part of his history. See vol. i. pp. 406—408. 



A.D. .1095.] COUNCIL OF PIACENZA. Gl 

endeavour to give, faitlifully and in order, some account of the 
pilgrims to Jerusalem, if God affords me the aid I need. 
In the deserts of Idumea, merciful Jesus, thou King of 
Nazareth, lend me, I beseech thee, thy powerful succour ! 
Grant me the ability to declare worthily thy mighty power, 
which was exhibited in the triumph of thy servants and the 
discomfiture of the rebellious. Thou art the leader and 
guide of the faithful, their protector in dangers, their shield 
in battle, and the giver of victory. Almighty God ! thee I 
adore, thy help 1 now implore ! To the King of kings be 
eternal praises, world without end ! Amen. 

Ch. II. A f/eneral drougJit and famine — Hemarhahle airpear- 
anceof '"'falling stars''' — The council of Clermont —its decrees 
— Urban 11. preaches the crusade — Numbers take the cross 
— Aimer, bishop ofFuy and Raymond, count of Tholouse. 

In the year of our Lord 1094, the second indiction, 
tumults and wars spread desolation over the greatest part of 
the world, and pitiless mortals inflicted on each other 
enormous calamities by rapine and slaughter. Iniquitv 
abounded on all sides, and involved those who abandoned 
themselves to it in endless sufferings. The grass of the earth 
was burnt up by excessive drought, which destro^^ed the corn 
and pulse, so that a severe famine ensued.^ 

The emperor Henry attacked the Eoman church, but bv 
God's providence was compelled to yield to the numbers who 
undertook her defence. Pope Urban held a council at 
Piazenza, in which the peace of the church and other pressing 
afiairs were carefully considered.^ 

^ This melancholy picture appears to be somewhat overcharijed. Tlie 
populations of the west were habitually the prey of so many devastations, 
that the year 1094 does not seem to have been particularly distinguished, 
except by a pestilence which extended its ravages to France, but which 
was a greater scourge to Bavaria and the banks of the Rhine. The 
Chronicle of St. Stephen of Caen speaks also of a great drought and 
famine, but refers them to the year 1091 ; while that of St. Brieuc, on 
the contrary, fixes them in 1095. 

2 The cause of the emperor, Henry IV. (October 5, 1056 — August 7, 
1106), was indeed Utile prosperous in Italy at this period. His sou, 
Conrad, who had commenced ho>tilities against him, caused himselt to bo 
crowned king of the Romans in 1093. The council of Piacenza sat from 
tlje 1st to the 7th of March, 1095. There weie present two hundred 
bishops, more than four thousand of the clergy, and thirty thousand lay. 



62 OEDERICrS TITALIS. [b.IX. CK.II. 

In the year of our Lord 1095, the third indiction, on 
Wednesday before the nones [4th] of April, on the 
twenty-sixth day of the moon, innumerable spectators 
in France witnessed such a prodigious commotion among 
the stars, that, but for their brightness, it might have been 
mistaken for a thick shower of hail. Many thought that the 
constellations had fallen, and that the scripture was fulfilled, 
which predicted when and wherefore the stars should fall 
from heaven. 

Gilbert, bishop of Lisieux, who was now an old man 
and a good physician as w^ell as deeply skilled in other 
sciences,^ had long been in the habit of regularly observing 
the stars at night, carefully noting their courses, like an acute 
astrologer. The able naturalist perceiving this prodigy in 
the heavens, called up the watchman who guarded the house 
■while the other servants were asleep, and said to him : " Do 
you see, AA^alter, this remarkable appearance ?" The man 
replied: " I see it, my lord, but I know not what it portends." 
The old prelate answered : " It prefigures, I think, the 
emigration of people from one country to another. Many 
will depart never to return, until the stars come back to their 
places in the heavens, from w^hich as it appears they are 
clearly wandering. Others will remain fixed in their high 
and lofty sphere, like bright stars shining in the firmament." 

men. The ambassadors of the emperor of the East attended the council 
to implore the succour of the Latin Christians against the Turks, who had 
overrun almost all Asia Minor, and threatened Constantinople itself. It 
was in consequence of this, and on the present occasion, that Pope Urban 
first proposed the Crusade. 

' From cur author's character, in a former chapter (vol. ii. p. 121), of 
this prel'dte, Gilbert Maminot,and scattered notices throughout the history, 
he must have been an extraordinary person in that age, but more eminent 
as a man of science than as an ecclesiastic. In fact, he a23pears to have 
been raised to the episcopate by William the Conqueror as a reward for 
services in his medical capacity rather than as his chaplain, and he 
attended his sovereign as his physician in his last illness. 

The author, who must have known him well, gives here a lively picture 
of the old bishop, who, he tells us in another place, was tall and spare in 
person, engaged in his nightly occupation of observing the heavens, and 
explaining to his astonislied domestic a phenomenon with which he must 
himself have been familiar, but which on this occasion presented an aspect 
more than usually brilliant. Little did the philosophical prelate know of 
the modern theory of aerolites, and he treated the subject, as was natural, 
more as an astrologer than an astronomer. 



A.D. 1095.] COUNCIL or CLERMONT. G3 

This "Walter, who was of Cormeilles, related to me a long 
time afterwards what he had heard from the mouth of the 
able physician concerning the falling stars, at the very 
moment the phenomenon was observed. 

Philip, king of Prance, carried off Bertrade, the wife of 
the count of Anjou, and having repudiated his own illus- 
trious queen, made a shameful marriage with the adulteress. 
He would not abandon this dishonourable connection, 
notwithstanding the censures of the French bishops on the 
criminal pair, the ond for having deserted his wife, the other 
her husband, and the king sunk into age and infirmities in 
all the corruption of his foul adultery.^ 

During King Philip's reign, Pope Urban undertook a 
journey to Prance, and consecrated the altar of St. Peter at 
the abbey of Cluni, and many churches dedicated to the 
saints ; and, by his apostolical authority, granted them 
privileges to the honour of Christ.^ Then a dreadful pesti- 
lence raged among the population in Normandy and France, 
so that numbers of houses were swept of their inhabitants, 
while, at the same time, a severe famine wasted the people. 

The same year, the fourth indiction, in the month of 
November, Pope Urban assembled the bishops of France 
and Spain in a great council at Clermont,^ a city of Auvergne, 
anciently called Arverne.* He reformed many things on 
this side the Alps, and made a variety of decrees for the 
reformation of manners. There were present at the council 

^ The details connected with this scandalous alliance, which drew on 
Philip I. the thunders of the church, are given in our author's pecceding 
book. 

'^ The pope crossed the Alps in the last fortnight of July, was at 
Valence in tlie beginning of August, at Puy the 15th, at Chaise-Dieu the 
18th, at Nismes the end of the month, at Tarascon the 11th of Septem- 
ber, at Avignon the 12th, at St. Paul-Trois Chateaux the 19th, at Mapon 
the 17th of October, and at Cluni the 18th. The altar at Cluni was con- 
secrated on the 25th. 

^ The pope arrived at Clermont the 14th or 15th of November, and 
opening the council on the 18th, closed it on the 28th of the same 
month. It was at first proposed to assemble it at V^zelai, then at Puy, 
but at last finally settled to hold it at Clermont. 

* The Roman name of the capital of the province of Auvergne was 
Augustonemetium, which it exchanged for that of Arvernis about the 
time of Ammianus MarceUinus. It preserved the latter name until it 
borrowed that of Clermont, a fortress built to protect and overawe it. 



64 OEDERICITS VITALIS. [b.IX. CH.II. 

of Clermont thirteen arclibishops, and two hundred and 
twenty-five bishops, with a vast number of abbots and other 
ecclesiastical dignitaries, to whom the care of the churches 
was divinely committed.^ 

The decrees of the council held at Clermont were as 
follows : — 

" The church ought to be catholic, pure, and independent ; 
catholic in the faith and communion of the saints ; pure 
from all contagion of sin ; and independent of all secular 
power. Let not bishops, abbots, or others of the clergy, 
receive the investiture of any ecclesiastical dignity from 
the hands of any prince or layman whatever! Let not 
clerks hold any prebends or preferment in more than one 
city or church ! Let no one be at the same time a bishop 
and abbot ! Let no priest, deacon, subdeacon, or canon be 
guilty of incontinence ! and let no priest, deacon, or sub- 
deacon perform any function after he has lapsed ! Let no 
ecclesiastical dignities or canonries be bought or sold ! 
Those may be pardoned who have purchased canonries in 
ignorance of the authority of the canons and the laws pro- 
hibiting it ; but let those be deprived who hold them 
wittingly purchased by themselves or their rektions ! Let 
no layman eat flesh after being sprinkled with ashes on the 
first day of Lent until Easter ! Let the first fast of the 
Four Times be always kept in the first week of Lent ! Let 
holy orders be always conferred either at vespers on Satur- 
day, or, the fast being prolonged, on Sunday morning! On 
Easter Saturday, let not the ofiice be concluded till sunset ! 
Let the second fast be always kept in the week of AVhitsun- 
tide ! Let the truce of God be observed from Advent to the 
octave of the Epiphany, from Septuagesima until the octave of 
Easter, from the first Kogation day to the octave of AVhitsun- 
day, and at all seasons from sunset on Wednesday to sunrise 

^ Cotemporary writers are not agreed on these numbers, but our author 
has prudently adopted those which were officially stated by the pope him- 
self in his brief in favour of the bishopric of Arras. Among the prelates we 
may single out Julias, archbishop of Bari, who figured in the narrative of 
the translation of the relics of St. Nicholas (vol. ii. pp. 393, 394), and who 
now, having received a visit from Peter the Hermit as he was returning 
from the Holy Land, accompanied him from Bari to the council of Cler- 
mont. The number of the abbots, which is not here given, is reckoned in 
the documents referred to at more than ninety. 



A.D. 1095.] CANONS OF THE COUNCIL OF CI.EEMONT. 05 

on Monday ! Let an}^ one wlio lays violent hands on a bishop 
be outlawed ! Let those who arrest or rob monks, clerks, 
or nuns, or their servants, be excommunicated ! Let those 
who plunder the goods of bishops or clerks at their death be 
excommunicated ! Let those who marry within the seventh 
degree of consanguinity be excommunicated ! Let no one 
be made a bishop but a priest, deacon, or subdeacon,^ and 
who is of honourable parentage, except in extreme cases, 
and with the pope's licence ! The sons of priests or concu- 
bines shall not be preferred to the priesthood, unless thev 
have before led a religious life ! Those who flee to a church 
or cross for refuge, shall, if guilty, be given up to justice, 
saving only life and limbs ; but if they are innocent they 
shall be set at liberty ! Let the body of our Lord and the 
blood of our Lord be received separately ! Let every church 
possess its own tithes, and not intrude on the rights of 
another under pretence of any gift ! Let no layman either 
sell or hold tithes ! Let no fees be demanded or paid for 
the burial of the dead ! Let no prince have any chaplain, 
unless by licence from the bishop ; and if he be guilty of any 
offence, let him be corrected by the diocesan, and another 
chaplain appointed in his place ! " ^ 

These decrees received the public sanction of Pope 
Urban at the council of Clermont, where he zealously 
inforced the observance of the divine law on all orders of 
men. He then laid before the council lamentable accounts 
of the desolation of Christianity in the East, and described 
the sufferings and cruel oppressions to which the faithful 
were exposed.^ His eyes filled with tears as he depictured to 

^ Gregory II. was only a deacon when he was elected pope. 

2 It must not be concluded that the acts of the council of Clermont 
were confined to this small number of canons ; on the contrary, they were 
so numerous that the very circumstance has occasioned the loss of the 
greater part, every one limiting himself to extracting only what particularly 
interested him. The general collection of councils contains, all that have 
been preserved by Lambert D'Arras, Alberic de Trois-Fontaines, and 
others. 

^ The calamities on which the pope expatiated are those which resulted 
from the conquest of Jerusalem and the whole of Lower Syria, in 1076, 
by the lieutenants of Malek-Shah, great-nephew of Togul-Bey, and Sultan 
of the Turkish dynasty of the Seljucides. The Christians of the Holy 
Land had already undergone great sufferings firom the cruelties of the 

YOL. III. F 



66 OEDEKICTJS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.II. 

the sacred synod Jerusalem prostrate, and the holy places, 
where Christ and his disciples walked in the flesh, profaned 
and trodden down. Then many of his audience were moved 
by sympathy and compassion for their afflicted brethren 
to weep with him. The eloquent preacher addi'essed his 
hearers in a long and excellent discourse, in which he 
exhorted the princes of the West, with their subjects and 
warriors, to maintain firm peace among themselves, and, 
assuming the badge of the holy cross on their right shoul- 
ders, give full scope to their military ardour on the renowned 
chiefs of the Infidels. 

" The Turks and Persians," said Pope Urban, " the 
Arabians and Saracens, have seized Antioch, Nice, and 
Jerusalem itself,' ennobled by the tomb of Christ, with other 
Christian cities, and have now turned their immense power 
against the empire of the Greeks. They are in complete 
possession of Palestine and Syria, which they have already 
subjugated, destroying the churches, and butchering the 
Christians like sheep. In the churches, vrhere the divine 
sacrifice was once celebrated by the faithful, the gentiles 
now stable their horses, introducing their superstitions and 
idolatries, have shamefully expelled the Christian religion 
from the temples dedicated to God. The domains given for 
the support of the saints, and the endowments of the nobles 
for the sustenance of the poor, are usurped by pagan 
tyranny, and converted by these cruel masters to their own 
use. They have dragged away many captives into far 
distant countries, the seats of barbarism, and yoking them 
with thongs, set them to labour in the fields, compelled 
them to plough the land like oxen, and to undergo other 
toils befitting beasts rather than men. Worn down with 
the fatigue of such employments, our brcthreii are flogged 
with whips, urged with goads, and abominably subjected to 
innumerable suft'erings. In Africa alone ninety-six bishop- 

Fatimite Calipl., Hakem (99G — 1002), to whose successors they continued 
subject until this invasion which restored them nominally to the government 
of the Abassides. 

' Tlie date of the conquest of Jerusalem by the Turks has been given 
in th.e last note. Nice was ceded to Soliman, sultan of Iconium by 
Nicejjhorus lilelis.nes in 1080, and Antioch bv the son of Philaretes in 
1085. 



A.D. 1095.] UEEAN II. PREACHES THE CRUSADE. 67' 

rics have been destroyed, as those who have come from 
thence inform us." ^ 

JN'o sooner had Pope Urban eloquently poured forth these 
complaints in the ears of Christians," than, by the inspiration 
of God's grace, thousands were inflamed with excessive zeal 
for undertaking the enterprise, and resolved to sell their 
lands and leave all they had for the sake of Christ. Rich 
and poor, monks and clerks, townsmen and peasants, were 
all seized with wonderful ardour to march to Jerusalem or 
to succour those that became pilgrims. Husbands were 
ready to leave their beloved wives at home, and wives were 
equally desirous to leave their children and all their sub- 
stance, and accompany their husbands on the journey. 
Estates of great value were sold for a trifle, and arms were 
purchased to inflict divine vengeance on the Saracens. 
E-obbers, pirates, and other criminals, touched by the grace 
of God, rose from the depths of iniquity, confessed and 
renounced their sins, and, to make satisfaction to God for 
them, joined the ranks of the pilgrims. The prudent pope 
stirred up all who were able to bear arms, to fight against 
the enemies of God, absolving by his authority all penitents 
from the hour they should take the cross from their sins, 
and releasing them from all obligations of fasting and other 
mortifications of the flesh. Eor he wisely considered, like 
a kind and prudent physician, that those who went on the 
pilgrimage would be constantly harassed on the road by 
difficulties of all kinds, and exposed to daily chances both 
for good or evil, for which the worthy servants of Christ 
should be purified from all the corruptions of sin. 

1 Among the numerous discourses attributed by the historians of the 
first Crusade to Urban II. at the council of Clermont, there are three 
which have the character of authenticity. The first, which is rather the 
fragment of an allocution particularly addressed to the French than a 
complete discourse, is preserved by Robert of St. Remi ; the second by 
Balderic ; the third by William of Tyre. They are all to be found in the 
general collection of councils, as well as in the history of this pope by Dom 
Ruinart. — Ouvres Posthumes dc Mabillon. 

2 It is said that this popular eloquence was displayed by Pope Urban 
from a lofty scaffold in the market place of Clermont. The city was filled 
with overflowing numbers, and, though the council was held, as we have 
seen, in the month of November, thousands sheltered themselves in tents 
hastily erected in the open fields round the town. 



68 OKDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.IX. CH.II. 

"While the pope was solemnly preaching in the council, 
and vehemently exhorting the sons of Jerusalem to hasten 
to deliver their holy mother, a man of high character, 
Adheraar,^ bishop of Puy, rose from his place before all the 
nssembly, and approaching the successor of the apostles 
with a cheerful countenance, bent his knee, and entreated 
permission to go, and the pope's benediction ; both which he 
obtained to the joy of all. Thereupon the pope issued a 
decree enjoining all the pilgrims to obey the bishop, and 
constituting him apostolical vicar in the expedition ; for he 
was a prelate of consummate ability, great courage, and 
singular industry. 

The envoys of Raymond Berenger, count of Tholouse,^ 
presently appeared, and announced to the pope that their 
master, with, many thousands from his dukedom, would join 
the Crusade, and stated to the council that lie had already 
assumed the cross. Lo ! thanks be to God, two leaders 
voluntarily presented themselves with alacrity to take the 
command of the Christian pilgrims. In this case, the 
priestly and princely powers, the order of the clergy and 
that of the laity, united to be the conductors of the people 
of God. The bishop and the count remind us of Moses 
and Aaron, who were also aided by the divine support. 
There was an eclipse of the moon on the tenth day of the 
month of February, which lasted from midnight to the dawn 

* The MS. of St. Evroult, following the text of Archbishop Baudri's 
narrative, always calls this prelate Naimarus, which should be written 
N^Aimarvs, the initial A^ being an abbreviation oi Don for Dominus, used 
in the south of France in the middle ages. The real name of the bishop 
of Puy was Adhe'mar — and by contraction Aimar — de Monteil. He was 
raised to the episcopacy about the year 1080, at the latest. The com- 
position of the Hymn, Salve Regina, in the office of the Blessed Virgin, 
is attributed to Adhemai-. 

^ Raymond, fourth of that name, and surnamed de St. Giles, was the 
second son of Pons, count of Tholouse. At first he was lord of that part 
of the l)ishopric of Nismcs, which adjoins St. Giles, but his brother William, , 
who married Emma, daughter of Robert, count de Mortain, f^ave him the f 
county of Rovergue in 106G, and that of Tholouse in 1088. William 
went to the Holy Land in 10.92, and died there the year following. 
Raimond was accompanied to the Crusade by his third wife, Elvira, 
natural daughter of Alfonzo VI., king of Leon and Castile, with a son 
he liad by her, who was quite young, and whose name has not been 
preserved. 



A.D. 1096.] SYNOD OF ROUEN. GO 

of inoruing, the obscuration commencing on the north side 
of the planet.^ 

Cn. III. A synod of the hisliops of Normandy, held at Rouen, 
proimilgates the canons of the council of Clermont — Origin 
of the Danes who conquered Normandy — State of the 
province — Duke Robert resolves to join the Crusade. 

Odo, bishop of Bayeux, Gilbert of Evreux, and Serlo of 
Seez, with envoys from the other bishops of Normandy, 
bearing letters of apology, were present at the council of 
Clermont, and returning with the apostolical benediction, 
brought synodal letters to their brother bishops. In 
consequence. Archbishop "William convoked a synod at 
Eouen, to consult with his suffragan bishops on the wants 
of the church. Having assembled at Rouen, in the month 
of February, they unanimously received the acts of the 
council of Clermont, and, ratifying the apostolical decrees, 
made a record to the following purpose for a perpetual 
memorial : — 

" 1. The holy synod has decreed that the truce of Grod 
shall be strictly observed from the Sunday before the 
beginning of Lent to sunrise on Monday after the octave or 
Whitsuntide ; also from "Wednesday before Advent at 
sunset to the octave of the Epiphany, as well as every week 
in the year from sunset on Wednesday to sun-rise on 
Monday ; ' also on all the feasts of St. Mary, and their vigils, 
and all feasts of the apostles, and their vigils ; so that no 
one shall assault, or wound, or slay another, or take pledge ^ 
or booty. 

1 This eclipse happened in the night between the 10th and 11th of 
February, at half-past three in the morning. 

2 According to this canon, there remained only the three first days of 
the week for carrying on hostilities. This was so totally inconsistent with 
the military spirit of the age, that the canon, by attempting too much, 
became quite nugatory, as our author states in the succeeding chapter, in 
commenting on the decrees of this council, promulgated by the synod of 
Rouen. See the note in p. 125 of vol. ii. on the'introduction of the" trucu 
of God " into Normandy, 

3 Namnum. The same word is used in S. 19 of the canons of the synod 
of Rouen in 1080. {ib. p. 128.) We have there given it the signification 
of a gage or pledge of battle. M. Le Prevost considers it an ordinary 
pledge, which generally consisted of cattle, and remarks that there is a 
street at Caen called, La rue aux Namps. 



70 OrvDERICUS YITALTS. [b.IX. Cn.TIt. 

" 2. It is also decreed that all cliurches and cliurcliyards, 
monks, and nuns, as well as females, pilgrims and merchants, 
with their servants, oxen, and horses at plough, and men 
driving carts , or harro^Ying, and horses harrowing, and men 
flying for refuge to carts, and all the lands of the saints, and 
the money of the clergy, shall be for ever unmolested, so 
that no one shall presume to assault, take, rob, or injure 
them in any manner or at any time whatever.^ 

" 3. It is also decreed that all persons, from the age of 
twelve years and upwards, shall swear to observe faithfully 
this institution of the truce of God as it is here appointed, 
by the oath following, ' You N. hear this ; I swear that hence- 
forth I will faithfully observe this appointment of the truce 
of God as it is here expressed, and will aid my bishop or 
archdeacon against all persons who shall neglect to take this 
oath, or fail to observe this decree : so that if I am summoned 
by them against the offenders, I will neither abscond nor 
conceal myself, but will attend them armed, and support 
them in all things to the utmost of my power, in good faith, 
without subterfuge, and according to my conscience. So 
help me God, and these saints.'" 

"4. Likewise, the holy synod hath decreed that excom- 
munication shall be pronounced on all who refuse to take this 
oath, or shall violate this decree ; as well as on those who 
have any communication with them, or sell them goods, 
whether workmen, or other tradesmen ; and also priests who 
shall permit them to communicate, or perform any divine 
office for them. Excommunication shall also be extended 
to all forgers, thieves, and receivers of stolen goods, and to 
freebooters banded together in strongholds for the purpose 
of pillaging, and to all lords who shall shelter them in their 
castles. And we prohibit, by the apostolical authority and 
our own, all Christian men from so doing on the lands of 
their lords. 



^ This canon is remarkable, because it appears to confer on carts and 
waggons in the country a sort of right of asylum for those who should take 
refuge in them, independently of the protection granted to persons 
engaged in husbandry, if, l)y implication we may include those not 
actually employed in harrowing, or carting, such as reapers, &c. 

'■* Isti sancti. Meaning probably the saints on whose relics the oath was 
sworn. 



A.D. 1096.] ACTS OF THE SYKOD OF EOUETT. 71 

" 5. The holy synod hath also decreed that all churches 
shall have the same fiefs in their possession as they had in 
the time of King "William, Avith the same rights and customs. 
and that no layman shall liave any share in the third part of 
the tithes, or in burial fees, or in oblations at the altar, 
nor shall require any service or exact anything in respect of 
the same, save what was established in the reign of King 
William. 

" 6. It is also decreed that no layman shall institute or 
dismiss a priest from his church without the bishop's con- 
sent, nor sell his patronage, or receive any money for it. 
Also, that no man shall wear long hair, but every one shall 
have it cut short as becomes a Christian;^ otherwise he 
shall be sequestrated from entering the doors of holy mother 
church, and no priest shall perform any divine office for him 
or assist at his burial. Let no layman assume episcopal 
rights, or the jurisdiction which belongs to the cure of souls.~ 

" 7. Let no priest do homage to a layman, because it is 
not fit that hands dedicated to Grod, and consecrated with 
the sacred chrism, should be placed within those which are 
unhallowed, and may belong to a murderer, an adulterer, or 
one who has committed some other grievous sin.^ If, however, 
a priest holds of a layman any fief which is not ecclesiastical, 
let him perform fealty for his security's sake !" 

Gilbert, bishop of Evreux, who was surnamed the Crane, 
because he was very tall, and Fulbert, archdeacon of Eouen,* 
promulgated these decrees, which Archbishop William and 
the other bishops ratified bv their authority ; Odo of Bayeux, 

' Not only was the hair worn short at this time, but the chin was shaved. 
The Crusaders having suffered their beards to grow before the battle of 
Antioch, either as a token of sorrow, or to disguise the emaciation of their 
faces, it was very difficult to distinguish them from the Musulmans, so that 
the bishop of Puy was forced to recommend, their wearing crosses on their 
garments, to avoid serious mistakes. The fashion of long beards, which 
was introduced into Normandy a few years later, to the great scandal, 
as our author has told us before, of the stricter sort, was therefore, it 
should seem, as yet but little in vogue in the West. 

^ This canon cannoc be considered, unnecessary in a country where we 
have seen (vol. i. p. 471) an archdeaconry held as an hereditary lay fief. 

' We havd here Gregory the Seventh's peremptory decision of the cele- 
brated question of investitures, which for so many years convulsed Europe. 

* For this person see before pp. 38, 39. 



72 ORDruicus vitalis. [b.ix. cn.iii. 

Grilbert of Lisieux, Turgis of Avranches/ Serlo of Seez, and 
Ealph of Coutances,- gave their sanction to tlie synod, and 
the abbots from the whole of Normandy, with the clergy 
and those of the nobles who were desirous of peace, assisted 
at it. The bishops, indeed, with the best intentions made 
such statutes as the times required, but as the laws were 
not enforced by the prince, they little availed to secure the 
tranquillity of the church, and all that was now ordained in 
the manner w^e have described was nearly useless. For at 
that time there were extraordinary feuds among the IN'orman 
barons, and the people throughout the country engaged in 
enterprises of violence and robbery, so that the whole land 
was devastated by ravages and flames. A great number of 
the inhabitants were driven from their homes, and the 
parishes being depopulated, the priests sought safety in 
flight from their ruined churches. 

The Normans are a turbulent race, and, unless restrained 
by a firm government, are always ready for mischief. In 
all societies wherever they are found, they struggle for the 
mastery, and disregarding all the sanctions of truth and 
good faith, are incessantly actuated by a fiery ambition. 
The French, the Bretons, the Flemings, and the other 
neighbours of the people of Normandy, have but too often 
had reason to be seiisible of this, and the Italians, Lombards, 
and Anglo-SaxoDis, have suff'ered from it even to extermina- 
tion. 

The origin of the Trojans may be traced, as it is reported, 
to the barbarous tribes of the Scythians ; and after the 
ruin of Troy, Antenor, the Phrygian, penetrated into 
Illyrium, and sought for a long time a settlement for him- 
self and his companions in exile. At last, he fixed his abode 
on the shore of the Northern ocean, and having with his fellow 
emigrants colonized the sea-coast, they left their possessions 
to their heirs. The race thus sprung from the Trojans, took 
the name of Danes, from Danus, son of Antenor.^ They 

» 1091-1133. 

^ 1093-1110. 

^ This fabulous account of the origin of the Danes from Trojan 
emigrants corresponds with that attributed by the chroniclers of the middle 
ages to the Britons and other nations of tlie West and North of Europe. 
Archaeologists are now pretty well agreed in assigning an eastern origm to 



ORIGIN OF THE NOETIIMEX. 73 

■were always a fierce and warlike people and governed by 
])Owerful kings ; but it was long before they submitted to 
receive tbe Christian faith. Eollo, one of their bravest 
chiefs, with the Normans, were of this race ; and being the 
first who subjugated Neustria, it took from them the name 
of Normandy, Norman signifying in English, Northman. 
Norman means therefore a man of the north, whose rude 
assaults have proved not less destructive to their dainty 
neighbours than the nipping blasts of the north wind to 
tender flowers. To this day their descendants inherit the 
native fierceness of the race and their ardour for war, so 
that tliey never suffer the tillers of the soil or even their 
own governors to have any peace in their homes. 

After Eollo, a succession of valiant dukes commanded the 
warlike Normans ; namely, William Long-sword, Eichard 
the elder, Eichard II., son of Gunnor, and his two sons, 
Eichard the younger and Eobert of Jerusalem, and then 
"William the Bastard. This duke, the last in order of time, 
surpassed all his predecessors in his warlike achievements 
and grandeur, and at his death left the duchy of Normandy to 
Eobert, and the kingdom of England to "William. But Eobert, 
a weak prince, degenerated from the vigour of his ancestors, 
and sunk in sloth and luxury, had more fear of his own 
subjects than they had of him, and consequently a mis- 
chievous insubordination gained ground in every part of his 
territories. One of his brothers, Prince Henry, had posses- 
sion of Damfront, a very strong castle, from whence he held 
great part of Normandy in subjection either by his policy 
or his arms, and befriended his brother or opposed him, 
according to his own pleasure. The other brother, Avho was 
king of England, held more, I think, tlian twenty castles in 
Normandy, and attached to his cause either by fear or 
reward many of the most powerful barons and lords of 
castles. Eobert, count d'Eu,^ Stephen d'Albermarle,^ 
Gerard de Gournai,^ Ealph de Conches,'* with Eobert, earl of 
the Scandinavian peoples, but derived through tribes which eniiijrated 
at a very early period from the vast plains of central Asia. 

^ It should be Henry, not Robert, count d'Eu, Robert being Henry's 
grandfather, who died before the year 1093. 

■■* Or Aumaie, cousin-german of Duke Robert. 

^ Gerard, lord of Gournai, son of Hugh, and of Basile, daughter of 
Gerard Fleitel. 

'^ Ralph de Conches, the second of that name, who died in 1102. 



74 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [B.IX. CII.IV. 

!^^orton/ Walter Giifard,- Philip de Braiouse/' and Eichard de 
Oourci,* and many other lords submitted to the king, with all 
the fortresses and garrisons belonging to them, and trembling 
at his nod supported him with all their power. Thus 
Normandy was a prey to the distractions of her own children, 
and the unarmed people had no protector. 

Roused to reflection by these calamities, and fearing still 
worse, as he was deserted by almost every one, duke Robert 
resolved, by the advice of some men of religion to leave the 
government of his dominions to his brother the king, and 
taking the cross, join the pilgrimage to Jerusalem in 
satisfaction of his sins. The king of England heard this 
determination with sincere pleasure, and approving the design 
received Normandy to hold it for five years, advancing his 
brother ten thousand silver marks ^ to enable him to under- 
take the pilgrimage. 

Cn. TV. The crusade preacJied &y Peter tlie Hermit — Vast 
multitudes assume the cross and set out on the pilgrimage to 
Jerusalem — Enumeration of the chief crusaders and their 
principal followers. 

Pope Urban held another council at Tours in the Lent 
following and confirmed in it the acts of the council of 
Clermont. In the middle of Lent he consecrated the church 
of St. Nicholas at Anjou, and conferred on it apostolical 
privileges. He also by his influence and authority effected 
the liberation of G-eofi^rey Martel count of Anjou, who had 
been traitorously seized and confined in the castle of Chinon 

^ Robert, Count of Mortaine (called in England earl of Morton), 
surnamed Le Prud'homme, 1082-5, June, 1118. 

* Walter Giffard, second of that name, count de Longueville, and earl 
of Buclsingham in England, who died in 1102. 

3 Philip, lord of Briouse, department of the Orne, son of William, de 
Briouse, who granted several charters in favour of St. Florence at Sauinur, 
which have been preserved. William was present at the battle of Hastings. 
The Berkeleys, and we believe the Howards, claim ancient baronies of this 
name, v/rltten also Braiouse and Breouse, in England. 

* Richard de Courci. For this person, see before, vol. ii. p. 505. 

* The silver mark was worth in these times IGO pennies ; and a pound 
weight of silver was coined into 240 pennies. This sum which is equal, 
M. Le Prevost observes, to QfiC^Q livrcs d'argent, was paid to Robert 
Curthose in the month of September. We shall see hereafter, from the 
details given l\y our author of the means employed to collect this sum, that 
its payment did not much exhaust the treasury of William Rufus. 



A.D. lOOG.] TETER THE nER:iriT. 75 

for nearty thirty years by liis younger brother Fulk Eicber, 
who in the meantime usurped his dominions/ 

In the year of our Lord 1096, the fourth indiction, in the 
month of March, Peter d' Acheri, a monk - eminent for his 
learning and liberality commenced his pilgrimage from 
France to the Holy Land, and led with him Walter de 
Poissi,^ with his nephews, "Walter, surnamed Sans- Avoir,* 

' Ordericus has inverted the order of events in this paragraph. It was 
on the 6th of February that the pope went from Poitiers to Angers, and 
on the 10th or 1 1th, he dedicated the church of St. Nicholas. If Geoffrey- 
le-Barbu was liberated from the prison in which he had been confined 
since 1068 (not as is erroneously stated, vol. i. p. 440, on the 4th of April, 
10G7), his brother, having relaxed his custody in the interval, it could onlv 
have been at a later period. This Geoffrey is here confounded with his 
nephew Geoffrey Martel, fourth of that name. From Angers the pope pro- 
ceeded by Avay of Sable (14th of February), Mans (16th-18th of February), 
and Vendome (19th of February, ^nd of March) to Tours, where he held 
a council in the third week of Lent (16th-28rd of March). 

- This was the famous Peter-the-Hermit. The enthusiasm for this preacher 
of the crusade was raised to such a pitch that, according to Guibert 
of Nogent, people scrambled for the hairs plucked from the tail of his 
mule. Our author is incorrect in describing him here as a monk ; he did 
not embrace the religious life until after his return from the Holy Land, 
when he founded a priory of regular canons at Neumostier {Novum Monas- 
ierium), in the suburbs of the town of Huy, in the bishopric of Liege, 
where he died the 6th of June, 1115, at the age of 62 years. He was, 
therefore, only 43, and probably a married man, Avhen he took so active a 
part in the first crusade. 

Peter's surname was probably derived from Acheri, Acheux, or some 
other locality with a corresponding name near Amiens, of which district he 
was a native. Our author, like many others, was deceived by his being 
called ihe Hermit, which did not mean that he had embraced the life of an 
anchorite, but was his family name. His father Reginald I'Ermite had 
borne it before him, and it was preserved by his descendants. Several 
noble families in different parts of France of this name have endeavoured 
in consequence to establish their connection with this celebrated individual. 

The foundation of Neumostier was the result of a vow made by Peter- 
the-Hermit and Lambart-the-Poor, count of Clermont, son of Conrad 
count de Montagu, and nephew of Godfrey de Bouillon, during a storm at 
sea which threatened their lives, while returning together from the Holv 
Land in 1105. The grave of Peter-the-Hermit was violated at the revolu- 
tion, and his remains dispersed, but his tombstone is still preserved by the 
present proprietor of Neumostier. 

' Waher de Poissi ; probably the same person mentioned before (vol. ii. 
p. 219) as son-in-law of Peter de Maule. It appears by a succeeding 
paragraph that he died early in the pilgrimage. 

There is a place of this name not far from Poissi, Boissi-sans- Avoir, of 
which this soldier of the cross was perhaps a native. 



76 OKDEEICTTS VITALiS. [b.IX. CH.IV. 

William, Simon, and Mattliew, and other gallant French 
knights, with a crowd of nearly fifteen thousand persons who 
travelled on foot. He reached Cologne on the Saturday of 
Easter,^ and rested there during the following week, but 
was still employed in his good work. Having preached to 
the Germans, fifteen thousand of them were persuaded to 
take part in the service of the Lord and he was joined by 
two powerful counts, Berthold and Hildibert,- and a bishop, 
who proceeded with him through Germany and Hungary.^ 
Meanwhile, the impatient Frenchmen were unwilling to wait 
for Peter while he tarried at Cologne, and endeavoured to 
augment and strengthen his forces by preaching God's 
word, and they continued their journey through Hungary 
without him. Colnmbau, the king of the Huns,* was at that 
time favourable to the pilgrims and supplied theui with 
means of subsistence while they were in his territories. At 
length, having crossed the Danube, they passed through 
Bulgaria, and arriving in Cappadocia, waited there till they 
were joined by Peter and the Germans who were in their 
rear.^ 

Intelligence of the apostolical mandate having been 
quickly spread throughout the world, those of all nations 
who were predestined to enlist under the banner of the 
mighty Messiah, were roused to action. Its thunders 
echoed through England and the other islands of the ocean, 
nor were they drowned by the roar of the waves which, in 

• Saturday, 12th of April. 

^ These names are not found in the narrative of Balderic nor in any 
other history of which we have any knowledge. The German bands who 
took the van in this expedition, were led, the first by Folkmar, the second 
by Godeschalk, and the third by Count Emichon. 

^ We have no other account of a bishop who ventured his person in 
company with these undisciplined hordes. Otho, indeed, bishop of Stras- 
burg (1085 — August 3, 1100), joined the first crusade, but it is believed 
that he attached himself to Godfrey. 

* Coloman, son and successor of St. Ladislaus, 1095 — February 3, 1114. 
From the time that St. Stephen, king of Hungary, 997 — 1038, had, with 
the zeal of a neophyte, treated the pilgrims who passed through his states 
in their way to the Holy Land with the most generous hospitality, this 
road was preferred to the voyage by sea, before universally adopted. 

^ It was not in Cappadocia, but under the walls of Constantinople, that 
the emperor Alexius stationed the Franks who preceded Peter-the-Hermit, 
while waiting his arrival. They reached Constantinople about the 1st of 
Aui'ust. 



A.D. 109G.] TUE CROAVD Ot PILGniMS. 77 

their deep channels, separate those islands from the rest of 
the world. The report swelling with increased fervour, 
roused to arms the Gascons, the Bretons, and the Gallicians, 
the furthest of men.^ The Venetians also, and the Pisans 
and Genoese, and other maritime states on the Ocean and 
the Mediterranean, covered the sea with ships freighted 
with arras and troops, engines of war, and provisions. Those 
who journeyed by land darkened the whole face of the earth 
like locusts.^ In the month of June Walter de Poissi died 
at Phinoplis in Bulgaria, and the sign of the cross v\-as 
discovered on his body after his death.^ The governor and 
bishop of the city, hearing of this prodigy conducted 
Walter's corpse into the place, and buried it with reverence ; 
they also granted free access to the other pilgrims which 
they refused before, allowing them to buy what they wanted. 
The same year, Hugh the Great, count de Crepi," entrusted 
his estates to his sons Ealph and Henry,^ and giving his 
daughter Isabel in marriage to Eobert count de Mellent," 
undertook the pilgrimage, accompanied by a noble band of 



^ Gallicia, in the extreme N.W. of Spain. 

2 The numbers of the needy and undisciplined band of adventurers, the 
refuse of the people, who anticipated the advance of the organized bodies 
of Crusaders was estimated at 200,000 souls, only one third of whom 
escaped the retaliation their aggressions merited, and arrived under the 
walls of Constantinople. The flower of European chivalry, afterwards 
mustered, furnished 100,000 knights with their attendants in full armour on 
horseback. Archbishop Baldric estimates the whole number of pilgrims 
bearing arms, besides women and children, who in successive divisions set 
forth on the crusade, at G00,000 men. 

■^ There was a city on the Bosphorus called Phinopolis above Buyukdere, 
but the place here spoken of is Philippopolis, which Villehardouin alwa}s 
calls Finepople. The miracle here spoken of by our author occurred so 
frequently, and in the case of persons of so questionable a character, that it 
entirely lost its credit. 

* Hugh the Great, brother of Philip I., king of France, became count cf 
Ciepi and Valois by his marriage (about lOGS) with Adela, daughter of 
Herbert IV., count of Vermandois ; h)y which title Hugh is also known. 

^ Ralph, count of Vermandois, 1117— October 14, 1131 , Henry, lord 
of Chaumont in the Vexin, died in 1130. 

^ Elizabeth, or Isabel, married to Robert, third of that name, count de 
Mellent. This union, which Avas attended with difficulty on account of 
the relationship established through Ive of Chartrcs between the parties, was 
celebrated shortly before the departure of the count of Vermandois for the 
crusade. 



78 OHDEEICTJS YITALIS. [T3.1X. CII.IY 

Erenchmen. At the same time, Stephen, count de Blois,^ 
yon of Theobald, count de Chartres, who was son-in-law of 
"WilUam, king of England, took the cross and departed for 
Jerusalem. Some other earls and men of rank also joined 
in the expedition for the love of Christ, among whom were 
Guy Troussel, nephew of Gruy, count of Chateau-Fort," 
Milo de Brai,^ Center de Briere,* Ealph de Bauguenci,^ 
Everard du Poiset,*^ "William Carpenter,' Dreux de Monci,^ 
with several other barons and distinguished knights. 

Peter the Hermit had preceded the army, and arrived at 
Constantinople wdth a number of Germans and Erench. 



* Stephen, count de Blois, " the richest and the most eloquent of the 
crusaders." See an account of his family and character, vol. ii. p. 182. 

2 Guy Troussel, lord of Mont Chdri nephew of Guy the Red, lord of 
Rochefon-in-Yve!ine and Chateaufort, seneschal of France, held that 
office himself, until he lost it after his disgraceful flight from Antioch, 
when it was restored to his uncle. 

3 Milo the Great, or Miles, lord of Mont Cheri and Brai-sur-Seine, father 
of Guy Troussel, had married about the year 1070, Litheuil, hereditary 
viscountess of Troyes, and founded in 1064 the priory of Longpont. 

* Our author, who has just ranked a son before his father, now transfers 
one of the bravest knights of the count of Tholouse to the followers of Hugh 
the Great, besides mis-spelling his name. 

This ))erson is Centule, viscount of Beam, after his father Gaston IV., 
whom he accompanied to the Holy Land, where we shall presently find 
that he acquired great distinction. 

* Ralph, lord of Baugenci, about 1080, was one of the most distinguished 
warriors of his age. He was son and successor of Lancelin II., and died 
before 1130, having contracted a second marriage with Matilda, daughter 
of Hugh the Great. 

•^ Everard, son of Hugh, the first of that name, and lord of Puiset, near 
Janvile. The hostilities of this family with Philip I. and Lewis-le-Gros 
are well known, and the sieges they stood against these kings in their castle 
of Puiset, built by Q,ueen Constance. Everard was father-in-law of Roger 
de Montgomery ; see before note p. 33. 

' William, viscount de Melun, son of Ursion, was surnamed the 
Carpenter, on account of the extraordinary strength of his arm. He 
appears to have been a cousin of Hugh the Great. We shall find hereafter 
that he had already fought against the infidels in Spain, and that the 
canipaign did not turn out more honourable for him than that at Antioch. 

^ This person was probably the father of Dreux de Monchi, who, in 1 146, 
was one of the followers of Lewis the Younger to the Holy Land. At a 
later period Matthew de Monchi went there with St. Lewis, and Ansel de 
Monchi signalized himself by a victory at the siege of Nyssa. The est^ite 
which gave its name to this illustrious family is Monchi-Cayeu near St. Pol 
in Artois. 



A.D. 109G.J FOLLOWEES Or PETER THE HERMIT. 79 

He found there a crowd of Lombards, Longobards/ and 
Grermans, who had outstripped him, and received the 
emperor's orders to make provision for the expected army. 
Meanwhile, he gave them permission to traffic in the city, as 
was just, but he prohibited them from crossing the straits of 
St. George," until the great body of the pilgrims for which 
they were waiting should come up. "If," he said, "you do 
otherwise, the barbarous tribes will fall upon you and destroy 
the unarmed crowds." And so it happened; for this multi- 
tude, which flocked together from all nations, without king 
or general, were under no regular discipline, but lived by 
plunder ; stripping the lead from the roofs of churches and 
selling it, pillaging the palaces of the rich, and abandoning 
themselves to all sorts of misconduct. The emperor, 
learning this, was much incensed at the ingratitude with 
which his kindness was repaid : he therefore expelled them 
from the city, and compelled them to cross over the strait. 
Having accomplished the passage, they again committed great 
outrages on the Christian population, devastating their lands, 
as if they were an enemy's army, and setting fire to their 
houses and churches. At length they reached Mcomedia, 
where the Ligurians and other nations separated from the 
French, who were more fierce and immanageable, and there- 
fore more disposed for evil. The others, therefore, chose 
one Reynold their leader, and under his command entered 
Homania.^ Having made four days' journey beyond Nice, 
the}^ reached a place called Exerogorgan,^ which they took 
possession of, intending to halt there.' It was full of stores 
of all descriptions, but it is not known whether the inhabit- 

^ Our author frequently thus distinguishes, though rather strangely, the 
two branches of the Lombard nation, those of the north of Sicily, and those 
who made settlements in the south (in Apulia and Calabria), which after- 
wards fell into the hands of the Xormans. 

^ The Bosphorus, anciently called the Hellespont, was named in the 
middle ages the Strait of St. George, from a monastery dedicated to St. 
George of Mangana, situated at its entrance. There was attached to it a 
palace of the same name, to which the empress Mary, widow of Michael 
Parapenaces, retired in 1081. 

^ Romania, or the country of Roum, as it is named by the Arabs, is the 
part of Asia Minor lying to the south of Constantinople, which still conti- 
nued to own the dominion of the Greek emperor. 

* M. Pojoulat has discovered the ruins of this castle four leagues and a 
half from Civitot. It is now called Eaki-Kuleh, the old castle. 



so OEDEKICUS VITALIS. [e.IX. CH.IV. 

ants deserted it through fear, or intentionally. Here the 
Germans were surrounded by the Turks, and almost all cut 
off to a man, as will be shown in the sequel. 

In the month of September,^ Eobert, duke of Normandy, 
put William king of England, in possession of his dominions, 
and having received from him ten thousand silver marks, set 
forth on the crusade at the head of large bodies of troops, 
both horse and foot, formidable enough to strike terror into 
the enemy. He was accompanied by his uncle Odo, bishop 
of Bayeux, by Philip the Clerk,^ son of Earl Eoger, Eotro 
son of Geoffrey, earl of Morton,^ and AValter, count of 
St. Valeri, nephew of Eichard the younger, duke of 
Normandy, by his daughter Papia ;* also by Gerald de 
Gournai,^ Ealph de Guader, the Breton,^ Hugh count de 
St. Poy Ives and Alberic, sons of Hugh de Grantmesnil,^ 
and many other knights of great gallantry. 

' It appears that the duke of Normandy did not set out on his journey 
until late in the month of September. At least one of his companions, 
William de Wasto signed a charter at Fecamp on the 9th of that month. 
Nor till the beginning of the month did William Rufus leave England to 
carry over the money he had engaged to pay his brother, and receive the 
dukedom of Normandy as a pledge for its repayment. 

^ Philip, fifth son of Roger de Montgomery and Mabel, countess of 
Alenpon. This young nobleman died at the siege of Antioch. The 
surnames of Clerk and Grammarian, given him by the contemporary 
historians, prove that he had received an education above the ordinary^ level 
of the age. 

^ Rotrou, the second of that name, succeeded his father as Count de 
Perch e. 

* Walter, lord, not count, of St. Valeri-sur-Somme, eldest brother of 
Gilbert d'Aufai. 

^ Gerald de Gouinai had given up his castles to William Rufus in 1089, 
as we find in the preceding book. 

" Ralph de Guader, who had been earl of Norfolk in England (see vol. 
ii. pp. 49, and 78 — 82), and having forfeited his rank for treason to the 
Conqueror, retired to his patrimonial estates in Brittany, Gael, and Montfort- 
la-Caune. 

' Hugh de Champ-d'Avcne. count of St. Pol in Artois (1083—1130 or 
1131), accompanied Duke Robert in the first crusade. Enguerrard his 
son was killed at the siege of Marrah, We are not informed what led the 
count of St. Pol to join the duke of Normandy in this expedition, rather 
than the count of Flanders, his suzerain lord. 

** The fourth and fifth sons of Hugh de Grantmesnil and Adeliza or 
Alice, daughter of Ives, count of Beaumont-sur-Oise, by Judith, his first 
wife. 



A.D. 109G.] FAMES OF THE CEUSADEES. 81 

Likewise, Godfrey, duke of Lorraine, wifcli Baldwin and 
Eustace, count de Boulogne, his brothers,^ and Baldwin, 
count de Mons,' Eobert, marquis of Flanders, nephew of 
Matilda, queen of England,^ 'and Eainard, the Teutonic,* 
with many thousand men-at-arms, quitted their hom.es for 
the love of Christ, and voluntarily departed for foreign 
countries to crush the Infidels and succour the Christians, 
taking the road through Hungary. Adhemar, bishop of 
Puy, and Eaymond de Tholouse, safely traversed Sclavouia, 
being favourably received by Bodin, king of the Sclaves.^ 
Meanwhile, Eobert the K'orman, with Stephen de Blois, his 
brother-in-law, Hugh the Great, and Eobert the Fleming, 

' These three lords were sons of Eustace II., count of Boulogne, by Ida 
of Ardennes, daughter of Godfrey IV., duke of Lorraine and I3rabant. 
After the death of his uncie, Godfrey V., surnamed the Hunchback, and 
the forfeiture of Conrad, eldest son of the emperor Henry IV., Godfrey of 
Bouillon was invested, in 1089, with their two duchies. Of all the noble 
soldiers who assumed the cross, he was the most prudent, moderate, and 
pious. The barons of France, Germany, and Lorraine, with their vassals, 
comprising a force of 80,000 foot and 10,000 horse, marched under his 
banner. 

^ Baldwin, count of Hainault, son of Baldwin de Mons and Richilde, 
heiress of Hainault. 

^ Robert of Jerusalem, who was cousin-german of the duke of Nor- 
mandy, succeeded his father, Robert the Frisian, in 1093. He displayed 
during the crusade, rather the courage and daring of a man-at-arms than 
the capacity of a chief 

* It is supposed that Rainard, count de Toul, 1076 — 1117, and son of 
Frederic II., is here spoken of. This baron, as well as Peter, his brother 
and successor, were in the first crusade. 

^ lUyrium, occupied by Sclavonic tribes. Bodin was not king of Escla- 
vonia, but of Servia and Dalmatia. Still he is called king of Esclavonia, 
Russia, and Bulgaria by the chroniclers of Bari, who relate his mariiage in 
1081 with Jacintha Joannaci, daughter of Argyros Joannaci, governor of 
that city. He even attempted, in 1074, to wrest Bulgaria from the Greek 
emperor, while expecting to succeed his grandfather, Michael, king of 
Servia. The passage through Illyria, alon.g the coast of the Adriatic, was 
not effected in the peaceable manner our author represents. It became 
necessary to carry by assault Scodra, now the Albanian Scutari, and dense 
fogs, which lasted forty days, greatly impeded the movements of the army. 
Between Durazzo and Constantinople, the bishop of Puy was exposed to 
great dangers by attacks from the Petscheneyes, and on one occasion they 
even got possession of his person. The division under the count of Thou- 
louse, reached • Constantinople the last but one. See the narrative of 
Raymond d'Agiles for the details of his march through Dalmatia, Iliyrium, 
and Macedonia. 

YOL. III. Gt 



82 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.IY. CH.IV. 

and several others, crossed the Alps into Italy, and visiting 
Borne in peace, went and passed the winter in Apulia and 
Calabria.^ The Duke E-oger, surnamed Bursa,^ received the 
Duke of Normandy and his ■ companions with the honours 
which belonged to his natural lord, and supplied them abun- 
dantly with all that they required. Mark Bohemond^ was then, 
with his uncle Roger, count of Sicily,^ besieging a certain 
castle, and upon hearing the movements of so many nobles 
and their people, he carefully enquired into the merits of each, 
and scrutinized their badges. Having satisfied himself, he 
ordered a rich mantle to be brought, which he cut into shreds 
and distributed crosses among all his followers, assuming 
one himself. A great number of soldiers immediately 
flocked to his standard, so that the aged Eoger was left to 
carry on the siege almost alone, and being thus deserted was 
compelled in much mortification to return to Sicily. Mean- 
while, the wise and provident Bohemond quietly made 
preparations for his journey and transport, and passing the 
sea with his nobles, and large bodies of men-at-arms, after a 
tranquil voyage, landed on the coast of Bulgaria.* 

Bohemond' s principal companions were — Tancred,^ son of 
Eudes, the Good Marquis, the Count of Eosinolo,' with bis 

^ This is quite incorrect, as far as concerns Hugh the Great and the 
count of Flanders. The first had been detained a prisoner at CoMStantino 
pie for a month before the arrival of Godfrey de Bouillon on the 23rd of 
December. The second did not cross the Adriatic till that time, and took 
up his winter quarters in Albania. Raymond count of Tholouse, a veteran 
warrior, but haughty and obstinate, led the provincials of Auvergne and 
Languedoc. 

^ Roger, duke of Apulia and Calabria, son of Robert Guiscard by his 
second wife, Sechelgaite, had succeeded his father in 1085. 

^ Bohemond, eldest son of Robert Guiscard, and prince of Tarentura, 
had already matched his forces with the emperor Alexius, and come off 
victorious. 

^ Roger, count of Sicily, the youngest of the sons of Tancred d'Haute 
ville. The place which these princes were besieging was Amalfi, probably 
on behalf of their brother and nephew, Duke Roger. 

' It was not in Bulgaria that Bohemond landed, but in Albania, near 
Andrinople, the ancient Phcenice. He embarked in the month of Decem- 
ber. 

" Tancred, son of Eudes the Good Marquis, by Emma, daughter of 
Tancred d'Hauteville. He was, therefore, Bohemond's cousin. In him 
we discover all the virtues of a perfect knight. 

7 liosinolo ; probably Roscigno, the capital of a duchy four miles from 



A.D. 1096.] BOHEMOIfD's FOLLOWEKS. 83 

brother, Richard of the Principaliiy, and Eanulf his brother,^ 
E-obert d'Ajixa,^ and Eobert de Sourdeval,^ Eobert, son of 
Thurstan ; Herman de Cannes,* Umfrid, son of Ealph ; 
Eiehard, son of Count Eanulf; Bartholomew Boel of 
Chartres, Alberede de Caniano,^ acd Umfrid-di-Monte- 
Scabioso f all these, with their vassals, unanimously attached 
themselves to Bohemond, and tooli a solemn oath to submit 
to his command devoutly and constantly in their holy enter- 
prise. 

Hugh the Grreat, and "William, son of the marquis, 
embarked with ease at the port of Bari, and after a quick 
voyage, landed at Durazzo. The governor of the place,'^ 
believing them to be great barons, had them arrested, and 
conducted under strict guard to the emperor at Constantino- 
ple. The flattering governor sought to recommend himself 
to the emperor by this treachery, and to prove his devotion 
to his service in this manner. 

Salerno. This count of Roscigno, whose name appears to have been 
GeoiFrey, is confounded by most of the historians with Gerard, son of the 
count of Roussillon, who also joined the first crusade, and remained. in the 
Holy Land till 1109. 

^ These two lords were sons of "William, one of the sons of Tancred 
d'Hauteville, to whom the principality was given by Humphrey his 
brother, after the death of Dreux. 

* It has been supposed that the person here spoken of was Robert the 
Burgundian, of the house of Nevers, lord of Sabl6 by his marriage with 
Avicia, the heiress of that fief, who, though very old, took the cross when 
Urban II. passed through Sabl^, and appears to have died in the Holy 
Land. But it is rather thought that Anza, called Ansa in the Chronicle of 
Monte CassinOj should be Anzi, a place four leagues from Matera. 

^ Sourdeval, in the department of La Manche, near Mortain. 

* This was the memorable Cannes of Roman History, now an obscure 
village of the territory of Bari, two leagues and a half from Barletta. 

* Caniano, now Cagnano, in the further Abruzzo, two leagues N.E. of 
Aquila. 

^ The Chronicle of Monte Cassiuo calls this place Monte Scaioso; 
now Monte Scaglioso, a town in the Basilicata, in the neighbourhood of 
Matera, and which is said to have been built by Alexander Severus on the 
ruins of Metapontes. Our author has omitted in this enumeration a 
person of some importance — for the Clironicle of Monte Cassino names him 
immediately after Tancred — Robert Fitz-Gerard, who carried Bohemond's 
standard at the battle of Dorylaeura. 

"^ Tancred's brother. 

^ The Duke John Commenus, son of Isaac Commenus, and nephew of 
the Emperor Alexius. 

G 2 



84 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. Cn.Y. 

Ce. Y. Soliman crushes the rabble of German pilgrims, in 
advance of the other Crusaders — The Franks also receive a 
check. 

SoLiMAK, chief of the Turks/ had no sooner learnt that 
the Christians were on the march to attack the Infidels, 
than he assembled a great army, and laid siege to the castle 
of Exerogorgan where the Germans had halted. The Turks 
lost no time in throwing up entrenchments round the town, 
having driven off Reynold and his followers, who made a 
sally and lay in ambuscade as the enemy approached the 
place. Many of the Christians fell in this skirmish, but 
those who could retreated into the shelter of the fortifi- 
cations. The trenches being completed on all sides, the 
assailants cut off the besieged from water, for the well and 
spring which supplied the town were outside the walls, but 
a body of the Turks were strongly posted round it, and 
kept incessant watch. The besieged had to suffer the horror 
of excessive thirst for eight days, being thus tormented on 
account of their grievous sins and hardness of heart, and 
not deserving aid from God. At last, their leader made 
terms with the Turks, agreeing, as far as it was in his power, 
to betray his comrades to them. In consequence, Eeynold 
marched out of the place at the head of a large body of the 
Christians, pretending that he intended to give battle to the 
Turks, instead of which, he went over to them. The rest 
were forced to surrender on very dishonourable terms, most 
of them shamefully apostatizing from the faith of Christ. 
Those however who refused to renounce their religion were 
put to death, exposed as marks to be shot by arrows, 
separated from one another, sold for a trifle^ or dragged into 
captivity with Count Berthold. The Christians suffered 
this first defeat on the third of the calends of October, 
[29th September], and in this manner the Germans and 
other nations were carried captives to Chorasan and Aleppo. 
But those who held firm their faitli in Ciirist found rest in 
a glorious death. 

^ This could not be Soliman, the fcunder of the Turkish dynasty of the 
Seljucides, who killed himself in despair after the loss of a battle against 
the sultan of Aleppo in 1085, but his eldest son, Kilidge Arslan (the 
sacred champion), who, after a long interregnum, succeeded him in 109'2. 



A.D. 109G.] Peter's mob of pilgrims defeated. 85 

Meanwliile the Franks^ had marched onward as far as the 
town of Civitot,^ which the emperor Alexius had lately- 
founded, intending to place in it the English refugees after the 
conquest of William the Bastard, but in consequence of the 
assaults of the Turks he had left it unfinished. Soliman, 
however, elated with his victory over the Allobroges^ and 
Grermans, and breathing slaughter marched to Civitot, which 
is not far from Nice, and confident of victory, made a bold 
attack on the French. Peter had already returned to Con- 
stantinople, as his throng of pilgrims paid no attention to his 
commands. The sudden charge of the Turkish cavalry took 
by surprise Walter,* a distinguished knight, who commanded 
a body of troops, and he was slain with many of his followers, 
after a slight resistance.^ His brother A¥illiam and some 
others were wounded, and the Turks struck ofi:* the head of 
a priest while he was celebrating mass. Such of the survivors 
as were in a condition to make their escape fled towards the 
city, or concealed themselves in the marshes, woods, and 
meuntains. Some few continued to hold the castle and 
killed many of their assailants. The Turks collected a vast 
quantity of wood in the neighbourhood, and made preparations 
for burning the place and the thousands who were shut up 
in it. But the Christians, driven to despair, boldly anticipated 
the manoeuvre, and sallying forth threw fire among the faggots, 
and thus escaped the peril of being burnt. Many fell on 
both sides ; this happened in the month of October. A great 
number of the pilgrims now retraced their steps in confusion, 
and told their misfortunes to those who having followed 

^ Franci. Throughout this narrative, when our author speaks of the 
Crusaders otherwise than under their common character of " Christians," 
he generally sinks their several nationalities, and designates them by the term 
here adopted; not the French only, but all the people of the West engaged 
in the enterprise, just as the term Frank has long been applied in the 
Levant to French, English, Italians, Germans, &c. We have therefore 
adopted this term in the translation. 

^ On the subject of this town, see vol. ii. p. 10. The Turkish village of 
Ghemlik now occupies the site of the ancient Civitot. 

^ Allobroges; the author probably means the Norman masters of the 
Lombard provinces in the south of Italy. 

* Walter Sans- Avoir ; see before, p. 75. 

* M. Michiud places the scene of this rencontre at six leagues to the 
west of Nice, between the lake Ascanius and a Turkish village called 
Basar-Keni. 



86 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [u.IX. CH.TI. 

them in their advance had now pitched their camp before 
Constantinople. The emperor bought the arms of the 
fugitives, to prevent their committing outrages among the 
inhabitants in a country to which they were strangers. The 
others waited for the arrival of their allies, that having con- 
sulted together, and having the support of the chiefs 
embarked in the cause and of the regular troops, and having 
implored the favour of Grod with prayers and penitence, they 
might then enter the enemy's country. 

Soliman, having defeated the Franks, killed numbers of 
them in battle, and dragged into captivity many more, beset 
the remainder, who made an obstinate resistance in the place 
they defended. Finding, however, the next day, that Duke 
Bohemond, having wrested Macedonia from the emperor, was 
leading a large army of Normans and Apulians against the 
Turks^ to avenge the effusion of Christian blood; he was so 
much alarmed that he broke up from Civitot, and withdrew 
his troops, in all haste, for the defence of his own territories. 
The impetuous Pranks disdained to wait for the arrival of 
succour from Bohemond and the rest of the faithful, but trust- 
ing too confidently in their own valour pursued the Turks to 
their own borders, where, as I said before, they by Grod's 
permission, suffered a severe defeat. 

Ch. VI. The Crusaders arrive in successive divisions tmder 
the walls of Constantinople — Alarm of the Greek emperor 
— He demands an oath of fealty from the Christian chiefs 
— They cross the Bosphorus, and march to Nice. 

Duke Godfrey arrived at Constantinople before any of the 
other chiefs, and pitched his camp near it on the tenth of the 
calends of January [23rd December]. Meanwhile Bohemond 
advanced by slow marches, judiciously making his troops halt 
for rest every day as he waited for those who were left to follow 
in the rear. The emperor Alexius assigned the duke quarters 
in a suburb of the city, soon after his arrival,^ and the duke's 

^ It was q lite impossible that Soliman (Kilidge Arslan) could have 
stopped his pursuit of the Christian pilgrims in the month of October from 
apprehension of the advance of Bohemond, who did not cross the Adriatic 
till the month of December, nor arrive in the neighbourhood of Con- 
stantinople till the month of April in the following year. 

* Quarters were assigned to Godfrey de Bouillon and his troops among 
the gardens on the shore of the Bosphorus. 



A.D. 1096 — 1097.] THE CEUSADEES AT CONSTANTINOPLE. 87 

squires purveyed all that was necessary for the array, passing 
to aud fro in the neighbourhood of the city to procure fodder 
and whatever they wanted in thoughtless security, but the 
Turkopoles and Petscheneye,^ laid wait for them, by the 
emperor's order, and many were daily cut off. No one 
suspected any treachery on his part, as he had voluntarily 
offered them hospitality ; but the duke was in great distress 
at the loss of his people by the insidious attacks of the 
Turcopoles. In consequence, Baldwin marched out of the 
camp for the protection of his followers, and discovering the 
enemy who laid in wait for them, attacked them suddenly 
and overpowering them killed some, and carried off sixty 
whom be delivered as prisoners to his brother. When 
the emperor heard this, he was much incensed, and began to 
contrive mischief to the pilgrims, but the wary duke was on 
his guard against treachery, and withdrawing from the city 
pitched his tents on the same spot where they stood at first. 
Night coming on, his camp was attacked by the emperor's 
order and the army exposed to serious loss. But the 
prudent duke, expecting a surprise, had posted the 
sentries for the night round the camp with great care, giving 
them orders to be on the alert. The assailants therefore 
met an instant repulse ; seven of them were killed, and the 
duke pursued the rest with great vigour to the city gates. 
[Returning to his camp, he remained there five days, during 
which the emperor was employed in devising means for 
annoying the Christians, while the duke was anxiously con- 
sulting with his confederates. The emperor decided on prohi- 
biting the passage of the duke's troops through the imperial 
city, the duke resolved to wait the arrival of reinforcements 
from the chiefs who were on their march. At length the crafty 
and politic emperor, who left no device untried, came to terms 
with the duke, assuring him, that if he would cross over the 
strait'^ he would find him abundant supplies of provisions, and 
would supply money for satisfying all who were in want of 
their pay; he took an oath also that the duke should have 
nothing to fear from him. The designing prince contrived 

* Tlie Turcopoles were light cavalry of Turkish race, or a mixed breed, 
in the pay of the Greek emperors. The Petscheneyes were other auxiliary- 
troops of Sclavonian origin. 

^ The Bosphorus. 



88 OKDEEICTJS TITALI3. [b.IX. CH.YI. 

this, in order to remove tlie duke and his troops from Con- 
stantinople, that he might not have the advantage of the 
counsels and aid of the princes who were expected. In con- 
sequence, the duke crossed over ; after having sworn to the 
emperor, and received from him the same pledge of fidelity 
to their mutual promises. 

Advancing from Adrianople,^ Bohemond halted his troops 
in a valley, and eloquently addressing them recommended 
them to act with prudence, and, remembering that their 
pilgrimage was undertaken in the cause of God, to restrain 
themselves from laying violent hands on the houses and 
property of the Christians ; but, having God always before 
their eyes, the rich among them should help the poor, and the 
strong the weak, supporting them for the love of God, with their 
strength and their money. Erom this valley they marched 
to Castoria, where they kept our Lord's nativity with great 
solemnity. They halted there some days, but the inhabitants 
would have no dealings with them, as they greatly needed, 
regarding them not as pilgrims, but as cut-throats and 
oppressors. In consequence they were reduced to such 
want that they were compelled to carry off oxen, horses, or 
asses, and everything eatable they could lay hands on. 
Departing from Castoria,'^ they pitched their camp in 
Pelagonia,^ and finding there a strong castle belonging to 
the heretics^ which was well stored with all kinds of supplies, 

^ Bohemond arrived by sea near Adrianople, in Albania, in the month 
of December. Our author probably mistook this city for one of the same 
name in Thrace, much better known. 

^ Castoria is an episcnpal city in Macedonia, near the source of the 
Cattaro. The place stands in the middle of a Jake, and is only connected 
with the mainland by means of an isthmus, defended by a wall flanked 
with towers. It was occupied by Bohemond from 1081 to 1084, while he 
was engaged in war with Alexius, for his father, Robert Guisc.ird. It 
should seem that in 1096 he only encamped under the walls; and it may 
be easily conceived that the inhabitants, remembering the sufferings that 
they had undergone at his hands on the former occasion, did not give him 
a very hearty reception. 

^ Felagonia, a province of Macedonia, so called from a city of the 
same name, which was destroyed when the Romans invaded the country. 
From the manner in which the troops of Bohemond conducted themselves, 
it would appear that his exhortations had made no great impression ou 
their minds. 

* The heretics were the Christians of the Greek church. 



A.D. 1007.] THE CIIUSADEKS ATTACKED BY THE GEEEKS. 89 

they assaulted it on all sides at once, and setting fire to it 
consumed the place and tlie inhabitants, leaving nothing but 
ruins. The pilgrims indeed held Jews, heretics, and Sara- 
cens in equal odium, calling them all the enemies of God. 
Thej then arrived on the bank of the river Vardari,^ v\-hich 
Bohemond forded with part of his troops, but Count Eosinolo 
with the rest halted on the other side. The emperor's 
cavalry, who hovered in the rear of the expedition, no sooner 
saw" the Christian army divided than they fell with great 
fury on Count Eosinolo and his division. Tancred however, 
who had not advanced far on the other side, perceiving the 
conflict, put spurs to his horse and fording again, or rather 
swimming across, the river flew like lightning to the rescue 
of the count. Two thousand troops quickly followed 
Tancred in re-crossing the river, and speedily putting the 
Turcopoles to rout drove them ofl* and gained a glorious 
victory. Some fell in the skirmish, but many more were 
taken prisoners and carried bound before Eohemond. Being 
interrogated why they engaged in these hostilities, although 
he was at peace with their emperor, they replied: "We are in 
the emperor's pay, and do w^hat he commands ?" This battle, 
unprovoked by the Christians, was fought on "Wednesday 
the first day of Lent.^ Bohemond was extremely indignant 
at the emperor's perfdy, but he smothered his resentment, 
and dismissed his prisoners without punishment, though not 
without warning them by severe threats, not to molest his 
people again. " We are," he said to his confidential friends, 
"on the point of passing near the emperor's capital, and we 
had better restrain our anger, and strive as far as possible 
to give him no cause for being exasperated against us. It is 
an extreme folly for a man to be inflamed wdth passion, when 
there is no means of taking vengeance, while it is the part of 
self-possession to dissemble as long as no opportunity is 
afibrded of obtaining satisfaction. A prudent man will 
postpone for a season what he cannot accomplish at once. 
He is doubly guilty, both of baseness and cowardice, who 
makes loud threats when he cannot strike, and who, when he 
can, passes over the insults he has received. If it is in our 

^ The Vardari, the principal river of Macedonia, runs into the gulf of 
Salonica, two leagues from that city. 
The 18th of February, 1097. 



90 OEDEEICUS yiTALIS. [b.IX. CH.TI. 

power let us excel the emperor in good behaviour, but if not 
let us magnanimously overlook the injuries he may do us." 
Such were his words; and then silently repressing any angry- 
invectives, he forwarded a message to the emperor begging a 
safe conduct for the pilgrims of Jesus Christ. 

In the year of our Lord 1097, the fifth indiction, Eobert, 
duke of Normandy, Hugh the Grreat,^ Stephen of Blois, and 
Hobert the Fleming, with other men of rank, who had 
assembled from various countries, and spent the winter in 
Italy with their troops, joyfully took advantage of the 
favourable season of spring, and crossing the Adriatic joined 
their forces to those of Mark Bohemond in Macedonia.'' At 
the sight of so great a body of nobles united for one object, 
and such incomparable valour sincerely devoted to the work 
of the Lord, there was great exultation among all present 
who were his faithful servants. The emperor Alexius had 
already felt the weight of the Cisalpine arms,^ and he was 
therefore in no little alarm when he received intelligence of 
the approach of so many barons. Considering, however, by 
what contrivance he could elude the danger, he came to the 
determination of betraying them under the appearance of 
giving them a peaceable reception. This prince was wily, 
plausible in speech, liberal enough, and deeply skilled in the 
art of deceiving. He, therefore, sent envoys to the noble 
pilgrims, humbly begging that the peace might not be 
broken, offering them a free passage through his dominions, 
and promising on oath to supply them with all things neces- 
sary for their subsistence. Duke Bohemond, who had 
already sufficient experience of the emperor's craftiness, and 
had twice defeated him in battle, gave no credence to his 

' As it has been already remarked, we must detach Hugh the Great 
from this group, which did not cross the Adriatic till the spring. Hugh 
the Great arrived at Constantinople as early as the month of November, a 
prisoner — William of Malmesbury says in libera custodia — however, he 
was not released until the arrival of Godfrey of Bouillon and the count of 
Flanders, who had gained the start of Bohemond. 

* The duke of Normandy and the Count de Blois did not embark at 
Brundusium till Easter-day, April 5, 1097; and did not join Bohemond 
lill the fiie^e of Nice, where they arrived the first week in June. The 
bishop of Bayeux had expired at Palermo in the month of February, as we 
have already seen. 

* At Joannina and Arta in 1083. 



A.U. 1097.] PEACE EESTOEED "WITH THE EMPEROE. 91 

false promises, and strongly recommended bis associates to 
lay siege to Constantinople, a measure which he showed to 
be most advantageous by the clearest arguments. The Franks 
however replied : " We have left our possessions, and have 
voluntarily embarked in this expedition, that, for the love of 
Christ, we may confound the Infidels and liberate the Chris- 
tians. But the Greeks are Christians, and we are therefore 
for making peace with them, and even restoring to them 
what they have lost by the Turks. The sagacious Bohe- 
mond was therefore compelled by the counsels of the Franks 
to conclude a peace with the Greek emperor,^ to the great 
injury, as it turned out, of the Christian cause. On being 
called upon, the emperor assumed the appearance of acting- 
with great favour towards the chiefs, and sent his master of 
the palace,^ who was in his entire confidence, with other 
envoys, to Bohemond, to conduct him safely through the 
country, and to provide him everywhere with the supplies 
be might need. In short, the Crusaders marching forward 
pitched their camp from place to place as circumstances 
required, and, passing by the city of Serra,^ arrived at Eusa.* 
Having obtained from the Greeks, while there, all that they 
wanted in suflacient abundance, the pilgrims pitched their 
tents on "Wednesday before Easter.^ Bohemond, now 
leaving his troops, hastened forward with a small retinue to 
have an audience with the emperor. Meanwhile, Tancred 

* It was not in a personal conference, but by his envoys, while Godfrey 
was treating with Alexius, that Bohemond urged him to break off the 
negociation, and attempt the conquest of Constantinople. It is not, there- 
fore, quite correct to state that Bohemond was compelled by the other 
chiefs to come to terms with Alexius, but only that he failed of preventing 
their treating with the Greek emperor. 

' For Corpalatiurriy read Curopalatium. They were in the number of 
the principal officers of the court of Constantinople, where they filled 
nearly the same functions as those of the Pretorian prefects of the Roman 
emperors. It was not only this dignitary, but the chiefs of the Crusaders, 
who had already arrived at Constantinople, and Godfrey de Bouillon him- 
self, who were sent by Alexius to Bohemond, to induce him to come him- 
self to that capital before his tmops. 

^ Seres, an archiepiscopal city of Macedonia, between Salonica, Philippi, 
and Amphipolis. 

* Now Botiskoinan, near the mouth of the Hebras. Villehardouin calls 
this city Rouse. 

^ The 1st of April, 109'/. 



92 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. Cn.TI. 

led the Christians, who v»ere much exhausted by their 
journey, another way through a rich valley, where they 
obtained refreshments for their wearied bodies, and cele- 
brated the feast of Easter. Alexius, learning the arrival of 
Bohemond, the great object of his alarm, as he had twice 
triumphed over him, gave him an honourable reception, and 
made abundant provision for his entertainment outside the 
city in a manner becoming to both parties/ 

In the interim, Duke Grodfrey, leaving his comrades 
on the other side of the straits, had returned to Constanti- 
nople, in consequence of the emperor's having neglected to 
furnish them with the supplies he had promised. The 
bishop of Puy and the count of Tholouse, having left 
behind them the mob they led, were also at Constanti- 
nople. The emperor, following the advice of the Greeks, 
who were in great alarm lest the Franks should make a 
combined movement and pillage their property, com- 
municated with these great lords separately, requiring each 
of them to pay him homage and fealty. He promised, if 
they consented to this, to give them pay and supplies, and 
marching in person for their support to assist them with 
his whole forces. The Franks now found themselves in a 
very difficult position ; they were unwilling to take the oath 
of fealty, and yet without it the Greeks would not grant 
them a free passage. They had no desire to war with a 
Christian people, but they were not permitted to march 
through their country peaceably. On the other hand, they 
shrank from retracing their steps and returning home with- 
out eftecting their object. At length, driven by necessity, 
they guaranteed to the emperor Alexius his life and crown, 
swearing to make no attempt on either so long as he kept 
faith with them. The count of Tholouse resisted longer 
than the rest, and even anxiously sought how he might be 
avenged of the emperor. However the general opinion of 
the chiefs prevailed, though it was not without difficulty 
they diverted the angry count from his purpose. He, there- 
fore, submitted to the oath, but he was never induced to do 

* We are informed by a contemporary writer, that the emperor granted 
to Bohemond a territory in Romania, fifteen days' journey long by eight 
broad ; probably as a position for his encampment. 



A.D. 1097.] THE CRUSADERS MARCH TO NICE. 93 

homage.^ Orders were now given for embarking the armj. 
Tancred had arrived in the interim with the troops he com- 
manded, but hearing that Alexius had exacted an oath of 
fealty from the chiefs, he mingled among the common 
soldiers with Eichard de Principatu, and having immediately 
set sail, passed the straits in great haste. Bohemond and 
the count of Tholouse remained until the emperor gave 
them satisfiiction about the supplies. Duke Godfrey and 
others went to JSTicomedia, and remained three days with 
Tancred. Then the duke, finding that there was no road 
over which it would be possible that so vast and mighty a 
multitude could travel, sent forward three thousand men to 
remove rocks and level the approaches to the mountains. 
These pioneers, armed with hatchets, axes, mattocks, and 
tools of all sorts for clearing away the bushes and under- 
wood, and levelling the precipitous mountain passes, levelled 
a road for the main body, and fixing signals on the heights 
to prevent those who followed from losing their way, arrived 
at Nice in Bithynia. 

Ch. YII. The siege of Nice — After a long defence, the 
citizens give it up to the Greek emperor — Discontents of 
the Crusaders. 

Tre camp was marked out on the day before the nones 
[6th] of 'May, and the tents of the forces of the West 
being pitched, siege was laid to Nice, the capital of Bithynia, 
a city so strongly fortified by lofty walls and a lake^ which 
washes them on one side, as to appear impregnable. At 
first there was so great a scarcity of bread in the camp until 
the em.peror's supplies arrived, that if a loaf could be found, 
it was worth twenty or thirty pence. But God providing 
for his people, Bohemond soon made his appearance with a 
great convoy, both by sea and land. The scarcity was 
therefore converted into great plenty throughout the Chris- 
tian army. The attack on the city was commenced on 

1 All that could be wrung from the count was a promise on oath to 
engage in no enterprise against the emperor's life or the integrity of his 
states, which was far short of the oath of fealty; and even this was yielded 
upon the impfied condition of the sworn promise simultaneously given by 
Alexius to join the crusade in person. 

^ The lake Ascanius. 



94 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b. IX. CH. YII. 

Ascension Day/ by erecting great engines of war to tlie 
height of the fortifications. This assault continued for two 
days, employed in endeavouring to batter down the walls. 
Meanwhile, the Gentiles within the place resisted the attack 
with great resolution, manfully defending their dw^ellings and 
housL^holds by hurling stones and darts on the assailants, 
while, protecting themselves with their shields, they boldly 
exposed themselves to the shower of missiles which were 
launched against them. The Franks, on their side, left 
nothing untried ; covering themselves with their shields 
closely wedged, like the shell of a tortoise, from which the 
enemy's iron hailstorm glanced off, they wearied the besieged 
with incessant assaults. Meanwhile, the citizens sent 
messengers imploring succour from their neighbours and 
countrymen: " Hasten," they said, "to our aid! Tou can 
enter without apprehension at the south gate, which is not 
yet blockaded." But, by God's help, their hopes were frus- 
trated ; for the same day, the Saturday after the Ascension, 
the bishop of Puy and the count of Tholouse arrived in the 
camp, and the guard of the south gate was entrusted to 
them by the other chiefs. The count, therefore, fell 
suddenly on the Saracens as they advanced in blind security, 
and his whole force, in bright array, repelled the undisci- 
plined horde of barbarians. The Saracens were routed with 
disgrace, having lost many of their people, and the Franks 
gained an easy victory. Again the citizens of Nice sum- 
moned their allies, assuring them on oath of the certainty of 
their being successful ; and they came boldly, furnished with 
ropes to bind the Christians they expected to make captives. 
But the Franks encountered the attack of the Gentiles in a 
close column, and then charging them, routed and defeated 
them a second time with great slaughter, and returned in 
triumph to their camp. After this. Count Eaymond and 
Bishop Aimar, with their troops, made great exertions, and 
assaulted the place in various ways, while, on their side, 
the besieged citizens obstinately resisted all their attacks. 

At length, the Christian chiefs held a meeting, and deter- 
mined and agreed on a plan for carrying on the siege of 
Nice. On one side the attack was entrusted to Bohemond 
and Tancred, near whom was posted Duke Godfrey and his 
1 The 7th of May. 



A.D. 1097.] THE CETJSADEES LAY SIEGE TO NICE. 95 

brothers.^ Next was Eobert, count of Flanders, a brave 
soldier and most daring knight.' Near him were stationed 
Eobert, duke of Normandy, Stephen, count of Chartres, 
Hugh, count of St. Pol, Conan the Breton, son of Count 
Geoffrey,^ Ealph de Guader,* and Eoger de Barneville,* with 
their respective followers. The count of Tholouse and the 
bishop of Puy kept guard at the south gate. The place was 
now so blockaded that there was no ingress or egress except 
by the lake which washed the walls on one side. This was 
securely navigated by the Gentiles in full view of the Chris- 
tians, and supplies were thus constantly introduced into the 
place. However, the Christian army had laudably formed 
the siege of Nice, and had skilfully disposed against it their 
well-formed camps and stately tents in the name of Christ. 
Splendid as was their array in arms, they were still more 
distinguished by the lustre of their virtues. They went 
forth to battle pure in their conduct, strong in limb, and 
stout in heart. Carefully watching for the good of their 
souls, they refrained from all fleshly lusts and forbidden 
indulgences. The chiefs fought in the ranks ; and, while 
they commanded and encouraged others, mounted guard like 
common sentinels. All things were had in common. The 

1 Bohemond and Tsncred Were stationed near the north gate of the 
city ; the duke of Normandy and count of Flanders at the west. 

* His father, Robert the Frisian, had formed a friendly alliance with 
Alexius on his return from the Holy Land, by way of Constantinople, in 
1088, and after that had been solicited to come to the aid of the Greek 
empire. His son, therefore, the present duke, was treated as an ally, and 
conducted himself as such in passing through the same provinces, and 
following the track in which Bohemond had preceded him ; arriving under 
the walla of Constantinople after that prince, and before the count of 
Tholouse. 

^ Conan, second son of Godfrey, surnamed Botterel, count of Lamballe. 
He was killed at the battle of the Iron Bridge, where his grave was to be 
been long afterwards, covered with a tombstone surmounted by a cross. 
Our author has omitted to mention a much more eminent person, Allan 
Fergan, duke of Brittany, and brother-in-law of Robert Curthose, v;ho also 
was present in this Crusade, 

* Ralph de Guader has been particularly noticed just before. See p. 80. 
' Roger de Barneville-sur-Mer. See on the subject of this castle and 

family, Les An-iens Chateaux de la Manche, in the Memoires de la 
Soci6c6 des AriiKjuaircs de Normandie, t. 1, p. 259. — Our author omits to 
mention amon^ the Crusaders who arrived with the duke of Normandy, the 
counts of Aumale and Boulogne. 



96 OEDE-BICUS TITALIS. [b.IX. CH.YI. 

bishops preached daily against incontinence, and whoredom 
and debauchery were scouted out of the camp. 

Meanwhile, the Turks laboured hard in defence of their 
city, and freely went to and fro on the lake in sight of the 
Christians. The Franks were much disturbed at this, and 
consulted how they might deprive the Turks of the command 
of the lake. In consequence they sent envoys to Constan- 
tinople, and proposed to the emperor with great ability what 
they had planned against the enemy. The emperor on 
hearing their proposition gave it his immediate approval, and 
ordered that everything should be done as they requested. 
By his command a number of oxen were hastily collected, 
and swift vessels sailed for the port of Civitot. The Tur- 
copoles were also ordered to be in readiness. The boats 
being then placed on waggons, and drawn by the oxen, with 
vast toil, to the shore of the lake, were, during the night, 
launched into the water, and manned by the Turcopoles. 
At the first dawn of day, they were discovered advancing 
in order towards the city. The citizens were astonished at 
seeing from their battlements the lake covered with boats, 
and began to think that perhaps succour was at hand from 
that quarter. But when the truth appeared, they were struck 
with consternation, and sunk into utter despair. There was 
no hope of safety now that the city was beset both by land 
and water. They therefore despatched messengers to the 
emperor, earnestly beseeching him to spare them in their 
low estate, and, by taking possession of the city which they 
were ready to surrender to him, save them from the enemy, 
so that they might not be exposed to pillage by foreigners. 
On receiving this message, the emperor being secretly jealous 
of tlie success of the Christians (as the event proved), yielded 
to the entreaties of the besieged, and gave orders to Tatan^ 
his general, who had been despatched after the Crusaders 

* This officer was not called Tatan, but Tatius. He was the son of a 
Saracen, taken prisoner hy John Comnenus, and brought up as a slave, 
but obtained his freedom by his bravery iind became the chief of the officers 
of the imperial household. The Latin historians of the Crusades, who 
have represented him in the most odious colours, draw his portrait 
personally as well as physically deformed. " His nostrils were slit ; a sif^n 
of his perverted mind : " says William of Tyre. " His nose was cut off, for 
some reason or other, and was supplied by one of gold," adds Guibert, 
abbot of Nogent. 



JUNE, 1097.] :n'ice given up to alexius. 97 

"with forty thousand troops, as well as to his other officers, 
to bring to Byzantium in safety those citizens of Nice who 
were ready to surrender themselves and their property, and 
to be careful that noninjury was done to the city. AH was 
done as the emperor commanded, the city was given up to 
him, and the Gentile people were conducted uninjured to the 
imperial city. The emperor treated the vanquished with 
great generosity, giving them their liberty, and making the 
poor Christians liberal presents. The city being thus surren- 
dered, the Crusaders drew off their forces. Numbers perished 
there by famine and the sword, or other means, who we believe 
attained the glory of martyrdom, as they offered their lives 
on behalf of their persecuted brethren. Many of the Gentiles 
also fell in various ways, whose bodies lay buried on all sides. 
The Crusaders were detained before the place seven months 
and three days,^ and after the city was given up to the em- 
peror turned their steps sorrowfully another road. In truth 
they sorely repented having wasted so much time on the siege, 
without having reduced the city to submit to their power as 
a place taken by assault. If the enemy's property had fallen 
into their hands, the necessities of the indigent would have 
been alleviated, and some portion of the expense they had 
incurred would have been repaid. The Crusaders did not 
patiently bear the order of Alexius" that they should not take 

1 The historians of the Crusades vary considerably in their accounts 
of the duration of the siege of Nice. From those of the best informed it 
may be concluded that it lasted thirty-five days, May 16 to June 20. 
Peter Tudebode speaks of seven weeks. Our author, who assigns it a 
much longer continuance (52 days), has been guilty of two serious omissions, 
that of the attack of Kilidge Arslan, to force the Crusaders to raise the 
siege ; and that of the singular intrepidity of a Norman knight, whose 
name is unhappily lost. Having crossed the ditch under a shower of 
missiles, he attempted to make a breach in the wall, but, not being 
supported by his comrades, he was buried under the stones and timber 
heaped on him by the besieged. 

2 All the historians of the Holy War echo the complaints made by the 
Crusaders of the capitulation which deprived them of the plunder of Nice. 
Our brother editor of Ordericus, with some truth and laudable humanity, 
is indisposed to justify their indignation, on the ground that the emperor 
had entitled himself by his munificence to the Crusaders (carried so far as 
even to take them into his regular pay), to receive from them an important 
city, only lately detached from his dominions, in a better condition than a 
heap of ruins. Then, on the score of humanity, as well as policy, the 
emperor's interference was justified by the fierce character of the Crusaders, 

VOL. Ill, H 



98 ORDERICUS TITALIS. [e.TX. CH.VIII. 

the spoils of Nice where they had wasted their resources 
and shed their blood to no purpose, and indeed had vastly 
diminished the means they possessed at the beginning of the 
siege. They had now become sensible, much to their loss, 
of the emperor's treacherous policy, but as there was at 
present no redress, they smothered their resentment. But 
the seeds of hatred were now sown, a hostile spirit was 
henceforth nourished, causes of discord burst forth, the 
phantoms of resentment grew portentous, and as Alexius 
had not acted justly towards the Crusaders, they meditated 
vengeance on him. 

Ch. YIII. TJie crusaders advance from Nice — Become sepa- 
rated into two divisions — The hard- fought hattle of Dory - 
IcBum — Continue their march hy Iconium, Seraclea, and 
Tarsus — Cross the defiles of Mount Taurus — Engagement 
at the Iron-bridge, near Antioch. 

The day on which the siege af Nice was raised,^ the Chris- 
tian army marched as far as a certain bridge, where they 
pitched their tents.^ They remained encamped there two 
days, and on the third day resumed their march in great 
haste before day-light ; but as the night was dark, they 
found themselves on an unknown road, uncertain if they 

and their cruel treatment of places which subsequently fell into their hands. 
For ourselves, we confess, with all respect for the feeling which dictated 
these sentiments, we do not see what end was answered by the sacrifice of 
so much time, so many valuable lives, and so much treasure, in the siege 
of Nice, if the emperor was to reap the fruits of the enterprise ; nor why, if 
it was necessary in a military point of view to dislodge the Turks in order 
that this strong fortress might be the base of future operations, it ought not 
to have been made the seat of a principality, vested in one of the Christian 
chiefs, like Antioch and Edessa, instead of being entrusted to so perfidious 
an ally as^ the Greek emperor. As to the question of humanity, it is 
sufficient to remark that, even in the present civilized age, the usages of 
war entirely justify the sack of fortified towns taken by assault, after 
holding out to the last extremity. 

On the siege and capitulation of Nice, see a letter of Stephen de Blois 
to the Countess Adela, his wife, in Mabillon's Museum Italicum, t. 1, p. 
237. 

^ The Crusaders did not break up their camp till June 25, some days 
after the capitulation. 

^ This bridge is situated at the di«tance of six hours' march from Nice, 
at the conference of the Gallus and Sungarius, now called by the Turks 



JULY, 1007.] ADVANCE FROM NICE. 99 

were in the right way. In this dilemma the troops sepa- 
rated from each other into two bodies, and thej spent two 
days in their march. In one division, there were Bohemond, 
Eobert the Norman, Stephen, count of Blois, Tancred, Hugh 
de St. Pol, Gerard de Gournai, "Walter de St. Valleri 
and Bernard his son,^ William, son of Ranulf the viscount,^ 
William de Perrers,^ Herve, son of Dodemon,* Conan, son 
of Count Geoffrey, E-alph de Guader and his son Alan, 
Eiou de Loheac,^ Alan, steward of Dol,^ and several more. 
In the other division were the count of Tholouse and the 
bishop of Puy, Duke Godfrey, Baldwin, Hugh the Great, 
and Eobert the Pleming, with large bodies of their fol- 
lowers. 

The same week, the Turks assembled to attack Bohe- 
mond^ in numbers like the sand on the sea-shore, and 
trusting in their vast superiority of numbers, charged the 
Christians with spirit. They had Doliman^ for their chief, 
and they were inflamed with rage against the foreigners 
who had dared to take Nice and ravage their territories. In 
their ranks were to be seen Turks and Saracens, Persians 
and Agulans,^ to the number, as was computed, of three 

^ On these two persons, who were the grandson and great-grandson of 
Richard II., duke of Normandy, see vol. ii. p. 9Cfi. 

" William, son of Ranulf de Briquessart, at that time viscount of 
Bayeux, and afterwards earl of Chester. 

^ William, baron of Ferrieres St. Hilaire, near Bernai, who had already 
distinguished himself at the siege of Courci. 

* The Breton chronicles mention, instead of Herve, son of Dodemon, 
Herve, son of Guyomark, count de Leon. The name of Dodemon still 
subsists in Normandy, but it is written Dondemont, which reminds us of 
the Dandy Dindemont of border Scotch story. 

^ Riou de Loheac, third son of Judicael de Loheac, died in the Crusade. 

" Probably the steward of the archbishop of Dol. 

■^ On the 1st of July, at Dorylseum, in the valley of Gorgoni. It appears 
thot this was one of the first battles in which the Crusaders heard the 
sound of the Turkish drums, which much frightened both the troops and 
their horses. " Their horses became unsteady under the strange shouts of 
the Saracens, and the braying of their trumpets, and the beating of their 
tambours, and refused to obey the spear. Our men, also, amidst this 
compound din, hardly knew what it meant." — Henry of Huntingdon's 
History (following William of Tyre), p. 229. Bohns Antiq. Library. 

The Christian army lost in this battle William, Tancred's brother, and 
Geoffrey de Mvinte-Scaglioso. 

* Soliman (Kilidge Arslan). 

^ It is not known whether this appellation is given to a nation, a sect, or 
H 2 



100 OEDEEICTJS TITALIS. [b.IX. CH.YIIT4 

hundred and sixty thousand men, besides Arabs, whose; 
swarms were countless. The illustrious Bohemond seeing 
the innumerable hosts of the enemy threatening and insult- 
ing his followers with cries of rage, and brandishing their 
spears, stood firm and unappalled, while he gave some short 
and skilful directions to his troops and cheered them on to 
the glorious conflict. He also despatched swift messengers 
to his confederates who were parted from him at some little 
distance, urging them to hasten with all speed to his succour. 
He commanded the foot soldiers to pitch their tents with 
rapidity and judgment, and the cavalry to follow him and, 
encountering the pagans, to stand, and maintain the con- 
flict with unabated vigour. Meanwhile the Turks rushed 
on with horrid cries,^ and attacked the Christians with great 
resolution, shooting their arrows, throwing their darts, and 
some of them engaging in close fight. There was no respite 
for the harassed crusaders, even when their bodies were reeking 
with blood and sweat. But the Eranks stood the brunt of 
the attack without recoiling ; sometimes prudently avoiding 
the assaults of their enemies, sometimes meeting them 
sword-in-hand, expecting the arrival of the other division, 
and never yielding a foot of ground. They sustained this 
fierce struggle from the third hour of the day to the ninth. 
The women rendered essential service to the combatants by 
running to them with pitchers of water w^hen they were 
dying of thirst, and giving them encouraging words, the 
field of battle being the burning desert. The confiict was 
maintained on both sides with the utmost desperation, and 
the crusaders were much distressed ; even their camp was 
assaulted several times.^ 

a particular corps of troops. The historian Balderic, ho-vrever, tells us 
that the Angulans were covered all over with steel armour (like the Estra- 
diots of the tifteenth century), impenetrable to arrows and spears, and that 
they fought sword-in-hand. 

^ " Alque dicentes nescio quid diabolicum in harbard UngtiA," naively 
observes Peter Tudebode. 

^ Our author's account does not give a very exact idea of the move- 
ments in the battle of Dorylaeum. He omits mentioning the attack and 
capture by the Turks of the Crusaders' camp, the brilliant valour of the 
duke of Normandy, and its recapture by Bohemond, who commanded the 
reserve. It was not till after their deliverance by this turn of affairs that 
the women carried refreshments to the combatants. 



JULY, 1097.] BATTLE OF DOllTLGEUM. 101 

Meanwhile, the other division of the army discredited the 
account given by Bohemond's messengers, questioning the 
reality of the attack : for they thought that there was no 
nation which would venture to engage with even a tenth 
part of their force. "When, however, the intelligence was 
spread among the troops, and one messenger followed 
another with news of the battle,^ Duke Grodfrey, a knight 
always the first in action, and Count Stephen, who was 
remarkable for his prudence and caution, together with 
Hugh the Great, and Baldwin and Stephen, all men of great 
intrepidity, galloped forward with their respective retainers. 
The bishop of Puy, and Eaymond, count of Tholouse, 
marched in the rear. The crusaders, already engaged, and 
who Mere now exhausted with fatigue, wondered how such 
countless hordes could have fallen upon them so suddenly 
and unexpectedly, and whence they came; for the dense 
mass covered the hills and valleys, and where there was any 
level ground it was swept by their squadrons of cavalry. 
Still, by God's help, the Christians fought stoutly, and the 
affair came to mortal combat at close quarters, sword- 
in-hand. But now their comrades who had been called to 
the rescue suddenly made their appearance. The bishop of 
Puy, with the large body of troops under his command, 
threatened the enemy's rear ; on one side the count of 
St. Giles, Baldwin and Eustace, galloped forward at full 
speed. Duke Godfrey charged the right flank, having with 
him Hugh the Great, and Eobert the Fleming, a soldier 
always prompt in action ; while Robert the Norman, Stephen 
Count de Blois, Tancred, and Bohemond, still held the 
ground on which they had long borne the brunt of the con- 
flict. The Gentiles, finding themselves now unexpectedly 
attacked in the rear as well as in the front, were thrown 
into confusion and took to flight without ofiering any fur- 
ther resistance. The swords of the Christians swept their 
ranks, and multitudes perished by death in every shape. 
Those who were able escaped to their fortresses. Thousands 
of the barbarians fell, after fiercely combating the crusaders 
and maintaining an obstinate conflict the whole of the day. 

1 Arnold de Rouex, chaplain to the duke of Normandy, conveyed the 
intelligence of the enemy's attack and the demand for succour, to Godfrey 
do Bouillon. 



102 ORDEEICnS YITALIS. [b.IX. CII.YIII. 

"William the Marquis, Tancred's brother, and Geoffrey de 
Monte-Scaglioso, knights of distinguished bravery, and of 
high rank and great merit, together with many others, both 
horse and foot, fell in the battle. The Turks are as dexte- 
rous in their mode of fighting as they are daring, wielding 
their scimitars so that there is no parrying the blow, while 
at other times they shower death on their enemies from a 
distance with their arrows and other missiles. They boast 
their descent from a common stock with the Pranks, and 
have traditions that their ancestors were once Christians. 
They also say that no people are instinctively warriors but 
themselves and the Franks. 

The battle was fought on the calends [the 1st] of July, 
and a day was set apart for offering with solemn service 
thanksgivings to Almighty God, who ordereth all things 
well. 

The infidels having been thus defeated and put to flight, 
the Christians returned to spoil the enemy's camp, in which 
they found large quantities of silver and gold. They col- 
lected a great number of beasts of burden, mules, horses, 
oxen, camels, sheep, and asses, and stripped the tents of 
their various furniture, returning to their own camp laden 
with booty in triumph and inexpressible joy. The report of 
this great victory spreading among strange and distant 
nations deterred them from hostilities against the Christians, 
whose glory was thus published in the ears of remote 
people. Ail were struck with terror at their achievements, 
and were in alarm lest they should be attacked in return. 

On his flight from Nice, Soliman fell in with a tribe of 
ten thousand Arabs, to v/hom he described in glowing 
colours the excessive bravery, the indomitable resolution and 
the vast numbers and rich equipments of the Crusaders ; by 
which account he prevailed with them to join him in his 
flight. Meanwhile, as human ingenuity has many con- 
trivances, and occupies itself with what may appear frivo- 
lous, the Turks invented a new story to amuse the simple 
Christians who lived among them. For Soliman and the 
other Gentiles, when they came to towns and places inha- 
bited by the Syrian Christians, cunningly said to them: 
" We have beaten the Franks ; they have all perished, or if 
any are left, they are burrowing in the earth." Addressing 



-A.T).1097.] MARCH OF THE CRCSA.DETIS. 103 

the ignorant nntives in this way, they got admission into 
their towns, and pillaged their dwellings and churches, 
carrying oft" whatever valuables they possessed, as well as 
their sous and daughters. Preceding the march of the 
Franks, they carried on this deception, until it came to the 
ears of the Crusaders, and they hastened to pursue them/ 
They now entered on an arid and uninhabitable region, in 
which they were reduced to the last extremity by hunger 
and thirst. If they chanced to light upon a spot where corn 
had been sown, but was yet unripe, they plucked the ears, 
and rubbing them out, chewed and swallowed the glutinous 
paste.^ They lost a nun\ber of men in this desert, and many 
of their beasts of burden. Eamous knights were compelled 
to march on foot, while those who had the means procured 
oxen to carry themselves and their effects instead of car- 
riages. Not long afterwards they reached a fertile district, 
abounding in food and all good things, except that it did not 
afford a fresh supply of horses. Arriving at Iconium,^ they 
filled their skins with water by the advice of the natives, 
and after a day's march reached the banks of a river where 
they halted two days to refresh themselves. The light 
troops, who were always in advance, to provide fodder and 
other necessaries for the army by pillage, arrived before the 
main body at the city of Heraclea, where a considerable 
number of Turkish troops were collected in the hope of 
opposing the crusaders. Some of them lay in ambush to 
cut off the advanced guards, but the Franks boldly charged 
them and dispersed them without difficulty. The Turks 

^ The Christian army resumed its march on the 5th of July, over the 
plain of Dorylaeum. 

2 Our author omits some details which are characteristic of the sufferings 
from the want of water in traversing the desert so truly called by the 
ancients, Phrygia the burnt. Women were taken in childbirth before 
their time ; others, in their despair, rolled themselves naked on the sands ; 
the falcons and hawks, which the nobles had brought with them to Asia, 
died of thirst on their masters' wrists, and the greyhounds at their feet. 

^ Iconium, the metropolis of Lycaonia, now called Koniah. 

Our author passes over several important occurrences in the interval, 
and, among others, the illness of Godfrey in consequence of his struggle 
with a gigantic bear, and that of the count of Tholouse, which was so 
severe that he was lifted from his bed and laid on the ground, when his 
pulse was scarcely perceptible, and the office for the dead said over him, 
says the author of the History of the Holy War, who was himself prer^ent. 



104 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.VIII, 

being driven out of Heraclea/ the place soon fell into the 
hands of the Christians, and they spent four days in it. 
Tancred and Baldwin nowtoolv a different route from the 
rest, and entered the valley of Bolentrot' with their own 
followers ; and Tancred then separating from Baldwin also 
marched to Tarsus with' the troops he commanded. As they 
approached the city, the Turks sallied forth prepared to 
oppose them ; but Tancred, with his usual intrepidity, imme- 
diately attacked them with great spirit, and drove them back 
in confusion to the city, to which he laid siege. During the 
night following, however, the Turks made their escape, and 
in the dead of the night the citizens cried aloud: "Ye 
Pranks, conquerors, and rulers of the world, the Turks have 
withdrawn ; the city is open to you ; enter the gates ; hasten, 
ye invincible Franks, to take possession of the place ; come 
quickly; linger not; why do ye tarry?" All this was dis- 
tinctly heard by the sentinels in the camp ; but as it was 
night, the consideration of the affair was deferred till the 
morning. However, at dawn of day, the elders of the city 
came to the camp, and surrendering themselves and their 
property, chose Tancred for their prince. This gave rise to 
a serious dispute between the Christian chiefs, Baldwin, who 
commanded the largest part of the troops, contending for 
giving up the place to plunder, or at least for requiring one 
half of all it contained. On the other hand, Tancred, whose 
character was moderate, preferred abandoning the conquest 
of the city to pillaging the citizens who had so readilj com- 
mitted themselves to his care. He, therefore, gave the 
signal for the march, and at the sound of the trumpets drew 
off his forces, somewhat annoyed, and Baldwin alone occu- 
pied Tarsus.^ Before long, two wealthy cities, Azera^ and 

* Heraclea ; thirty hours' march from Iconium. 

■■' This valley lies at the entrance of one of the passes of Mount Taurus. 
Its present name Gealek-Bogaz ; Albert d'Aix calls this pass " The Gate 
of Judas." 

3 This statement is not perfectly correct. The Turks did not privately 
evacuate Tarsus, but they hoisted the flag of the Christians, promising to 
surrender if they were not relieved. Baldwin finished driving them from 
the towers which they still held, when he replaced Tancred in the interior 
of the place. 

It appears that Godfrey now separated his division from the rest of the 
army, and having occupied Edessa, extended his conquests in Armenia amt 
Mesopotamia, founding the first principality of the Franks in Asia. 

* It should be Adana • a city eight leagues from Tarsus. Tancred, 



iL.D.1097.] THE CIIUSADERS IN ARMENIA. 105 

Malmistra/ and several walled towns surrendered to Tancred. 
Meanwhile, the rest of the chiefs advanced into the country 
of the Armenians with the troops they commanded. On 
their approach the town of Alfia^ was given up to them, and 
was entrusted to a military man named Simeon, a native of 
the country,^ for the defence of the neighbourhood. 

The main body of the Crusaders arrived before Caesarea 
in Cappadocia,^ which they razed to the ground. The ruins 
still left attest the former importance of the place. 

Plastencia,^ a fine city, standing in a fertile country, which 
had lately been besieged by the Turks, for three weeks with- 
out being able to reduce it, opened its gates readily to the 
Crusaders. Peter de Alfia*^ requested to have the custody 
of it, and the chiefs committed it to him without hesitation 
for the defence of the country, to be held under fealty to 
the holy sepulchre and the Christian religion. Bohemond, 
who was always most active in military enterprises, selecting 
a chosen body of his own followers, went in pursuit of the 
Turks who had besieged Plastencia,- and kept in advance of 

finding it already in the occupation of a Burgundian knight named Guelph, 
passed on after having rested and provisioned his troops. 

' Alalmistra, the ancient Mopsuestia, now called Mesiss^. six hours 
S.E. of Adana, and -three leagues from the sea on the river Djihan, the 
ancient Pyramus. This place is composed of two castles, one of which is 
called Cufr-Bina— the work of the infidels, probably because it is believed 
to have been built by the Crusaders. 

* Archbishop Baudri, also, names this place Alfia. Messieurs Michaud 
and Poujoulat were not able to discover any trace of it in their travels in 
Syria. Matthew Paris, who calls it Azena, pretends that it was the duke 
of Normandy who took it, and gave it to this Simeon, one of his knights. 
The author of the History of the Holy War, who was an eye-witness, tells 
us, on the contrary, that Simeon was a native of the country : ortus 
rcgione. 

^ The Lesser Armenia. 

* All the historians of the Crusades have committed the same error in 
placing the site of the ancient Ccesarea of Cappadocia between Heraclea 
and Cosor, now called Kaisarieh ; but it was situated far from thence in 
the northern part of Asia Minor. 

^ We have no account of the situation of this place by the modern 
historians of the Crusades. 

<* This person is called by Robert de St. Remi, Petrvs ah Alpibns, and 
by Peter Tudehode, Petrus de Alaph. Perhaps he was the Peter d'Aulps, 
a Proven9al gentleman, who after having accompanied Robert Guiscard 
to Cephalonia in 1085, enlisted in the Greek army, and founded at Coa- 
stantinople the powerful family of the Petraliphes. 



106 ORDERICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. Cn.VIIT. 

the army in order to molest them, but to no purpose, as with 
all his diligence he was unable to find them. 

The Crusaders now arrived at Coxon,^ a stately and rich 
city, which the inhabitants voluntarily ceded to their brother 
CJhristians. The army halted there three days to refresh 
themselves after their fatigues. It was now reported to the 
count of Tholouse that the Turks who were in possession of 
Antioch, had deserted it, and fled. Consulting, therefore, 
his associates, he selected some officers who, being sent 
forward, should carefully explore the road, and obtain all 
necessary information. The viscount of Chatillon,^ AVilliam 
de Montpelier,^ Peter de Boas,* and Peter Eaimond,^ chosen 
for this service, advanced with a large body of troops 
into the valley of Antioch ; but they found affairs very 
different from what they expected. The Turks were making 
great preparations for the defence of the city. 

Peter de E-oas, being detached from the rest of the force, 
penetrated into the valley of Eugia,^ where he discovered a 
number of Turks whom he cut to pieces or defeated and put 
to flight. The Armenians, who had heard of the successes 
of the Crusaders and the frequent disasters of the infidels, 
gave up the city of Eugia to Peter, with several walled towns. 
The main army found the road they had to pass extremely 
difficult. They had to climb the passes of the mountains^ 

* Cosor, or Cocson, the ancient Cucusus, celebrated for being the place 
to which St. Chrj sostom was banished in the year 404. 

■■^ Peter, viscount of Chatillon. 

^ William, aon of Ermengard, lord of Montpellier, 1085 — 1121. He 
distinguished himself at the siege of Marrah, where he commanded the 
moveable towers of wood, by means of which the place was entered. His 
son, whose will is preserved in D'Achery's Spicileyiumy was also in the 
Holy Land. 

* Probably Peter de Roaix, near Vaucluse. 
^ Peter Raimond d'Hautpool. 

There is another person mentioned by Peter Tudebode, whom he calls 
Aralium Vicecomitem, and who sent to the count of Tholouse plenans 
hasiam, " with Turkish noses and lips." 

* According to M. Poujoulat, the site of the town and castle of Rugia 
is now occupied by the village of Riha, the third resting place in the 
journey from Lattakia to Aleppo. 

' The Crusaders had to cross the chain of Mount Taurus by almost 
impracticable passes, which they cursed in their sufferings, and called the 
Devil's Mountains. Peter of Tudebode is at a loss for words sufficiently 
to execrate them. He describes the knights as clasping their hands in 



A. T). 1097.] PASSAGE OF MOUNT TAURUS. 107 

which were precipitous and rocky, and where they sustained 
severe losses. The troops often fell and were bruised, while 
struggling and faint from the difficulties of the track ; and 
the horses rolled over a fearful precipice. Many were reduced 
to penury by the loss of their horses and the beasts of burden 
which carried their effects. Having escaped with difficulty 
from these dangerous passes, they reached a place called 
Marafi,^ the inhabitants of which furnished them with 
plentiful supplies of food. They rested a short time there, 
until they were somewhat recruited.^ After this the army 
entered the noble, rich, and extensive valley in which stands 
the royal and famous city of Antioch, the metropolis and 
capital of Syria, in which Peter, prince of the apostles, had 
his episcopal seat. ISTow, however, by the mysterious provi- 
dence of Grod, several of the churches in that city are ruined, 
and irreverently applied to secular uses.^ The light troops 

despair, and selling their armour for whatever it would fetch, to be relieved 
of the burden; and even sometinnes throwing it away from the impossibility 
of transporting it over such precipices. 

'^ Afaresia, now Marash ; eight or ten leagues from Cosor, across the 
mountains. Godechilde de Toiini, daughter of Ralph de Toeni, and wife of 
Raymond de Boulogne, died and was buried at Maresia. It stands on the 
site of the ancient Germanica. The Crusaders were obliged to halt there 
to wait for Bohemond, who, in spite of all that our author says of his 
activity, had fallen into the rear of the rest of the army. 

* Our author has omitted to mention the occupation by the Crusaders of 
Artesium, the ancient Chalcis, situated between Maresia and Antioch, 
which surrendered to Robert of Flanders. A village near this town and 
castle still bears the name of Ertesi. According to Matthew of Paris, the 
duke of Normandy assisted in its capture. 

^ William of Tyre furnishes some curious details of the outrages per- 
petrated by the Moslems, iconoclasts on principle, on the images of the 
saints painted on the walls of the churches of Antioch. " The venerable 
pictures of the saints, which the simple and devout people in their want 
of cultivation, laudably use instead of books, and which, in place of 
lessons, inspire them with devotion, were razed from the walls, and the 
infidels plucked out their eyes, and cut off their noses, and daubed them 
with filth from the foulest places, as if they were venting their rage against 
living persons." — Will. Tyr. Hint. lib. vi. We have other details, not less 
curious, of the transformation of the church of St. Peter into three mosques: 
" The Turks occupied, or rather polluted, the church of St. Peter, con- 
verting it into three chapels for the devil's worship, and covered with lime 
or plaster the paintings, which were richly ornamented with silver and 
gold, so as to be splendid objects from every part of the church. They 
also inscribed diabolical sentences on the face of every picture." — Belti 
Sacri Hist. Ix. 



108 ORDEEICUS VITALIS. [e.IX. CH.IX. 

in advance liaving reached the Iron Bridge^ found large bodies 
of Turks who were hastening to defend the city. They 
immediately attacked them, for the Christians were always 
under arms, and their onset was so sudden that they were 
easily routed.^ Many were slain, and the purveyors brought 
back to their camp which was pitched on the river bank, the 
convoy of mules and beasts of burden which was being 
conducted to the city laden with provisions and all kinds of 
valuable supplies. Great joy spread through the camp, both 
for the victory, and the rich booty the purveyors had brought 
back with them. Daily praises and thanksgivings were 
constantly offered to God, for the especial protection he 
afforded to those who had become exiles from their native 
land, in love for Him, in the midst of heathen armies. 

Bohemond, who never yielded to idleness and sloth, for he 
was always in action, cautiously reconnoitred the gate of 
Antioch at the head of four thousand troops, and kept watch, 
under cover, to prevent any parties from entering or leaving 
the city unobserved. 

Ch. IX. The siege of Antioch — Assaults of the enemy — 
Operations of the hesiegers — Forts huilt hy the crusaders — 
their sufferings — The city taken hy escalade and sacked. 

At the first dawn of day, the army struck their tents and 
marched from the spot where they had encamped. It was 
on Wednesday the twelfth of the calends of November 
[the 21st of October],^ that they pitched their camp before 
the city, and they blockaded it strictly until the third of the 
nones [the 3rd] of June, on the side of three of the gates 
The other quarter of the city* was not invested, because it 
was closed in by such projecting and inaccessible cliffs and 

^ This bridge of nine arches over the Orontes, not over the Pharpar, is 
situated four leagues from Antioch. M. Michaud informs us that it was 
laid in ruins in 1822, by an earthquake, together with the two towers, the 
doors of which were covered with iron plates, from whence the bridge 
derived its name. William of Tyre, however, tinds another reason for its 
being so called, in the Orontes, near Antioch, having the name of the Fer. 

'• The duke of Normandy commanded the van in this battle. 'J'he 
standards of the Christian array were entrusted to Roger de Barneville 
and Everard du Puiset. 

^ According to William of Tyre, it v> as the 1 8th. 

* The south side. 



A.D.1097.] SIEGE or AXTiocir. 109" 

mountains, tliat there was no level space on wliicli the 
besiegers could establish themselves. The consternation into 
which the inhabitants of Antioch and their neighbours were 
thrown was such that no one dared to encounter the pur- 
veyors^ for the Christian army ; all was quiet therefore for 
nearly fifteen days. The country about Antioch, being a 
fertile valley, is very productive, being full of vineyards, 
abounding with corn and fruit, and shady groves, and pleasant 
gardens, and rich meadows. A number of Armenian and 
8yrian Christians who were at the beck of the Turks, pretend- 
ing to make their escape from the place, went boldly to the 
camp, as mendicants, and having remarked what was passing 
returned and reported it to the Turks, to the great injury 
of the Crusaders.^ For the garrison of Antioch having thus 
learnt the plans of their enemies, began to grow bold, straiten- 
ing the pilgrims by attacks, cutting off those who were not 
on their guard, and molesting them by robberies and other 
means. They beset all the roads in the neighbourhood, 
and shut out the Christians from receiving any supplies by 
sea or over the mountains ; so that those who were encamped 
without the place were blockaded worse than those within. 
There was a castle in the neighbourhood called Arech,^ pretty 
well fortified, from which the Turks made irruptions on the 
Christians, many of whom perished by the secret attacks of 
the country people. The Christian chiefs, being much grieved 
at this, marched out of their camp, and offering battle to the 
Turks pretended to fly and artfully led them to the spot where 
Bohemond and his troops were placed in ambush. Two 
[thousand]* Christians were slain there. Then Bohemond, 

'^ Cursitores, a term well rendered in a military sense by the French 
word Ckassenrs. It is frequently used by our author in his narrative of 
these campaigns in the East, but not in the sense of light troops em- 
ployed in opening or keeping up the communications of the army, but, as 
being in advance to provide what we should now call the commissariat for 
the main body. 

2 William of Tyre relates the cruel stratagem by which Bohemond rid 
the camp of these spies. 

^ The castle of Harench, built on a hill, at two hours' distance from the 
Iron-bridge, still bears the name oi Kirliz-Kalessi, the Giii's Castle, by the 
translation of which Albert d'Aix describes it. It had been conquered by 
Tancred, with almost all Cilicia, after his departure from Malmistry, but 
retaken by the Moslems. 

* Our author has made a serious error, which is entirely his own, in 



110 0EDEEICU3 TITALIS. [b.IX. CH.IX. 

the bravest of the warriors, rose from liis ambuscade and 
falling on the Turks killed many of them, and taking some 
alive caused them to be beheaded before the gate of the 
town, as a warning to others. At length the besiegers built 
a fort on the summit of a hill which they called Maregard,^ 
which was guarded daily by each of the chiefs taking his 
turn in succession. Meanwhile, provisions began to run 
short, as they could neither draw them from the country, 
nor purchase supplies, and they had carelessly consumed all 
they found in the valley. Every article of food therefore 
became very dear, and famine stared them in the face, 
inasmuch as their stock daily grew less ; so that the enemy 
in the city made open demonstrations of joy. 

In the year of our Lord 1097, the fifth indiction, after the 
celebration of the feast of Christ's nativity,^ Duke Bohemond 
and Eobert the Meming marched out of the camp, amidst 
much lamentation from those who staid behind, at the head 
of a force of twenty thousand men, both cavalry and infantry 
with which they overran the settlements of the Saracens. 
The Arabs and Turks from Jerusalem and Damascus, and 
other cities of various provinces, had assembled in a body 
for the relief of Antioch.^ Hearing, therefore, that the 
crusaders were scattered through the country, they exulted 
in the hope of being able to crush them, as they reckoned 
them to be few in number and mere adventurers. They 
consequently in the darkness of the night, posted two bodies 
of troops in ambuscade, one in front the other in the rear of 
the crusaders. But the warlike Count of Flanders and 
Bohemond made a joint attack upon them at dawn of day, 
and calling on the name of Jesus and crossing themselves, 

rendering the words duo milites, wliich occur in Balderic's narrative, into 
duo millia. There were, indeed, it appears, two thousand men s'ain, but it 
was on the side of the Mahometans. 

1 This mountain was called Mauregard (Mai-Regard) by tlie Crusaders, 
who were annoyed at its commanding their camp, and especially Bohemond's 
position. 

2 Monday, December 28, 1097. 

^ Another circumstance, which revived the courage'of the Mussulmans, 
was the continuance of tlie feeble state of health of Godfrey de Bouillon, 
who was not yet recovered from the effects of his struggle with the bear, 
and of the count of Tholouse, who did not regain his health until the 
following spring. 



A.D.1098.] BIEGE OF ANTIOCH. Ill 

fought with great resolution, and slev*- a .great number of the 
enemy. They were, however, able to secure but little 
booty, having no leisure to pursue and take the spoil/ 
Meanwhile, the Turks who garrisoned the city, learning 
that Bohemond was gone, boldly sallied forth and made 
inroads among the tents. Indeed, having thus explored the 
weakest points, they one day, before they heard of the defeat 
of their allies, assembled their whole force and made a gene- 
ral attack on the camp, coming to close quarters with the 
crusaders. On that occasion the Ishmaelites fought with 
great fury, and many of the Christians were slain. The 
standard-bearer of the bishop of ' Puy was among the 
number,^ and had it not been for the marshes which lay 
between the city, and the camp and made the road almost 
impracticable, the enemy would have been able by a despe- 
rate efibrt to destroy the tents and make great havoc in the 
Christian army which had already been somewhat weakened.^ 
, Bohemond, returning from the battle he had fought with 
the Saracens, in which he had secured but little booty, 
ascended some other lofty hills. But the country was now 
so devastated that many returned empty. Their toil had 
been therefore fruitless except that they had gained a great 
victory over the Turks. But victory will not allay hunger, 
when there is nothing to eat. Joy is of short duration 
when it is saddened by want of bread. Bohemond returned 
to the camp which was suffering cruelly the horrors of famine. 
However the Armenians and Syrians, whose thirst for gain 
is insatiable, finding that the expedition was come back 

' The battle was fought on the 31st of December. Our author is 
mistaken with respect to the circumstance which prevented Bohemond 
and the count of Flanders from reaping the fruits of their victory. It was 
not time they wanted, but horses. There were scarcely a thousand fit for 
action in the whole army. 

"^ Heraclius, the standard-bearer of the bishop of Puy, and youngest 
brother of Pons, viscount of Polignac. The Turks carried off the 
standard. According to Raymond d'Agiles, that knight was not carrying 
it at the moment when he was shot by an arrow in the face, of which 
woimd, it is said, he died the 9th of June following. 

^ Our autlior has omitted to mention the bridge of boats, which greatly 
facilitated the operations of the siege, and which the Crusaders established 
at an early period on the Orontes, above the bridge of Antioch, and nearly 
opposite the gate which was afterwards called the Duke's Gate. The 
marsh here spoken of was in front of the Dog's Gate. 



112 OHDEEICUS VITALIS. [e.TX. CK.TX. 

without ■ supplies, searched for provisions in likely places at 
a great distance, and buying them up resold at an enormous 
profit what they had purchased at a low rate. The richer 
pilgrims bestowed large donations on the poor and those 
who went about begging ; but it was impossible to maintain 
so many thousand souls any great length of time. Some 
began to think of deserting the camp. "William Carpenter 
and Peter the Hermit crept out by stealth, but Tancred 
discovered and arrested them, and after a sharp rebuke 
compelled them to return to the army. Bohemond also, 
before whom they were brought, gave them bitter words and 
treated them with the contempt they deserved.^ Men and 
horses were now in equal want of food, and despair of relief 
began to prevail. So many of the horses had failed that in 
the whole of that immense army, scarcely a thousand 
mounted knights and men-at-arms could be found. Tatan, 
the Greek, the commander of the emperor's troops, was so 
appalled by the prospect of perishing in the common cala- 
mity, that he undertook a mission to the emperor, and after 
making great promises to assist his companions as soon as 
he could, took his leave and never returned." He faithfully 
reported to his master Alexius the courage and constancy, 
and the great privations of the besiegers, and exliorted Gruy, 
son of Duke G-uiscard,^ and the noble chiefs of the Eranks 
who had followed the first crusaders with numerous troops, 
but were honourably detained by the emperor at Constanti- 

* Every kind of reproach was heaped upon the deserters. William 
Carpenter, viscount of Melun, was reminded in no gentle terms of the 
dishonourable termination of his campaign against the Moors in Spain : 
** Probably, wretch, you were ready to betray these knights and soldiers of 
Christ, as you did before in Spain," were the words of Bohemond. 

Guy Troussel was also one of the deserters, and soon afterwards 
succeeded in making his escape, though he had taken the most solemn 
oaths to remain for ever faithful to the standard of the cross. See Ralph 
de Caen, who calls him Guy the Red. 

^ Even the duke of Normandy was so disheartened that he retired to 
Laodicea, and did not return to the camp till he was thrice summoned. 
According to Ralph of Caen, Robert was invited to Laodicea by the garrison, 
which consisted of English refugees (see vol. ii. p. 357), placed there by 
the Greek emperor, who, weary of the Byzantine yoke, were willing to 
make a voluntary submission to the son of the king, to escape whosu 
dominion they had chosen to become exiles from their native country. 

^ This young prince died on his return from the Holy Land, in 1107. 



A.D.109S.] SIEGE or ANTIOCH. 113 

iiople, to hasten to the relief of their friends. On hearing 
distinctly how matters stood, the emperor assembled a 
powerful force, and put himself in march with a large convoy 
of provisions to succour the crusaders ; but evil counsels, a^s 
will appear hereafter, prevented the accomplishment of hia 
laudable enterprise. 

Meanwhile, the crusaders, reduced to extremity, deserted 
privately, every one going where he thought he could find 
the means of existence ; but no one dared to make for the 
sea-coast, as the roads and paths on that side were strictly 
watched. Fresh reports were also brought that a countless 
host of Turks were advancing, and that the whole army was 
threatened with immediate destruction. It was said that 
the numbers of the enemy were so great that a space measur- 
ing several furlongs square would not contain them. The 
crusaders trembled with alarm, and many of them drooped 
their fainting heads. But the nobles still dared to talk of 
fighting; and assembling in council mutually encouraged 
each other. Finding this, the wise Bohemond warmly con- 
gratulated them, and proposing judicious measures, encou- 
raged them to resistance with much eloquence. He gave 
orders that the infantry should remain in the camp and 
narrowly watch the city gates, lest if they were opened the 
citizens might make sallies at pleasure. All the knights 
then armed themselves, invoking the name of the Lord 
Jesus, and haviiig strengthened their good resolutions by 
receiving the holy sacrament, set forward, followed by the 
lamentations of all orders. No one had any assurance of his 
own safety, whether priest or woman, common soldier or 
knight. Both parties despaired of ever seeing each other 
again. Those who were dear to each other embraced by 
turns, and all were melted to tears. The knights established 
themselves on the bank of the river anciently called Daphne/ 
which flows between Antioch and a lake, having heard that 
the Turks had collected their forces at the castle of Arech, on 
the further side of the Iron Bridge. The watchful chiefs of 
the crusaders assembled before day-light, and at the first 
blush of dawn sent out wary horsemen to reconnoitre the 

• ^ The Daphne, now called the Boueir, is two hours' march from 
Antioch, on the road to Lattakia, to the west of the city, and on the right 
of the Orontes, into which it discharges its waters. 
VOL. III. I 



114 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.IX. 

enemy. Thej soon returned shouting that the Turks were 
at hand, and were formed in two strong divisions ; they had 
seen them moving rapidly forward from the other bank of 
the river. The Christian chiefs then discussed the order of 
battle, which they determined to leave altogether to Bohe- 
mond's judgment. He therefore divided his force into six 
troops, five of which were to advance and bear the brunt of 
the enemy's onset, repelling it by a spirited charge, while 
Bohemond, with his own troop, was to bring up the rear at 
a short distance, as a reserve to support the others aa 
occasion required, and in case the Turks should rout the 
foremost troops to be ready to meet the full tide of the 
battle. The clarions sounded the charge, and it was echoed 
back by the trumpets of the Christian cavalry, and with 
loud cries on both sides the fierce battle began. Both 
parties closed hand-to-hand ; armour clashed against armour, 
and shield against shield, and swords were hacked against 
broken spears. The reserves of the Turks were brought up 
and made a desperate charge on the Christians. The Eranks 
could not sustain such attacks from so many assembled 
nations, and began to stagger and give way. The cries were 
fearful, and the air was darkened by clouds of whizzing darts. 
Bohemond who saw the whole, watching it as if he was all 
eyes, cried with a groan, " Christ, support thy faithful ones !" 
lie then added, " Bobert (Eobert Eitz-G-erard carried his 
pennon^), put spurs to your horse, and hasten undaunted to 
the succour of the Christians, who are giving way! Bemem- 
ber, I pray you, our race, and do not tarnish the glorious 
name of Frenchmen ! Be confident that we shall speedily 
have aid from > Heaven, but it is God's will, that like brave 
champions, we should merit as well as receive the reward of 
courage." 

Bobert having devoutly fortified himself with the sign of 
the cross, galloped forward, surrounded by an auxiliary 
troop, and like a brave knight fell on the fiercest of the 

* Bohemond's pennon was red, the colour of the ensigns of Normandy 
and the Scandinavian nations. *' In Norway, red seems to have been the 
national colour from an early period. Something similar was also probably 
the case in Denmark." Worsaac's Danes and Norwegians in England, 
&c., pp. 01, ()2. Hence, probably, the scarlet uniibrms peculiar to the 
Danish and English armies. 



A.D.1098.] SIEGE OE ANTIOfllH. 115 

Turks, closing with the infidels so near that the fringe of 
Bohemond's pennon floated in their faces, and they recoiled 
a few paces as he shouted his war cry. The Franks regained 
their courage at this desperate charge and the cries which 
accompanied it, and made a combined attack on the Turkish 
squadrons. Loud was the clash of arms, and sparks were 
struck from the brazen helmets ; wounds followed wounds 
and the earth was dyed with purple blood. On every side 
were seen intestines torn out, decapitated heads and dis- 
membered bodies. The Turks were struck with panic, and 
their troops at first staggered and then took to flight, pur- 
sued by the Franks beyond the Iron-bridge. The Turks lost 
a vast number of horsemen, but there was no infantry engaged. 
The crusaders returned in triumph to their camp, bringing 
with them a number of horses of which they had the greatest 
need, and much spoil which they had taken in the battle. 
The Turks retired, shamefully discomfited, to their castle of 
Arech which they dismantled and burnt, and then continued 
their retreat. The Armenians and Syrians, discovering this, 
made haste to occupy the defiles, and put many of them to 
the sword, but some they brought away alive. They also 
gave up the castle of Arech to the crusaders. The Franks 
brought into the camp a hundred heads of the slain, for the 
encouragement of their own army and to terrify the besieged. 
All this was seen by the envoys of the emir of Babylonia, 
who had been sent on a mission to Antioch, and pitched 
their tents near the crusaders' camp.-" The troops who had 
remained in their intrenchments during the battle were 
engaged all day in assaulting the garrison of Antioch, and 
constantly watched the three gates of the city to prevent 
their making sallies. The battle was fought on Tuesday, 
the ides - of February [9th] being the day preceding the first 
day of Lent. 

Though the people of Antioch had been defeated in every 
engagement, and they had sustained considerable losses by 
death, wounds or captivity, the numbers of the citizens were 
so great, that being now inflamed to the highest pitch of fury 
their attacks on the Christians were more impetuous, they 

^ The ambassadors of Aboulcassam Mostali, the sixth Fatimite Sultan 
of Egypt, 1094— December 11, 1101. 

^ It should be the sixth of the ides (Tuesday, the 9th) of February. 

I 2 



116 OBDEEICUS VITALIS. [b. IX. Cll.IX. 

never suffered the camp to be at rest, but made frequent 
sallies in which blood was continually shed. Besides this, 
the crusaders were under many disadvantages, being neither 
able to raise the siege nor to leave the camp for any consi- 
derable distance. The country round was become such a 
desert that it yielded them no means of subsistence, while 
the Turks who knew its resources better were able to 
procure supplies, and always ready to fall on the Christians 
by surprise. Moreover, there was not a city, castle or town, 
nor man nor w^oman, nor any living creature that was not 
in hostility to the crusaders. All access was obstructed, 
that traders might not come and traffic with them, so that 
they were exposed to the horrors of famine. 

In consequence, the nobles anxiously consulted on the 
means of relieving the people, and determined to fortify a 
mosque in order to interdict the Turks from passing the 
bridge.^ It was resolved that Duke Bohemond and Eaymond, 
count of Tholouse, should proceed to Port St. Simeon,^ and 
bring up the troops who were waiting there to join in the 
siege. Those who remained in the camp set to work in a 
body, and under arms, to begin building the fort.^ On the 
other hand, the Turks equal in numbers and not less deter- 
mined than the Franks attacked the workmen, and their 
onset was so severe that they drove them off and killed 
many of them. Discovering also that two of the principal 
chiefs had left the camp for the port of St. Simeon, they 
laid in wait for them on a well-chosen spot and made a fierce 
attack. The Saracens aimed at the Christians with arrows, 

^ The mosque, where we shall presently find the Mussulmans burying 
their dead who fell in battle, btood on the right bank of the river, and lacing 
the bridge at no great distance. 

* A description of this port (now called Soueydya) is given in vol. ii., p. 
420. It takes five hours to travel from thdnce to Antioch, the road run- 
ning on the right bank of the Orontes. 

^ Raymond, count of Tholouse, undertook to superintend the erection 
and defence of this fortification. The party detached to Port St. Simeon 
had for their principal object to procure and bring back workmen qualified 
to engage in it. But the author of the Holy War (ch. Ivi.) informs us that 
all the Crusaders assisted in the operations, which consisted in throwing up 
an immense earthwork as well as a wall and two towers. It appears from 
this that it was rather an entrenched camp than a fort or castle, and the 
rest of the chapter proves that the intention was not only to intercept th^ 
passage of the bridge over the Orontes, but to break it down. 



A.D.1098.] STEGE or ANTIOCH. 117 

swords, spears, darts, and all sorts of missiles, sweeping 
them down without mercy, and uttered loud cries, gnasliin^ 
their teeth. A body of men were returning with the chiefs 
who were neither well armed nor used to war. The small 
band of crusaders were unable to withstand the fierce attack 
of their raving enemies, and after losing more than a thou- 
sand men, the rest took to flight. Such are the chances of 
war, such the vicissitudes of human affairs, as well as of sea- 
sons. No one was ever fortunate under all circumstances, 
uo one ever has or ever will enjoy uninterrupted prosperity. 
In success therefore we must fear and guard against misfor- 
tunes, and in adversity we may hope for better times. 

Iteports that the Christians were overpowered filled with 
anxiety those who had remained in the camp ; more espe- 
cially as no certain accounts were given of the living or the 
dead. Many escaped by climbing the mountains, and soon 
found their way to the camp. Bohemond, taking the 
shortest road, arrived before the count of Tholouse, and 
gave an exact statement of the losses he had incurred. The 
crusaders were more exasperated than alarmed at the 
intelligence ; and, roused to vengeance for the loss of their 
comrades, made a general attack on the Turks with great 
spirit. On both sides they fought resolutely. The Turks 
had crossed the bridge, when the Christians boldly met 
them, and, contrary to their expectations, received them 
with great fury, and falling upon them, forced them to seek 
safety in flight, but there was no possibility of escaping the 
swords of their pursuers. In the rear of the fugitives there 
was a narrow bridge, over a deep and rapid river.^ There 
was no other passage ; no one could ford, and few could 
swim across the stream in the neighbourhood of the bridge. 
Great numbers of the Turkish horsemen crowded together on 
the crown of the arch, and the Franks, eager for victory and 
revenge of their comrades' deaths, cut them down as if they 
were beasts of prey. In their insatiable fury they charged 
with their lances and engaged in close combat with their 
swords. Some they forced into the river, and others they 
mortally wounded. The stream was dyed with blood, and 

* The thickest of the fight appears to have been on the bridge itself, 
which was not yet commanded by the works in progress, under the count 
of Tholouse. 



118 OEDEEICtrS TITALIS. [b.IX. CII.IX. 

the bank was encumbered with corpses. The gallant God- 
frey drove his sword across the back of a warrior of enormous 
stature, who wore golden armour, as if he had been a 
succulent leek. The head, and shoulders, and upper part 
of the body, as far as the belt, fell into the river, while the 
lower part remained on his spirited horse, which, no longer 
held by the reins, but still pricked by the spurs, galloped 
through the foremost of the throng of fugitives to the city 
gate.^ All who were on the battlements and bulwarks 
witnessing this spectacle were filled with dismay, and, amid 
their grief, told strange tales of the wonderful exploit of the 
stout knight. A day of death in every form, a day in which 
scarce any of the assembled multitudes would escape with 
their lives, lowered upon the pagans. From the tops of the 
towers and walls, the women looked down on the disasters 
of their countrymen, and envied the successes of the Franks. 
In that battle twelve chiefs, who are called emirs, and 
fifteen hundred distinguished horsemen were slain, the rest 
were deterred by their fears from attacking the Christians. 
Night put an end to the conflict, and the crusaders, rejoicing 
in the name of Christ, returned triumphantly to their 
camp, bringing with them many horses and much booty. 
The next day the Turks collected their dead, and interred 
them in a mosque over the bridge, before the city gate. 
They buried with them their mantles and rich garments, 
adding, for the use of the deceased, their bows and quivers, 
and a large quantity of bezants. The Crusaders discovering 
this, dug up the bodies, and, having pillaged all the valuables, 
threw the mortal remains with contempt into one deep 
grave. They also drove to the city gate four mules' loads 
of the heads of the slain, to the inexpressible grief of the 
citizens and the Babylonish envoys. 

Three days afterwards, the crusaders began to erect the 
fortifications which have been already mentioned, and con- 
structed them of stones removed from the graves they had 



* Henry of Huntingdon and Matthew Paris, who both relate this asto- 
nishing feat of strength and dexterity, performed by Godfrey de Bouillon, 
describe also a parallel achievement of the duke of Normandy, only, in 
this case, the sword-cut, instead of being horizontal, clove the Turk through 
helmet, head, neck, and shoulders, down to the breast. 



A. D. 1098.] SIEGE OF ANTIOCH. 119 

disturbed.' When the works were sufficiently advanced, 
the Franks began to restrain the enemy within narrower 
bounds. They also commanded free communication with 
the hilly country, and were able to procure more liberal 
supplies of forage and other provender. Still they had not 
as yet pitched their tents on the other side the river, and the 
Turks had free egress in that quarter.^ 

A fort was therefore erected by common consent on the 
other side of the river,^ and the magnanimous Tancred 
engaged with the chiefs of the Franks to undertake to 
guard it, all the others declining its custody. Putting him- 
self, therefore, at the head of his fellow soldiers and retainers, 
he manned the works, closely blockaded the city, and kept 
strict watch over the roads and approaches. One day he 
caught the Syrians and Armenians conveying, as they were 
wont, large stores of supplies into the place, and instantly 
attacking them, got possession of the whole convoy, which 
he conducted in triumph to the camp. The inhabitants of 
Antioch and their adherents became now much alarmed, 
having suffered such frequent disasters and losses.* The 

' The tombstones of the Turkish cemetery furnished the materials for 
facing the two towers built by the Christians to flank the mo.-^que, which 
Peter Tudebode calls the devil's temple. Our author omits mentioning the 
convicts which took place on the bridge after these works were completed, 
as well as that at the same time they erected this fortification, the crusaders 
blocked up with timber and masses of rock, the bridge at the Dog-gate, 
which stood at the N.W., opposite the camp of the count of Tholouse, by 
which the besieged were constantly making very annoying and murderous 
sallies. This bridge formed a causeway over a marsh which lay between 
the city gate and the camp of the Crusaders. 

^ Our author liere makes a serious mistake. The formation of the 
entrenched camp entrusted to the count of St. Giles, had for its express 
object to exclude the besieged from the right bank of the Orontes, in which 
it succeeded ; and it is of that he means to speak, as Tancred's fort was 
erected on the other side of the river. 

^ This was another fort constructed, not as our author says, on the other 
side of the river, but on this side, viz., near the west gate, called the gate 
of St. George. It was erected on the site of an ancient monastery, and its 
ruins are still called ihe convent of St. George, which was probably the 
name of the monastery. Tancred engaged to build and defend it for 400 
silver marks. According to William of Tyre, he would have 100 marks 
for the building, and 40 marks per month for the pay of the garrison. 

* Ordericiis, as well as most historians of the crusades, have neglected to 
notice a truce concluded with the besiegers, which was interrupted by 
the murder of Walon, See Robert de St. Remi, 1. v. This event is, how- 



120 0£DEr.ICUS YITALIS. [c.IX. CH. IX. 

jFranks were of a fierce spirit, naturally daring, and well 
trained in the art of war, and in consequence had manfully 
undertaken this expedition into distant regions and among 
strange nations. In their difficulties they had recourse to 
God, invoked his aid in seasons of distress, and did frequent 
penitence for their human infirmities. 

One Pirrus Datianus,^ of Turkish origin, who held three 
towers in the city of Antioch, had formed a connection with 
Bohemond, of whom he had heard good reports, by means 
of confidential messengers who went to and fro between 
them. They had even frequent conferences through faithful 
interpreters, and signals, which were agreed on. Bohemond 
on some occasions tried to convert this person to Chris- 
tianity; sometimes he used all the arguments he could think 
of to induce him to betray the city to the besiegers, and left 
no means untried which would suggest themselves to a man 
of sagacity. At one time he impressed on him the calamities 
which impended on the citizens, at another he invited him 
to become a Christian by holding forth the rich rewards 
which were promised by the Divine goodness. At last 
Pirrus was persuaded by his noble friend to give him 
possession of the three towers,^ promising also to deliver 
his son a-3 an hostage, and recommending him to lose no 
time in completing the enterprise. The prudent Bohemond 
concealed the secret satisfaction he now felt, and sufi'ered 
no signs of it to appear in his countenance and conversation. 
He discoursed with the chiefs on the difficulty of taking the 

ever, one of the most interesting episodes connected with the siege of 
Antioch. According to Gilon's metrical narrative, the wife of this warrior 
must have been a daughter of Hugh the Great, named Humberge, who is 
not mentioned by the genealogists. 

1 Read Phirouss, and see in Ralph of Caen the motives which that 
author assigns for his conduct. Kemal-Eddin, historian of Aleppo, calls 
Phirouz Zerrad, or the armourer. It is impossible to conjecture what our 
author means by assigning to this person the surname of Datianus, which 
has nothing oriental about it. 

2 Phirouz did not put the crusaders in possession of three towers, but of 
one tower bearing the name of the Three Sisters, of which he had the 
custody, and another in the neighbourhood, where his brother commanded. 
These two towers, the ruins of which may still be seen, were not as lofty as 
those on the south ramparts, and might be escaladed without much 
difficulty. That of the Three Sisters is the^first to the south of the gate or" 
St. George, and the other is the second. 



A.D. 1098.] SIEGE or ANTIOCH. 121 

1 

city, the weariness of tlie protracted siege, and the exemplary 
constancy of the victorious army, and he proposed that the 
dominion of Antioch and its territory should be conferred, 
by common consent of the chiefs, on that one of their 
number who should obtain possession of it either for money, 
or by force of arms, or by fair means, or stratagem. The 
chiefs were far from lending a willing ear to this proposition, 
alleging that it should belong to them all, as they had con- 
tributed by their joint exertions to the success of the 
enterprise. After hearing the opinion of several of his 
companions, Bohemond observed a prudent silence, waiting 
for a favourable opportunity of accomplishing his object. 
Soon afterwards common report, the forerunner of evil, 
noised in the camp that the Turks, Publicans,^ Azulans, 
Azimites,^ and several other heathen nations, were on the 
march, and had leagued to make war on the crusaders. 
The truth of these reports of imminent peril was soon con- 
firmed by messengers who could be depended on. Thereupon 
the Christian chiefs, having consulted together, made a 
voluntary offer to Bohemond in the following terms : " You 
see the critical position of affairs ; if, therefore, you can get 
possession of the city either by fair words or for money, 
with all the assistance we can give you, it shall be yours by 
common consent, save only the fealty which, with your 
approbation, we swore to the emperor. If he keeps his 
engagements and comes to our aid, observing the terms of 

1 The text should be Populicani. They had separated from the sect of 
the Manichees, who took the name of Paulicians, from one Paul, who 
had introduced some innovations into their creed. Being favoured by the 
emperor Nicephorus (802 — July 25, 811) they founded a small state in 
Armenia. But, being persecuted by his successor in 812, and the empress 
Theodora in 848, they placed themselves under the protection of the 
caliphs, who gave them settlements in Cappadocia and Armenia the Less. 
There is a very curious letter from Lewis the Younger to the pope {Hist, 
lie Fr., XV. 790), which proves that the doctrines of this sect had not only 
reached the coast of France, which was always in communication with the 
East, but had penetrated into the most northern provinces of the kingdom. 
Several Manichean and Gnostic sects were also introduced in consequence 
of the crusades, and planted in various parts of the country, 

"^ Azimitea, a name given by the schismatic Greeks to the Latin catholics, 
But it is here- applied to some of the auxiliary forces of the Mussulmans. 
They were probably Christians who used unleavened bread for consecrating 
the host, according to the custom of the church of Home. 



122 OBDERICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.IX. 

4 

the treaty sworn between us, we will not perjure ourselves, 
bat you must allow us to say, we will surrender the place to 
him ; but if not it shall be for ever under your dominion." 

In consequence, Bohemond had frequent communications 
with Pirrus, who, nothing loth, sent him his son as hostage. 
"Let your herald," said he, "proclaim aloud throughout 
your camp, that the army of the Franks shall make prepara- 
tion to-day for entering the country of the Saracens to- 
morrow for the purpose of pillaging it ; and by this means 
our project will be concealed from both sides. When our 
people understand that the main body of the enemy is gone 
on a distant expedition, the strictness of their night-watch 
will be relaxed ; do you then hasten with great secrecy to fix 
scaling-ladders to the walls, and without making any noise, 
mount boldly, and take possession of the towers I have pro- 
mised to deliver to you. Then take your measures for com- 
pleting the enterprise; use your swords, and be not so 
stupid as to neglect any thing which ought to be done. I 
shall remain on the -watch myself, alive to all that passes, 
and anxiously expecting your arrival." 

Bohemond, therefore, ordered his herald, who was called 
Mala-Corona, to proclaim through the camp that all the 
troops were to proceed on the morrow to ravage the enemy's 
countr}^ However, he entrusted the entire secret to Duke 
Godfrey, to the count of Flanders, and the duke of Nor- 
mandy, and the count of Thoulouse, and bishop of Puy, and 
some of the other chiefs ; Tancred and his counsellors had 
been privy to the whole affair from the beginning."^ Ste- 
phen of Chartres was absent, being, as he said, detained by 
severe illness at Alexandretta, whither he had gone for the 
recovery of his health.^ The Christian army, ignorant of 

* This is incorrect. Tancred was not even one of the first of the 
crusaders who entered the city ; and he severely reproached Bohemond 
for having kept him in the dark respectino- his neo^ociations with Phirouz. 
See Ralph of Caen, Gesta Tancredi, Ixx. 

'^ This knight, to whom the crusaders had entrusted the supreme com- 
mand and the direction of their operations, had, indeed, the cowardice to 
retire to Alexandretta with four thousand men, under pretence of illness, a i 
very few days before Antioch was stormed. According to Fulcher of 
Chartres, he withdrew on the very eve of this important event. But it 
would seem almost impossible that, in his position of commander-in-chief, 
he had received no intelligence up to that late period of the understanding 



A.I>. 109S.] ANTIOCII TAKEX. ] 23 

%vhat was intended, marched out of the camp towards 
evening, and being led through some by-ways, found itself 
before dawn near the city, having reached it by the nearest 
roads. Meanwhile, Bohemond gave directions to his chosen 
followers to convey with great caution the scaling-ladders he 
had prepared to the wall, and mounting them confidently 
without noise, to accomplish the rest by their arms and 
courage as prudence should direct. A Lombard of the name 
of Paganus was the first to mount, though in considerable 
trepidation ; he was followed by Fulcher of Cbartres,^ Eoger 
de Barneville, Geoffrey Parented, de Castro Secred," and 
others to the number of about sixty, who were cautiously 
admitted by Pirrus and lodged in his towers. When, how- 
ever, he saw that no more followed, he was in great distress, 
and exclaimed, it is said, in his mother-tongue : Heu ! Heu! 
Jlikro Francos ecliomen ;^ that is, we have few Franks. Upon 
this the Lombard hastily descended the ladder, and called 
from above to Bohemond, who was waiting below : " What 
are you doing ? Are you asleep ? Send up instantly all 
you intend, for we are already in possesion of these towers 
without any loss ; otherwise you will lose us, as well as the 
city, and ruin your friend, who has trusted you with his 
hopes and even his life." On hearing this, Bohemond and 

which subsisted bet.ween Bohemond and Phirouz, and wovild not have 
remained in the camp twenty-four hours longer to wait the result. 

^ It appears that there were no less than four persons in the crusade of 
this name and surname : — 

1 . Fulcher of Chartres, the historian, who was chaplain to Baldwin of 
Boulogne. 

2. Fulcher of Chartres, liere mentioned as the second who scaled the 
walls of Antioch. According to Raymond d'Aigles, he was the first ; and 
that author calls him " the brother of Budell of Chartres, not improbably 
the Bartholomew Boell, before-mentioned among the followers of Bohe- 
mond. 

3. Fulcher of Chartres, who, according to Albert d'Aix, was slain at the 
same time as Walter Sans-Avoir, before Civitot. 

4. Last, Fulcher of Chartres, to whom Baldwin gave the government of 
Balasen in Armenia. 

According to Ralph of Caen, the first crusader who escaladed the walls 
of Antioch, was not Fulcher, but Gouel of Chartres ; perhaps, by a mis- 
reading the Eoell already mentioned. 

2 Castel-Sagrat, a little town near Agen, which, in the sixteenth century, 
belonged to a branch of the family of Gironde. 



124 OSDERICUS TITALT3. [b.IX. CH.IX. 

those who were witli liim, made for the wall as quick as 
thought, and a great number mounting the ladder, estab- 
lished themselves on the summit, and occupied, under the 
guidance of Pirrus, seven more towers. Cutting down 
every one they found within, thej spread themselves along 
the walls, and rushed shouting through the streets, giving 
no quarter to all tbey met. The inhabitants, weary with 
the evils of a long siege, were roused with difficulty, and 
issued from their houses half asleep and unarmed. In this 
drowsy condition, and confused by the shouts of the assail- 
ants they rushed wildly out, unprepared for action, and, not 
knowing what was going on, mistook enemies for friends ; 
so that wherever they appeared, they were struck down and 
butchered like sheep. Even the uterine brother of Pirrus 
was killed among the rest.^ Meanwhile, so many crowded 
on the ladder to mount the walls, that it slipped down and 
was broken, so that none of the others who were waiting 
below at the foot of the walls could render any assistance to 
their comrades fighting above. But in their distress, a 
remedy was supplied by the mercy of God ; for by his pro- 
vidence they found not far from the ladder, on feeling to 
the left, a gate ^ which they had seen some days before when 
reconnoitring the ground, and breaking it down forced an 
entrance. Then the cries grew louder, and the Christians 
had freer scope for fighting their way, while the Turks, over- 
come with sleep and wine, were plunged into the deeper sleep 
of death. Endeavouring to escape the perils that threatened 
them, they encountered the Christian troops, and when 
seeking to avoid their attacks, rushed on immediate death 
in some other quarter. By Bohemond's orders his standard 
Avas planted in the city, near the citadel which stood on the 
top of a hill. 

The Christians got possession of Antioch on Wednesday, 

* Most of the historians state that this brother was killed by Phirouz 
himself, to furnish the crusaders with a striking prooof of his firmness of 
purpose. 

■■' M. Pojoulat thinks that this might be the gate of Olives, now called 
Bab-Zetou7i, to the south of the gate of St. George ; or rather another 
small gate, which has a cross over it (perhaps in remembrance of this event), 
which stood at the foot of the first or most western of the four hillocks 
included in the defence of Antioch. 



1098.] THE ASSAULT. 125 

the third of the nones [3rd] of June/ having put to the 
sword vast numbers of the Pagans. On that night, neither 
age nor sex, nor condition of any sort, received quarter ; in 
its darkness the assailants were unable to distinguish the 
difference of sex. When day dawned, those who remained 
in the camp, roused by the tumultuous shouts of the people 
and the clang of the trumpets, beheld the ensign of Bohe- 
mond floating over the city, and, recognizing it, rejoiced at 
the capture of the place. No time was lost in rushing to 
the gates and getting in they seconded their companions 
with their whole force. Wherever the Turks were found con- 
tri\dng to escape they were butchered on the spot ; some 
few only got away through the gates without being disco- 
vered by the impetuous Franks. 

Cassian,^ the chief of the Turks and emir of Antioch, 
escaped among these fugitives, and rode at full speed to the" 
territory occupied by Tancred,^ but the horse he had mounted 
and those of his attendants were so exhausted that he was 
forced to take refuge in a mean hut. As soon, however, as 
the Syrians and Armenians, inhabitants of that district who 
had suffered much under Cassian, discovered his retreat, they 
rushed upon him, to the number of twenty, and seizing him 
cut off his head* and brought it to Bohemond ; thus securing 

^ Tuesday, June 3, 1098 ; not Wednesday, as our author states. He is 
not the only writer who dates the capture of Antioch from the moment at 
which Phirouz admitted the crusaders into his tower, which was towards 
the close of June 2. The romance of Godfrey de Bouillon, whicli echoes 
the received traditions, says, 

Antioche fut prise un Mercredi au soir. 

"^ The true name of the governor of Antioch (who is called Caspian by 
Stephen de Blois, Darsian by Albert d'Aix, Baghitian, Gratian.. &c., by 
other historians) appears from the oriental writers to have been Bagui-Siariy 
He was one of the Seljucide princes. 

' The territory here described as belonging to Tancred was that part of 
Cilicia which had been conquereu by that brave knight before the siege, 
including the cities of Malmestra, Alexandretta, Laodicea, &c. In the 
letter of Stephen de Blois to his wife Adela, which was dated the 2.9th of 
March, he tells her that the Christian army already held one hundred and 
sixty towns and castles in Syria. 

• * Albert d'Aix draws a strikirg likeness of this governor's head : " It 
was," he says^ " of an extraordirary size ; the ears were Lirge and hairy ; 
his hair was grey, as well as his beard which flowed from his chin down to 
his navel." 



126 ORDERICUS VITALIS. [b.IX. ClI.X. 

hisfavourandtlieir own liberty. Thus perished Cassiaii, misled 
by his ill-fortune: it is uncertain whether he fled at random, 
without any plan of escape, or was on his way to seek for 
succour among his countrymen. But it is clear that if he 
had retired into the citadel, he would have done better. 
The streets and squares were so incumbered with corpses, 
that no one could pass them without difficulty, and those who 
traversed them were struck with horror and sickened by the 
intolerable stench. 

Ch. X. The Turks hold the citadel of Antioch, after the 
capture of tlie place — A combined army of Moslems invest 
the city — Sufferings of the crusaders besieged in it — They 
gain a great victory, and the citadel surrenders. 

Great numbers of those who had flocked to the defence of 
Antioch, on hearing rumours that it was on the point ot 
being taken, were put to the sword. Some escaped by taking 
refuge in the citadel ; others sought safety in flighty Sensar 
dolus,^ Gassian's son, fled to Curboran," commander of the 
forces of Soldan king of Persia, and with tears in his eyes 
informed him of the sad misfortunes of his father and his 
country. Cassian had sent frequent messages to this chief, 
during the siege of "Antioch by the armies of the West, to 
entreat him to march to the relief of the place. Three days 
after the city was taken,^ Sensadolus yielded himself up to 
Curboran with the citadel which commanded the place and 
all that he possessed, and moved him with tears and prayers 
and promises to undertake an expedition against the 

' For Sensadolus, we find some other historians writing the name Sensa- 
donias or Sanzedona, a corraption, perhaps of Schems-Eddaule, the Sun- 
of-the-Empire, a title of honour, conformable to the usages of the court ot 
the Seljucide sultans. It appears that this son of Bagui-Sian surrendered 
the city with great reluctance to Kerboga, who made it an absolute condi- 
tion of his interference. 

' Curboran. Kerboga, prince of Mossoul, and lieutenant of the Selju- 
cide sultan Barkiarok, son of Malek Shah, who governed the East under 
the nominal authority of the caliph Mostadher, son of Moctadi-Bamrillah. 

^ It was on Saturday, the 5th of May, the second day after Antioch was 
taken, that the citadel was given in charge to an officer appointed by Ker- 
boga. M. Pojoulat informs us that this fortress, of which the ruins are 
still to be seen, was rectangular, and surmounted by fourteen small towers, 
Reven to the east and seven to the west, as the author of the History of thu 
Holy War states. 



A.D. 1098.] THE MOSLEMS INVEST AJsTIOCH. 127 

Christians. This emir was brave and warlike, prudent and 
wealthy, and ambitious of glory. He had received permission 
from the caliph,^ the chief of his religion, to persecute the 
Christians, and he had sworn never to return until he had 
subdued Syria and Eomania, and even Apulia. He felt great 
confidence in his resources, having: countless multitudes of 



many nations under his command. The king of Damascus' 
and the emir of Jerusalem,^ were his allies, and Turks and 
Agarenes, Arabs and Publicans, Azimites, Curds and Persians, 
with three thousand Agulans followed his standard. The 
Agulans wore steel armour, impenetrable by arrows or darts, 
and used no other arms but swords in their battles. This 
vast hostile army pitched their camp at the Iron-Bridge, 
taking by assault the fort there and putting the whole 
garrison to the sword, except the commander, who was 
bound with iron fetters and found in chains at the end of 
the war.* The Agarenes took some miserable arms from a 
few poor wretches, such as a rusty sword, a small lance, and 
a useless bow, and sent them in derision of the Eranks, to 
Curboran, who sent them to Chorasan with insulting 
mockery and vain boasts, intended to rally the ignorani; 
idolaters against the Christians. 

While these occurrences were taking place, Curboran' s 
mother arrived from Aleppo on a visit to her son, and 
severely blamed him for engaging in his present enterprise, 

^ The caliph's commission could only be nominal, the real power having 
been vested, as we have already seen, in his lieutenant Barkiaroh. As for 
licence to kill the Christians, nothing but the ignorance of the manners of 
the Turks which prevailed among the authors of the middle ages, could have 
led til em to think it necessary to be armed with it. 

^ Dekak, sultan of Damascus, son of Totousch. 

3 Sokman, son of Ortok. The western writers omit in this list Genah- 
Eddaule, prince of Emessa, and Vatab, son of Mahmoud, chief of some 
hordes of Nomade Arabs. The Mussulman army assembled towards the 
end of May in the neighbourhood of Aleppo. The implacable hatred 
which subsisted between Dekak and his brother Radonan, prince of 
Aleppo, appears to have been the cause of much dissension in the Mussul- 
man camp. The intrigues of the former were particularly directed to act on 
the Turcomans, whose precipitate retreat at the first onset threw disorder 
into the ranks of the infidel army. 

* It was on the 6th of June that the troops of Kerboga carried the two 
towers by assault ; he then approached the city and remained two days in 
inaction. 



128 ORDERICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.X. 

predicting in the clearest terms that he would be defeated 
by the Christians, and perish wiMiin the year, not in battle, 
but by sudden death. This woman was very aged, being as 
much as a hundred years old ; she foretold future events, 
consulting the stars, and being skilled in generation,^ and 
many other sciences. The boastful prince soothed his dis- 
tressed mother by lofty promises, and three days afterwards, 
taking arms, led a powerful force to the citadel whicli had 
been ceded to him. The crusaders marched out to oppose 
the advance of the Ishmaelites, but were unable to withstand 
so numerous and strong an army. They were quickly 
forced to retire into the city, and the crush was so great 
at the narrow entrance of the gates, that many were suffo- 
cated, the Turks pressing on them with great impetuosity.'^ 
Despair spread through the ranks of the crusaders ; some 
however consoled the rest and taiked of battle on the 
morrow. Some few, overcome by disgraceful and un- 
founded apprehensions, to their eternal shame, thought of 
making their escape during the night. William de (jrant- 
mesniP and his brother Alberic, Guy Troussel^ and Lambert 
the Poor,^ with several others, were so terrified by the battle 
of the preceding day, and so anxious to escape the coming 
conflict, that they let themselves down from the walls by 

* Geniculorum. Our author means to say that Kerboga's mother was 
versed in the superstitions of the Gnostics. It is not very likely that she 
lived at Aleppo, while her son was prince of Mossoul. Ordericus has shown 
his good sense in sparing the recital of the long dialogue, embellished by 
quotations from the Bible, which most of the historians have put into the 
mouths of these two persons. 

* This happened on Tuesday the 10th of June. The battle lasted the 
whole of the next day. 

* Brother-in-law of Bohemond. Ralph of Caen positively states that 
Ivo de Grautmesnil also joined his brother in this disgraceful transaction. 

"* Peter de Tudebode r; ''resents that Guy Troussel did not leave the 
army till this period, and adds to the list of deserters two others, one named 
William de Bernouville, the other William, son of Richard. 

^ Lambert, surnamed the Poor, count of Clermont, near Huy, in the 
province of Li^e, and after his father's death, of Montagu (see vol. ii p. 75). 
They both followed Godfrey de Bouillon, their brother and uncle, to the 
Holy Land, and Lambert returning in 1 105 with Peter the Hermit, founded 
in the suburbs of Huy a monastery of regular canons of the order of St. 
Augustin, of which Peter became the superior. It is supposed t^Jat 
Lambert was the second husband of Gertrude, daughter of Theodore 
d'Alsace, count of Flanders, and that he died in the year 1147. 






A.D. 1098.] DESERTION AMONG THE CRUSADERS. 129 

ropes. In consequence of their everlasting sliame, they 
were called the sneaking Funambulists.^ Walking all 
night through a rocky country full of precipices, they 
arrived on foot, their hands and feet excoriated, with many 
companions, at the port of St. Simeon. They found a 
number of ships lying there, and terrified the crews, 
who were already in a state of great uncertainty by 
their alarming reports, giving out that the Turks had 
re-taken Antioch and massacred all the Christians. On 
receiving this intelligence, some of the sailors cut their 
cables, and leaving their anchors, put out to sea, hoisting 
their sails obliquely to the wind ; others, more slow in 
their movements, dissembled their intentions ; but all were 
filled with alarm and consternation. In the midst of this, 
the Turks who watched the coast, suddenly made their 
appearance, and putting to the sword the timid sailors, 
unprepared for defence, pillaged the ships which remained 
in port, and setting them on fire, massacred the cowards 
without ceremony. 

The brave defenders of the city stood their ground all 
day against the attacks of the Turks, and by a sudden 
thought of the chiefs, ran up a loose wall of rough stones 
without mortar between the town and the citadel.^ This 
useful barricade afforded shelter to the Christians in their 
defence of the place, while it seriously checked the assaults 
of the Turks. The Franks manned the wall with great 
zeal, constantly armed for battle, and neither indulging in 
sleep, nor occupying themselves with any other cares. 
Meanwhile famine began to spread among the Christians, 
and they were compelled to live on horses, asses, and other 
unclean things. In this extremity, the faithful invoked 
the Lord, and he heard their prayers. 

The Lord Jesus appeared surrounded by a company of 
saints, to a priest who was watching by night in the church 
of St. Mary, while engaged in prayer for the suflfering people 
.of God, and complained that the soldiers of the cross pol- 
luted themselves by fornications with both foreign and 

1 They made their escape in the night of Friday, the 11th or probably 
the 12th of June. 

2 According to Peter Tudebode, this wall was not built until after the 
fire. 

YOL. Til. K 



130 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.X. 

Christian harlots, adding severe threats on the debauched 
multitude. While lie spoke a radiant crucifix shone over 
his head, by which the priest recognised the Eedeemer of 
the world, and he fell on his face and worshipped. Then 
the blesed Mary, mother of mercy, and St. Peter, prince of 
the apostles, fell at the feet of the Lord the Saviour, and 
endeavoured to soften his anger by devout intercessions for 
the afSicted Christians, complaining of the pagans who had 
polluted the holy temple of Grod by their foul superstitions. 
When the holy mother and the apostle had finished their 
supplications, the Saint of saints yielded to them, and with 
a serene countenance commanded the priest to publicly 
rebuke the people and call them to repentance ; and then, 
when they were truly converted, to promise in the name 
of God that divine help should be afforded them in their 
need within five days. The priest afiirmed his report of 
tliis vision on oath upon the holy gospels and the crucifix, 
before the bishop of Puy and all the people. The multitude 
immediately gave way to lamentations, and exhorted 
one another to the confession of their sins. They were 
seen on all sides praying in the churches, with tears in 
their eyes and ashes on their heads and naked feet, implor- 
ing help and counsel from the Lord. The chiefs all swore, 
by a unanimous resolution, that not one of them while he 
lived would retire from the confederation until he had 
reached Jerusalem and kissed the holy sepulchre of Christ. 
Tancred also swore that as long as he had fifty soldiers he 
would never abandon the expedition to Jerusalem. This 
declaration much animated the Christians, restoring their 
courage and filling them -with joy. 

Peter Abraham, a Proven9al clerk, related the following 
vision to his companions. " During the siege of Antioch," 
he said, "when we were undergoing much suffering and 
severe privations, St. Andrew the apostle appeared to me, 
and upon my asking his name, told it, and taking me to the 
church of St. Peter in this city,^ pointed to a certain spot, 
and said, ' I wish you to know that when you shall be in 
possession of Antioch, you will find here the spear which 
pierced the Lord the Saviour's side on the cross. This 

' M. Pojoulat could find no vestiges of this church, nor, indeed, of any- 
other remiiins of the Chriatian monuments in Antioch. 






109S.] CITADEL or a^hTioch besieged. 131 

weapon is very lioly, and the Christians ought especially to 
revere it.' With these words ttfe apostle vanished, and I 
had not confidence enough in any one to reveal the vision. 
On the city being taken, the apostle again appeared to me 
and said, ' Paint-hearted man, why have you not removed 
the spear ?' I replied, ' My lord, if I should tell of it, who 
would believe me ?' ' Despair not,' said the apostle, ' but 
know for certain that all I have said and shown you is very 
true. This revelation will confer great benefits on the 
harassed Christians, as it will inspire them with a holy 
confidence in this spear. "Within five days the Lord will 
visit them, and deliver them by his power from the hands 
of tlieir enemies.'" Peter made known this divine revelation 
to his companions, but the people disbelieved him, and 
laughed at his assertions. However he persisted in them, 
and confirmed them by his oath, and the people at last 
placed confidence in him, and recovered courage to bear 
their sufterings. 

Meanwhile, the Turks in the castle made frequent sallies 
on the Franks, which they resisted with all their might. 
In the first conflict Eoger de Barneville was slain,^ and 
buried by the Christians in the church of St. Peter, with 
deep sorrow, for he was a Norman of great distinction, and 
a handsome and gallant knight. On one occasion, the 
Turks blockaded three Christians in one of the towers, and 
the Pranks, worn out with their distresses, could afford them 
210 relief. However, two of them though severely wounded, 
contrived to make their escape from the tower, and Hugh 
de Porsennat, a brave warrior belonging to the troop of God- 
frey de Monte-Scabioso, was left alone, and stoutly defended 
himself the whole day. He cut down two Turks with 
his own hand, having no one to support him, and singly 
withstood the attacks of his assailants. He was, indeed, a 
bold and resolute man, and deserved praise more than any 
of the combatants. • But the spirit of our people must have 
been then broken by their severe disasters, when they saw 
a comrade fighting all day single-handed without attempting 
to succour him, and heard his cries without answering them.. 

* It was not by the Turks from the citadel, but those who were encamped 
outside the walls, in one of whose attacks Roger de Barneville fell as early 
us the Cth of May, probably in the marsh near the Dog's-gate. 

K 2 



132 ORDErvicus TiTALis. [b.ix. cn.x. 

"When the chiefs summoned the soldiers to action, they did 
not appear ; when the tr\impets sounded, they concealed 
themselves in the houses. IN ay, helpless and fainting, they 
shrunk from the contest they had long desired, and were so 
disheartened and reckless that they desired death. 

Bohemond and the other chiefs, perceiving that the 
courage of the troops had so entirely failed that they could 
not even prevail on them to man the wall between the castle 
and the city, set fire to the town in order to drive the 
skulking cowards from the houses and hiding places in which 
they concealed themselves.^ The fire was lighted in that 
part of the city where the palace of Cassian towered over 
the rest, and it continued burning from the third hour of 
day to midnight. About two thousand houses and churches 
were laid in ruins. At last, the flames went out in conse- 
quence of the wind becoming calm. When the fire 
penetrated to the lodgings of the Christians, after hastily 
snatching up their booty, they were now compelled to join 
their chiefs, who assigned to each his station at the city 
gates to keep watch and ward. Then a severe conflict took 
place between the Eranks and the Turks in the citadel ; 
they came to close quarters and fought hand to hand, nor 
was the battle interrupted for a moment. The Turks being 
superior in numbers, better fed, and engaging by turns in 
successive divisions, left no means of annoyance untried, 
boldly rushed on the Pranks, threw themselves fearlessly 
into the midst of the fight, and encouraged one another. 
The I^ranks, on the other hand, beyond measure distressed, 
could hardly stand, and no respite was allowed them 
either to take food or rest. They therefore commenced 
carrying up a lofty wall cemented with lime, as the Turks 
had easily thrown down the other built of loose stones. 

One night a blazing light was seen hanging in the heavens 
in the western quarter,' which seemed to fall on the Turkish 

^ According to Ralph of Caen, it was the count of Flanders who set fire 
to the city, but Peter Tudehode, an eye-witness, asserts positively that this 
measure was adopted* by Bohemond, as our author intimates. 

2 This phenomenon, perhaps the aurora-borealis, whs also visible in Nor- 
mandy ; Ralph of Caen was eye-witness of it. According to Florence of 
Worcester, it did m t >ipp( ar until the •27th of September, several months 
after the period asssigned here. 



JUNE, 1098.] FAMINE AT ANTIOCn. 133 

citadel and rage within it, and although it did no injury to 
the Gentiles, it filled them with alarm and disquietude. 
To the Christians it aflbrded comfort and joy ; and both 
the people took it for a sign from heaven. The garrison of, 
the citadel spent the whole day in hurling spears and darts, 
and inflicted wounds upon wounds. The besiegers had so 
closely invested the city from without that by day there was 
110 possibility of ingress or egress ; some however contrived 
to go out by night, but by stealth, and with much appre- 
hension. The famine continually increased and tormented 
the Christians beyond all belief; many indeed died of hunger. 
A small cake baked on the embers, if perchance it could be 
procured, cost a bezant. The flesh of horses and asses was 
esteemed a dainty fit for an emperor, fowls were worth fifteen 
pence each. An egg sold for twopence, a walnut for a 
farthing, and the vilest commodities fetched several staters. 
It would be wearisome to detail the various sufferings, 
miseries, and torments, which the Christian soldiers endured 
for the thirty-six days^ they were blockaded in the place. 
It was by such trials that the Almighty proved his champions, 
trying them in the furnace of affliction to purge them from 
their guilt, in order to give them a glorious triumph when 
purified from their sins. 

Meanwhile Stephen, count of Chartres, had retired to 
Alexandretta for the recovery of his health,^ and was detained 
there for some time, as it is said, by sickness. The crusaders 
impatiently waited his return, as all the chiefs looked to him 
as their prime leader and counsellor f for he was a man of 
great eloquence and singular ability. Having heard that 
the" Turks had invested the city, he cautiously ascended the 

^ This computation is much too low ; the crusaders were blockaded in 
Antioch nearly two months. 

* See before p. 122, where our author raises the same doubt whether the 
sickness was not pretended. Alexandretta is called by the Turks Scande- 
roun, giving its name to the gulf at the bottom of which it is built, on the 
opposite shore to Antioch. At any rate, it was a bad place to choose for 
the re-establishment of health. Its neighbourhood to pestilential marshes 
makes it quite uninhabitable at present during the heats of summer. 

^ Stephen, count of Chartres and Blois tells his wife Adele, in his letter 
to her, which is extant, that this pre-eminence was conferred on him by 
the chiefs with the common consent of the whole army, agahist liis will. 
See note in ch. ix. p. 122, on the previous conduct of this general of the 
crusaders. 



334! OHDEEICTJS VITJiLTS. [b.IX. CH. X. 

hills above Alexandretta, which is not very far from Ar.tioch, 
and saw from the heights the inDiimerable tents of the Turks, 
and their forces covering the plains like the sand on the sea 
shore ; nor could he fail of comprehending the condition of 
the small body of crusaders shut up in the beleaguered city. 
This spectacle filled him with such consternation, that he fled 
with his attendants from the spot in the utmost haste, and, 
using great precaution, returned to his fortress, which he 
stripped of everything. He then retreated in the direction 
in which the emperor Alexius ^as advancing with a powerful 
army to the relief of the besieged, and, falling in with him 
at the town of Philomenes,^ called him aside and thus 
addressed him : "You have received certain intelligence of 
the capture of Antioch by the crusaders, but the Turks 
retain possession of the citadel which is very strong and 
commands the town. They also blockade and besiege our 
troops who are in the occupation of the place, or I should 
rather say they have taken it by assault and put the Christians 
to the sword. Look, therefore, to your own safety and that 
of your troops." 

Guy, Bohemond's brother, and numbers both of Franks 
and Greeks were hastening to the succour of the besieged, 
but the emperor, summoning them to his presence announced 
his determination. He then issued orders for the retreat of 
the whole army, laying waste all the country round, and 
making the inhabitants retire into Bulgaria, so that if the 
Turks should attempt to pursue them they might fail of 
finding subsistence in the depopulated region. The sad news 
too easily promulgated by the credulous count, plunged the 
people of God in the deepest affliction. For three days the 
bishops, abbots, and priests, discontinued the prayers and 
praises of divine worship and abandoned themselves to sighs 
and groans. The emperor, giving too much credence to the 
report of Stephen of Chartres, returned to Constantinople, 
and the glory of victory and triumph over the Turks was 
reserved for others to whom it rightfully belonged. The 
Franks retreated with the utmost reluctance bitterly lament- 
ing the order, and many of the poorer pilgrims died here and 
there on the road. 

Guy, Kobert Guiscard's son, poured forth unceasing 
' Philomelium, near Antiochctta. 



Jr>"E, 1098.] DISCOYEUT OP THE HOLT SPEAT?. 135 

lamentations for the fate of liis brotlier and his friends, so as 
to draw tears both from his acquaintance and from strangers, 
while at the same time he overwhelmed Stephen of Chartres 
with reproaches. However, he had no choice but to return, 
sorrowing, with the emperor and his auxiliary forces. 

And now the soldiers of God in Antioch, being reduced to 
the last extremity, placed all their hopes in heaven, and 
consulted with confidence on the means of discovering the 
holy spear. In consequence they assembled in the church 
of St. Peter, and long disputes were held respecting the place 
where it was to be found. At length the opinion of the 
majority prevailed, and thirteen strong and laborious men 
were employed in carefully digging. They turned up the 
soil from morning until evening, and at last found the spear 
in the presence of the same Peter to whom it had been 
revealed.^ It was lifted from the spot among general acclama- 
tions, crowds of people running to see it, and covering it 
with kisses of devotion. Their joy was so great, that, no 
longer dispirited, they forgot their griefs, and from that 
moment took courage to think of war. 

The Christians agreed in council that two enterprising 
men, Peter the Hermit and Herluin, who spoke the Turkish 
language, should proceed on a mission to Curboran, and, on 
the part of G-od and his people, enjoin him and his followers 
to retire peaceably with all they possessed from the city which 
St. Peter the apostle had converted to Christ. They added 
that if the Turks aspired to the sacrament of baptism, the 
Christians would receive them as real brothers, and would 
make a treaty of perpetual peace with them: if not they 
might arm themselves and prepare for battle, if they dared.- 
Curboran received with disdain the message of the envoys, 
and, utterly rejecting the proposal that he should embrace 
Christianity, he treated the crucified King with contempt, 
called St. Peter a superstitious impostor, and said that our 
religion was a most absurd sect. He called on the Christians 

^ The discovery was made, according to Peter Tudebode, on the 14th of 
June ; others say the 19th. Bohemond's excellent arguments against the 
genuineness of the holj spear, may be seen in Ralph de Caen, ch. cii. 

2 If the Oriental writers are to be believed, this mission had no other 
object but to obtain an honourable capitulation ; but all the Latin writers 
put into Peter the Hermit's mouth language similar to that employed by 
oar author. 



136 OEDERICUS yiTALIS. [e.IX. CH.X. 

to believe in Mahomet, and recommended them, if they con- 
temned his faith to take to flight. The envoys, proceeding 
on their journey in return, hastily made their appearance, 
and assured the Christian army that a battle was at hand. 
Meanwhile the famine increased, and fear of the Turks still 
somewhat unmanned the courage of the timid. Having at 
length completed a fast of three days enjoined by the priests, 
and chanted litanies in processions to the churches, while every 
Christian man prepared himself for death by taking the host 
as a viaticum, the crusaders were arrayed for battle, being 
formed into seven divisions in the heart of the city. 

In the first di\dsion, Hugh the Great, with Eobert earl of 
Flanders, took the command of thirty thousand Erenchmen 
and riemings. 

In the second division were stationed Duke Godfrey and 
Eustace his brother with Count Conon^ and thirty thousand 
of the bravest warriors of Germany, Lorraine, and Boulogne. 

In the third division Duke Eobert was at the head of his 
Normans, with fifteen thousand troops from Maine, Anjou, 
Brittany, and England. 

The fourth division included Aimar, bishop of Puy, with 
the rest of the bishops and ecclesiastics, among whom was 
Peter Abraham, who bore the lance of our Lord;'^ the 
crusaders being desirous to have it carried before them, and 
believing that it was their great safeguard and protection. 

In the fifth division was Kainald,^ a valiant count, with four 
thousand men of Teutonic and Bavarian race. 

^ Con on, the first count of Montagu, mentioned in history, was son of 
Gozelon, count of Bohagne, who died in 1064, and Ermentrude d'Harenzey. 
Notwithstanding the sileiTce of the French genealogists it seems certain 
that Conon was brother-in-law of Godfrey and Baldwin, by his marriage 
with their sister Ida of Boulogne. This nobleman, who appears to huve 
returned from the Holy Land with his son Lambert and Peter the Hermit 
in 1101, died the 30th of April, 1105, at the castle of Dolhain, near 
Liege, and was buried at Dinant. The castle of I\Iontagu stood on the 
banks of the Ourthe, between Marche and La Roclie, in the urovince of 
Luxembourg. 

2 It was Raymond d'Agiles, the historian of this crusade, and canon of 
Tuy, and Adhemar's chaplain, who carried the holy lance. 

•'' Tliis is incorrect. At first there were only six divisions, and Peter 
Tudebode savs : " In the fifth was Tancred, son of the marquis, with Gaston 
of Beam and his va?sals, and the followers of the count of Poitou." Such 
troops as there were from Germany and the eastern part of France, com- 



JU^^E, 1098.] BATTLE OF ANTIOCH. 137 

The sixth, composed of four thousand men-at-arms from 
Apulia, was led by Tancred. 

The seventh was under the command of Bohemond, duke 
of Apulia, and numbered thirty thousand Lombards and 
Italians. This division was the last to march out of the city, 
and was to provide against all emergencies, and be a reserve 
to support the other divisions in time of need. 

Eaymond, count of Tholouse,^ remained with twenty 
thousand troops to guard the city, and prevent any assault 
by the Gentiles, who, to the number of many thousands, 
occupied the camp of St. Peter near the walls. While the 
Christians marched out, the bishops and priests exhorted 
and prayed, standing on elevated spots, from which they 
made the sign of the adorable cross over all the troops as 
they passed. 

As the divisions in regular order marched out of the city- 
gate, which is near the Mosque,^ imploring from their inmost 
souls the powerful succour of the merciful God, a gentle 
rain fell from the skies, its still drops moistening and 
refreshing the horses and riders like morning dew. The 
steeds gave token of their satisfaction by beginning to 
neigh, and the spirits of the horsemen were invigorated by 
the cooling moisture, while the whole army was exhilarated, 
and moved with increased alacrity. Yet the shower was so 
gentle and evanescent that it could hardly be called rain, but 
soft dewdrops which were felt rather than seen. This is 
related by many persons worthy of credit who were witnesses 
of it. 

As soon as Curboran ^ perceived that the Christians were 

posed part of Godfrey's division. Later in the day, a seventh division was 
hastily formed from those of Godfrey and the duke of Normandy, upon ita 
being observed that the manoeuvres of the Mussulmans tended to cut off 
entirely tlie retreat of the crusaders, either towards Antioch, or to the port 
of St. Simeon, by means of a body of troops which occupied the right bank 
of the Orontes from the sea to the bridge of Antioch. This seventh divi- 
sion was commanded by the count de Toul. Our author himself gives an 
account of this a little further on. 

^ The count of Tholouse was detained at Antioch in consequence of a 
wound. 

2 The Bridge-gate. The principal contest lay on the right bank of the 
Orontes, betwe-jn the river and the Black Mountains. Kerboga com- 
manded in person on the left bank. 

2 Kerboga, prince of Mosaoul^ see note before p. 12G, most of the his- 



138 ORDETIICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. CK.X. 

marcliing out to battle, he said : " These people are 
hastening rather to flj than to fight ; let them approach ua 
quite close, that we may have them in our power to devour 
at our leisure. Let them march out! Let them march 
out! We will presently surround them, and defeat and 
crush them ! " The Christians, however, marched forward, 
keeping the step, no one breaking the ranks by undue haste. 
Curboran, seeing them approach under arms in such good 
order, without wavering as if they were under any alarm, 
but keeping the measured time and pace, — did not blush 
to add : " These worthless curs seem as if they mean to 
venture on fighting." He was then struck with sudden terror, 
his limbs lost their powers, and his heart was frozen. In 
consequence, he gave secret orders to his lieutenant, who is 
called an emir, that if he saw the smoke from a fire lighted 
in front of the army,^ he might conclude that his comrades 
were certainly defeated, and should immediately give the 
signal for retreat, and withdraw the troops under his com- 
mand, that the whole body who were with him, and in the 
camp, might not be cut off. Then, seeing the Christians 
advancing in good order and in greater force than his reports 
had said, he began to retire by degrees towards the moun- 
tains,^ in order that the Franks, supposing they had taken 
to flight, might pursue them with impetuosit}^, and breaking 
their order, might be more easily attacked. Finding that 
this manoeuvre failed, the Turkish army was divided into 
two bodies, one of which advanced on the side towards the 
sea, while the other stood fast, hoping thus to place the 
Christians between them. But the Franks detached a body 
of troops from the division commanded by Duke Grodfrey 
and Eobert the Norman, thus forming an eighth division, 

torians assert that the general was playing chess when the near approach of 
the Christian army was announced to him. 

^ Raymond d'Agiles and William of Tyre assign a more natural cause for 
this setting the dry grass on fire. According to them, the Mussulmans had 
recourse to this expedient without premeditation, and to stop the impetuous 
pursuit of the crusaders. 

- The Black Mountains, according to "William of Tyre, the Mount 
Pierius of the ancients, now called by the Arabs Gebel-el-Hamar (the Red 
Mountains). Seven rivulets or torrents take their rise in them, all of which 
discharge their Avaters into the Orontes. The mountains are situate one 
hour distant from Antioch. 



jl':jte, 1098.] the saint-watitiioiis. 139 

which thej placed under the command of one Eainald/ -with 
directions to oppose the advance of the Pagans from the 
side towards the sea. These troops were instantly attacked 
by the Turks, and numbers of them fell by showers of 
arrows or by death cruelly inflicted in other ways. The 
other divisions of the Christian army extended their lines 
from the sea to the foot of the mountains, a space of about 
two miles. 

The Turks charged them with vigour on both flanks, 
skilfully endeavouring to surround them and extend their 
attacks on all sides. But in this emergency, thanks be to 
Grod, there was seen to issue forth from the heart of the 
mountains, a countless host, mounted on white horses, and 
carrying white banners. This spectacle was witnessed by 
many of the Christians, and it is believed, of the Gentiles, 
who, in their first surprise, did not know what to make of 
it. At last, both parties became sensible that it was a 
manifestation from heaven, and recognized in the leaders of 
the celestial army the holy martyrs St. G-eorge, St. Deme- 
trius, and St. Mercury,^ marching at the head and carrying 

^ See just before p. 136, and the note. The Rainald here mentioned 
rather slightingly is the same person described in the former passage as *' a 
valiant count" — the count de Toul. The author of the History of the 
Holy War has given the clearest account of this battle. Ho says : " The 
Turks were divided into two bodies ; one went towards'the sea, and the other 
stood firm, thinking to enclose our army between them. Then there was 
formed a seventh division from that of Duke Godfrey and the count of 
Normandy, and it was placed under the command of Count Rainald. This 
division was ordered to oppose the trooj s of the enemy advancing from the 
sea coast." 

2 These three saints belonged to the Eastern church. 

St. George, of whose history there are few authentic remains, is supposed 
to have been a native of Lycia, and to have suffered martyrdom at Lydda, 
in Palestine, as we shall presently find, on the 23rd of April. 

St. Demetrius is a name common to many Eastern saints ; but the one 
here referred to was doubtless martyred at Thessalonica in the year 307 — 
on the 8th of October, according to the Latins, but his feast is kept on the 
26th of October by the Greeks and Russians. 

These two saints are not only held in great veneration among the 
Oriental Christians, but by the Turks also, who keep their feasts, marking 
by the former their season of going to reside in the country, and by the 
latter that of their return to the towns, and affirming that both were Mus- 
sulmans. 

St. Merciiry, a soldier, suffered martyrdom at Caesarea in Cappadocia, 
about the year 260, on the 25th of December. 

Robert of St. Remi substitutes St. Maurice for St, !Mercurv, not vcrv 



140 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.X. 

their banners. At this sight the Saracens were struck with 
mortal terror, while the Christians were filled with confident 
hope. The prodigy was not* seen by all, but it is attested 
by many who were eye-witnesses. It was a sign from 
heaven for the confusion of one party and portending the 
approaching triumph of the other. 

The Gentiles who fought on the side towards the sea, 
finding they were unable to sustain the weight of the con- 
flict, set fire to the grass as Curboran had ordered. This 
preconcerted signal being seen, those who were in the tents 
fled hastily and in confusion, snatching up in their alarm 
their most valuable effects. The Christians who fought on 
this side had already directed their attack to the Turkish 
camp, where they knew that their greatest force was 
stationed. The Turks still made all the resistance in their 
power, so that some fought while the rest were intent on 
pillaging the tents. Meanwhile, Duke Godfrey, with Robert 
of Flanders and Hugh the Great, made a charge with their 
cavalry near the river,^ w^here they found that a great body 
of the enemy was again collected. Their joint attack 
repelled the pagans, although they made a stout resistance, 
and the battle raged desperately on both sides. The clang 
on brazen helmets was like the hammering of anvils. Sparks 
flew from the battered sw^ords^ skulls were cloven ; and the 
ground was bespattered with the brains of the dead. 
Armour was broken, and men embowelled. The weary 
horses were covered with sweat, but there was no repose 

happily, for the commander of the Theban legion is, from the place of his 
martyrdom, altogether a saint of the Western church (•22nd of September). 
There were, however, two other saints of the name of Maurice in the East ; 
St. Maurice of Nicopolis, 10th of July, and St. Maurice d'Apamea, 16th 
and 18th of July. 

In the chronicle of Monte Cassino, St. Theodore (probably Stratelates, 
February 7) is substituted for St. Mercury, and the miracle is referred to 
the battle of Dorylceum. The History of the Holy War agrees with this, 
and also represents the three saints as having often appeared at the head of 
celestial warriors in the crusaders' battles, St. Mercury most frequently; St. 
George, also, on some occasions, and St, Theodore more rarely. The 
three latter are introduced by the author in his account of the battle of 
Antioch, to the exclusion of St. Demetrius. 

^ This movement w;is made in support of Bohemond and his corps de 
reserve, which was sharply attacked by the sultan of Damascus and the 
emir of Jerusalem, who had, as before observed, ascended the right bank \ 
of the Orontes to cut off the retreat of the Christians. 



JUNE, 1098.] THE TURKS DEFEATED. 141 

either for the horses or horsemen. The troops were engaged 
at such close quarters, that they were scarcely separated by 
the length of their weapons. Some fought hand to hand, 
foot to foot, and body against body. Meanwhile, a terror 
inspired by God himself seized the Turks, and the invincible 
constancy of their adversaries filled them with admiration 
and astonishment, and compelled them to retreat. The 
whole body began to give way, and neither trumpets, drums, 
nor clarions, nor the voice of heralds, could recall them to the 
ranks. The routed Turks made for their tents, where they 
expected to find a large body of troops, whom they had left 
there in reserve, but they had fled, as before related, as 
soon as the signal-fire was lit by the troops engaged. 
The Christians drove the pagans before them with great 
slaughter to the Iron Bridge, and pursued them sword-in- 
haud as far as Tancred's fort; they then returned to the 
enemy's tents, and pillaged everything they fancied. They 
carried back with them to the city in great triumph wealth 
of all kinds, woolled sheep, innumerable beasts of burden, 
plentiful stores of provisions, and whatever else could 
supply their necessities ; for it is the custom of the pagans 
to carry with them in their expeditions abundant supplies, 
horses, asses, and camels for conveying baggage, sheep, and 
oxen for food, with corn, and meal, and lentiles, and oil, not 
forgetting wine. The Christians, having obtained with the 
wished-for victory these abundant stores of all descriptions, 
blessed God with due praises, acknowledging him as their 
present protector, and raising to heaven hymns of thanks- 
giving. 

The Syrians and Armenians who inhabited that country, 
seeing that the Turks had sustained an irretrievable defeat, 
closed the well-known passes of the mountains, occupy- 
ing the defiles, and sword-in-hand caused the fugitives great 
losses. They butchered them like lost sheep who in their fear 
could find no means of safety. The emir also who had 
remained in the citadel, the custody of which was committed 
to him by Curboran, seeing his friends shamefully routed in 
every quarter, was struck with terror, and consulting his 
own safety, before the Erauks re-entered the city, asked for 
a Christian standard, which being given him, he planted it 
on the summit of the castle, that it might secure quarter to 



Ii2 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [e.IX. Cn.X. 

himself aud the garrison, there being no doubt as to the 
surrender of the citadeL The crusaders returning con- 
querors, when the Lombards ^ saw the pennon of the count 
of St. Giles, he being nearest at hand when a Christian 
ensign was demanded, they were much enraged, and began 
to utter violent threats. The emir, to allay the disturbance, 
sent back the count's pennon, and hoisted that of Bohemond 
on the tower,^ for the peace and safety of himself and his 
comrades. Then the capitulation made between Bohemond 
and the emir was ratified by all, and the citadel was quickly 
surrendered to the Christians. Soon afterwards, the emir 
was baptized, as, according to his account, he had long 
desired, and received magnificent presents from the liberality 
of the Franks. 

It was thus that the Christians, by God's help, gained 
the victory in the battle on the fourth of the calends of 
July [June 28th] ^ and possessed Antioch in freedom and 
tranquillity. As for the Turks of the garrison who had 
surrendered the citadel but rejected the Christian faith, 
which is the light of the soul and the way of salvation, they 
returned to their own country, under the protection of 
Bohemond, according to the terms of their capitulation. 

The Franks who formed their escort according to tho 
treaty, having left them on their own frontiers to which the 
Turks were approaching unsuspicious of any danger, Baldwin 
suddenly set on them from Eages,^ and attacking them in 
the Lord's name, overthrew the barbarians and put them 
nearly all to the sword. Then he led his followers laden 
with booty to Antioch, and announced this favourable intel- 
ligence to his friends. 

* The inhabitants of the southern provinces of Italy, Apulia, and Cala- 
bria, who marched under the standard of Bohemond. 

^ Of the citadel. We shall find in the sequel that the count of Tholouse 
retained possession for a considerable time of the mosque he had fortified, 
ad well as the palace of Bagui-Svan. 

=* The 28th of June, 1098. 

* Edessa is the place meant. William of Tyre, as well as our author, 
has adoj)ted this erroneous name. Most of the historians of the crusades 
call Edessa Roais, lihoa, Wioas, in which we recognize some remains of 
the name of Callirhoe, given it by Pliny on account of its beautiful fountain. 
The Turks now call it Or/a. It is situated to tho N.E. of Antioch, at the 
distance of fifty-six hourb' journey. 



A.D. 1097.] HALDWIK'b CO^'QUJ■STS. 143 

Having now an opportunity of relating what refers to 
Bald^^'in, it sliall, in God's name, have a succinct place in the 
course of my narrative ; for such considerable events ought 
not to be passed in silence. 

Ch. XI. Baldwin's conquests in Armenia — Becomes ditJce 
or prince of JEdessa — Elected Mng of Jerusalem^ after Ids 
Irother Godfrey's death — Succession of the crusadet^s, Icings 
of Jerusalem. 

When Baldwin, as before related, on Tancred's departure 
in disgust, had taken posession of Tarsus, a city of Cilicia, 
he left the army of his brother Grodfrey and the other chiefs 
and marched in the direction of Edessa at the head of three 
hundred knights with their men-at-arms. On his arrival 
Baldwin offered the services of his followers to the free dis- 
posal of the govenor who commanded the Turks in that 
province.^ That officer and his citizens received the Franks 
with great kindness, assigned them quarters in that wealthy 
place, furnished them with plentiful supplies of food, and 
good pay, and entrusted to them the defence of the whole 
country. Duke Grodfrey and the other Christian chiefs, 
learning that Baldwin had the command of the duchy of 
Edessa, were highly pleased, and out of respect to him avoided 
entering on the borders of that province. Baldwin was a 
knight of great stature, of a noble presence, and lofty spirit, 
well imbued with letters, celebrated for his valour and worth, 
and of illustrious descent, as sprung from the race of the 
emperor Charlemagne.^ This lord, with the inhabitants of 
Edessa, made frequent expeditions against the Turks in the 
neighbourhood, and defeating the pagans took much booty 
and many captives ; thus making the duke of Edessa formid- 
able to all his neighbours. 

The city of which we are speaking is called by old writers 
E,ages, but it was destroyed during the fierce wars waged 
between the ancient kings of the Assyrians and Chaldeans 

^ He was an old Greek, sent there in the rei?;n of the emperor Romanus 
Diogenes (1068 — 1071), and who is called by Anna Commena, Thoros. 

2 See vol. ii. p. 12. It may be added that Maud of Louvaine, wife of 
Eustace I., coutat de Boulogne, through whom this descent is traced, had 
for her mother Gerberge of Lorraine, daughter of Charles, duke of Lorraine, 
brother of King Lothaire. 



1-14 OEDEHICUS VITALTS. [b.IX. CH.XI. 

At a later age, Seleucus Nicanor, who was one of the four 
principal generals of Alexander the Great, after his death 
restored this citya nd called it Edessa. It is watered by the 
Tigris and Euphrates which are the sources of fertility 
and abundance to the natives. King Abgarus governed 
Edessa, the same to whom the Lord Jesus sent a sacred letter, 
and the precious napkin which had wiped the sweat from his 
brow and retained the Saviour's features miraculously 
impressed, so that the lineaments and proportions of the 
divine image were visible on it. Thaddeus, the disciple of 
Jesus Christ came to this city and baptising King Abgarus 
with all his people first established, by the grace of God, the 
worship of the divinity.^ The community of this place 
was composed of Greeks, Armenians, and Syrians living 
together, and serving the King of heaven from the foundation 
of Christianity to the present day. But for their sins God 
had lately chastised them with the discipline of his rod, and 
caused the offences of the Christians to be punished by the 
fury of the Gentiles ; so that the city, with the surrounding 
country was under the dominion of the Turks. They still 
freely attended divine worship, and were not compelled to 
abandon the law of God by any restriction of the pagans. 
The citizens of Edessa therefore were well pleased with the 
civilization of the Eranks, who, on their part, treated them 
in all things as brothers. 

The haughty governor of Edessa, moved by jealousy and 
blinded by malice, laid snares for the crusaders, commanding 
his officer, who was going on an expedition, to attack Baldwin 
and his companions, as they were returning and when they 
were unarmed, and to kill them without mercy. The treach- 
erous contriver of this nefarious scheme took his measiu'es 
accordingly, but the intelligence reached Baldwin's ears who 
was beloved by many. As they were returning from the 
expedition the pagans recommended the Christians, in light 
talk, to lay aside their armour, that they might be less incum- 
bered ; but they, aware of the plot, did not listen to the 
advice. At last, as they were drawing near to the city, the 
Eraidis riding in full armour, the Gentiles at a given signal 
suddenly threw themselves on them, and, thus assaulting 
their comrades, disclosed their base designs. The Christians, 
^ See vol. i. p. 263. 






A.D. 1097.] AFrAIRS AT EDESSA. 145 

however, in the name of the Lord, stood firm, and attacking 
their enemies with spirit put them to flight, killing some as 
they were making their escape and pursuing the rest, sword 
in hand, to the city gate. Baldwin then ordered his people 
to pitch their tents on the spot, and lay siege to the place. 
A great commotion was now raised in the city, and the 
people flocked together from all quarters. 

Then Tobias, the chief of the citizens, thus addressed them : 
" Good citizens, I beseech you to be quiet for a short time 
"while I go with three of my neighbours to the Franks, and 
inquire for what reason they have laid siege to our city." 
In consequence the four principal citizens went out of the 
town, and inquired the cause of the sudden siege. Baldwin 
replied : " I left my brothers and friends, and the noble army 
of Christians, in Cilicia, and came here with three hundred 
gallant knights to enter your service, and I have been a faithful 
protector to you and your governor on all occasions. The 
crusaders, out of their regard for me have left the borders of 
your country untouched, and have done you no injury of any 
kind. I and my followers have engaged in sharp hostilities 
Avith your enemies in the neighbourhood, and gained frequent 
triumphs over them for your peace and security. "Xou 
doubtless are sensible of this, and will, I think, bear witness 
to the truth of my assertions. What ofi'ence then have I 
and my companions given this day ? Why, when we were 
returning in security to your city, as we did yesterday and 
often before, did our fellow soldiers suddenly attack us with 
swords and spears ? In this emergency we resisted, calling 
on God according to the Christian practice, and Christ our 
God, who is always ready to help his servants, promptly 
gave the succour from heaven which we implored. Our 
comrades who attacked us as enemies felt the weight of our 
arms in defence of our own lives, and turned their backs 
and fled. Some of them, as you may perceive, were left by 
their companions dead on the road. These things being so, 
we remain in our tents, expecting your aid and advice ; for 
we still regard you not as enemies, but as our loyal hosts." 

Tobias, having heard this account and other similar 
details, called his neighbours apart, and after a brief confer- 
ence returned to the Franks. " There is no need," he said, 
"illustrious knights, for many words; we entreat you to 

TOL. III. L 



14G OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.Xr. 

wait for us here in peace, while we are employed in 
arranging your business satisfactorily in the city." 

With these explanations, and a mutual understanding, 
the envoys re-entered the city, and reported to their neigh- 
bours what they had heard and said. The conduct of the 
four deputies was approved, and they were commissioned to 
present themselves at the governor's palace, while the rest 
of the citizens followed slowly under arms. They found the 
harsh governor alone in his private apartments, and saluting 
him in the fashion of the country, thus addressed him.: 
" The times demand prudent counsel, for we have now reason 
to fear as enemies those whom we have hitherto considered as 
oar faithful protectors. The Franks now besiege us closely, 
and are proceeding to assault us with the greatest vigour. 
They call us traitors, and summon us to judgment. They say 
that their fellow soldiers treacherously attacked them as they 
were returning from the enemy's country, and that they 
received more injury from their allies than from their 
adversaries. They, therefore, threaten us terribly that 
unless we render them justice they will bring upon us the 
whole force of the Christian army. We must, therefore, 
use prudent means for avoiding destruction, and take care 
that we do not provoke the intolerable T\T:'ath of the Chris- 
tians by our injustice. The treasonable enterprise was 
undertaken without our knowledge, and so great a crime 
ought to be instantly punished. It is, therefore, the universal 
opinion of the citizens that the atrocious traitors should be 
dealt with according to the severity of our ancient laws, and 
that our illustrious friends, or rather protectors, should be 
respectfully conciliated." 

While Tobias was thus speaking, a baud of citizens had 
crept cautiously and silently into the palace. The pagan 
governor, however, treated with contempt the proposals of 
the friends, and plainly avowed himself the defender of the 
traitors and their fellow conspirators. Upon this, the 
incensed citizens rushed upon him, and, losing all respect, 
at once cut oif his head.^ Then Tobias took it, and said to 

' This narrative of Baldwin's conquest of Armenia is not extracted from 
1i;;lderic'8 history, like all the rest of our author's present book, nor even 
from that of Fulcher of Chartres, who, having followed the adventurous 
knight as far as Edessa in the capacity of chaplain, could have furnished 



A.D. 1097.] BALDWIN, PRINCE OF EDESSA. 147 

the citizens his neighbours : " Guard the palace, and all that 
it contains from injury ; and I and my companions will 
bring hither the Franks with joy and peace." Saying this, 
Tobias went forth, and saluting the Franks, thus addressed 
them : " The citizens of Edessa, being greatly concerned at 
the injury done you, demanded redress from the governor. 
As, however, he avowed himself the author of the treason, 
they have cut off his head. See here the head of the enemy 
of God and of you, which they have sent by us." All 
present being filled with joy, Tobias added : " Come, illus- 
trious knight, and receive the hand of the governor's 
daughter in marriage. Be our prince, and long may you 
possess the dukedom of Edessa." Baldwin, therefore, and 
his followers, entered the city in triumph, and were received 
in the palace of the government by all the citizens with 
great joy. In due time the beautiful daughter of the wicked 
governor was baptized, and married Baldwin the handsome 
knight, on whom she had secretly set her affections during 
her father's life, without his knowledge.^ The native Chris- 
tians were highly delighted to be under the government of a 
Christian prince, and returned thanks to God, while the 
Turks were dejected at losing their dominion over the wor- 
shippers of Christ, whom they had hitherto oppressed. The 
magnificent church of St. Sophia had been built at Edessa 
in ancient times, and under the rule of Baldwin, the faith- 
ful, both natives and foreigners, dedicated to St. Saviour, the 
virtue and wisdom of God the Father, and restored his 
worship. The order of divine service was re-established with 
much splendour at Edessa, and divine grace displayed its 
influence on the people both in their hearts and actions 

our author with more precise information than that he has adopted. The 
reader will already have discovered that the account savours more of romance 
than of history. Unfortunately for the crusaders' fame, the governor was 
much more true to his engagements than Baldwin. The old prince having 
solemnly adopted him, with singular ceremonies, became the victim of a 
popular tumult, of which Baldwin v/as the hero, if not the contriver, and 
which, at least, he took no pains to repress. 

' The new prince of Edessa^ did not marry his predecessor's daughter, 
but the niece of a chief of that country, whose name, it is said, was 
Taphroe. He divorced her, and married again in 1102, Adelaide, widow 
of Roger I., king of Sicily, whom he soon afterwards also repudiated upou 
the pretext of cousanguinitv. 

L 2 



148 OSDEHICTJS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.XI. 

much more wonderfully and incomparably than my pen can 
describe. 

Baldwin, having been thus engaged in a multiplicity of 
aifairs for the glory of Christ,^ had not been able to assist 
the crusaders in the siege of Antioch. Hearing, however, 
reports of the extreme distress to which they were reduced, 
he and his companions deeply compassionated their suifer- 
ings, and as soon as it was in their power, put their aifairs 
in order to hasten to their relief. Meanwhile, by the help 
of the Lord Jesus, they had gained a great victory over 
Curboran and his army, and Baldwin and his companions 
had cut oif the Turks, who had retreated from the citadel 
of Antioch, as before mentioned, and taking their spoils, 
visited their brothers and friends. Then, all having mutually 
related their several successes, rejoiced together, and gave 
thanksgivings with heart and mouth to the God of victory, 
who ordereth all things well. 

After this conference of the brothers and friends, Duke 
Baldwin returned to Eages, and took imder his fatherly 
government the church of God and the people committed to 
his care. He defeated the Turks on his frontiers in frequent 
engagements, and crushing the wicked, enlarged the borders 
of the Christians. He also nobly increased the endowments 
of the clergy, furnished them with all that was necessary, 
and anxiously entreated them to celebrate daily service for 
the benefit of the faithful. He maintained himself vigorously 
in the dukedom five years.^ He then succeeded his brother 
Godfrey in the kingdom of Jerusalem, which he governed 
nearly fifteen years,^ signalizing his reign by many bold 

^ Much less for the interests of religion than of his own private ambition. 
So much so that the princes and prelates of the crusaders made in vain a 
solemn appeal to his religious professions and his oaths, in order to retain 
l)im imder the banner of the cross. 

^ This calculation is evidently exaggerated. Baldwin's government at 
Edessa could not commence before the autumn of 1097. He was elected 
king of Jerusalem about the 18th of October, 1100, and crowned on Christ- 
mas Day, the same year. 

' This reckoning is not more exact than the preceding. Baldwin did not 
defer urging in person his claims to the crown of Jerusalem until he heard 
the news of his election. He quitted Edessa, as early as the 2nd of Octo- 
ber, 1 1 00 ; " his grief for his brother's death was absorbed by his joy at being 
liis heir," says his historian, Fulche rof Chartres. He was elected the 18th of 
the same month, crowned the 25th of December, as we have just remarked, 
and died in the beginning of April, 1118. 



JULY, 109S.] cou:prciL or citusADErtS at aktioch. 149 

actions agaiDst the pagans. He had no offspring by the 
Turkish wife he married. In consequence he appointed his 
cousin Baldwin de Burg to be his successor in his duchy and 
knigdom.^ Afterwards, Fulk, count of Anjou, went in 
pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and received the kingdom with the 
hand of Melisent, daughter of the second Baldwin, whom he 
married.^ 

Ch. XII. After the siege of AntiocJi, tlie crusaders rest 
during the summer — Several towns taken— The chiefs 
re'Cissemile — Description ofAntioch — Bohemond and JRay- 
rnond of Tholouse dispute the possession of it. 

In the month of July, after having, by the grace of God, 
gained the victory, and established their authority in Autioch, 
the Christian chiefs held a council, and by common agree- 
ment commissioned Hugh the Great to proceed to the 
court of the emperor Alexius at Constantinople and offer 
him the immediate possession of the city which they had 
purchased for him at the cost of so much suffering, calling 
upon him at the same time to observe the terms of the 
treaty which he had sworn to on his part, viz., that he 
would resolutely accompany them in their march to Jerusa- 
lem. Hugh the Great departed on this mission ; but 
although he had hitherto conducted himself with great 
ability during the crusade both in the field and in council, 
he was very deficient on this occasion, for, like the raven 
sent forth from the ark, he never fulfilled as he ought, his 
promise of returning again. ^ 

After Hugh's departure, the chiefs held a council, in 
which they consulted together how they were to i>roceed in 
leading the people of God to Jerusalem. They said : " This 
people which has undergone great sufferings in their en- 

'^ Baldwin de Burg, second son of Hugh, count of Rethel, was crovaied 
king of Jerusalem on Easter day, 14th of April, 1118, and died the 21st 
of August, 1131. lie was cousin-german of Guy Troussel by his mother, 
Melisent of Monteheri. 

'^ Fulk of Anjou, fifth of that name, surnamed the Young, who married 
Melisent, daughter of Baldwin de Burg, was crowned king of Jerusalem the 
14th of Septeniber, 1131. His firfit wife Avas Eremburge, countess of Mans, 
1110—1126. 

' According to Ralph of Caen, Hugh the Great had been wounded iu 
the thigh, and went to Tarsus for the recovery of his health. 



150 ORDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.IX. CH.XTI. 

deavour to reach the sepulchre of the Lord their God at 
Jerusalem, now exhausted by many calamities, calls loudly 
upon us to hasten the march, and we ourselves are weary of 
disappointment, and join our complaints to theirs. Let us 
therefore take the course most convenient for them, and 
submit to no further delays but such as are occasioned by 
necessity. At the same time, everything must be calculated 
with prudence and discretion. The country through which 
we have to pass is burnt up ; the summer heat is excessive ; 
and at this season it would be impossible for us to bear the 
torrid atmosphere. Besides, both our strength and our sup- 
plies are exhausted by a long siege. Let us therefore be 
quiet and seek repose, endeavouring to restore our sick and 
wounded, and not forgetting the relief of the poor. Let us 
wait for the rains of autumn, and avoid the injurious influ- 
ences of the Cancer and the Lion. In the month of 
JSTovember the climate will be refreshed, and we will then 
re-assemble, and with one accord proceed on our journey : 
otherwise, the whole people will be prostrated with the 
intolerable heat. Let this counsel be well considered by 
the crowd w^ho are agitating for our immediate departure. 
J^fecessity requires that we should defer it during this 
intractable season : and this course seems most advisable 
far all parties." The determination was announced to the 
whole army, and in the end it met with universal appro- 
bation. 

The chiefs, therefore, with their household troops, dis- 
persed themselves throughout the neighbouring country to 
pass the summer ;^ and the poor followed them to obtain 
subsistence : for the chiefs had said, " If there be any in 
want, or infirm health, let them attach themselves to our 
families, and we will support them, allowing them pay. 
The disabled shall be maintained at the pubHc expense until 
they recover." 

Then Eaymond Pilet, a brave knight, one of the com- 

* The chiefs of the crusaders quitted Antioch not only to pass the 
intense heats of summer in the cooler climate of the neighbouring mount- 
ains, but also to escape from the pestilential atmosphere generated by tlie 
decay of so many corpses in the close and heated, city, from which consti- 
tutions already shattered by privations and excesses were exposed to so 
much injury. The women were particularly subject to these disorders, 
which, according to William of Tyre, carried off fifty thousand souls. 



AUTUMN, 1098.] SEVERAL TOWNS TAKEN. 151 

panions of tlie count of St. Giles, collected a body of horse 
and foot-soldiers, and putting himself at their head, 
and boldly entering the country of the Saracens passed 
beyond two cities to a strong place belonging to the 
Syrians called Talamania.^ The inhabitants submitted 
voluntarily to the Franks, who rested there nearly eight 
days. 

Then, again buckling on their armour, they attacked a 
castle of the Agarenes in that neighbourhood, and having 
blockaded it till it surrendered, it was sacked and the natives 
put to the sword, except those who were willing to become 
Christians ; those were preserved uninjured. After this, 
they returned to Talamania, rejoicing at their success. 
Three days afterwards they made another expedition against 
Marrah, a neighbouring town.^ From thence many pagans 
who had assembled from Aleppo and other neighbouring 
places, issued forth to attack them. The Franks supposing 
that they were going to fight drew up in order like disciplined 
soldiers, but their hopes were disappointed. For the Turks 
cautiously retreated towards the city, neither flying before 
the enemy, nor suffering them to come to close quarters ; but 
withdrawing a little from the conflict by a skilful manoeuvre, 
they turned and again made a rapid charge on the Franks 
and then wheeling their horses round again retreated. The 
Franks had to sustain repeated attacks of this kind, nor could 
they safely disengage themselves from the enemy. For if 
they attempted to retreat the gentiles pressed on their rear, 
as afterwards happened. They had to maintain their ground, 
suffering from intolerable thirst, until the evening ; for the 
heat was excessive. At last, being no longer able to bear 
the fatigue, and having no means of assuaging their thirst, 
for no water was to be found, they resolved to draw off in a 
body, and by a slow march, to their own castle. But the foot- 
soldiers and Syrians, feeble and undisciplined troops, break- 
ing their ranks, regardless of the commands of the knights, 
were seized with a panic and began to fly in utter confusion. 
The pagans were instantly upon them when they gave way, 
and cut them down without mercy, fiercer than wolves, and 

* M. Poujoulat thinks that this place must be in the neighbourhood of 
Mount Amanus, as its name indicates — Tel-Amania. 
3 Marrah, between Hamath and Aleppo. 



152 OECEEICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. Cn.XII. 

giving no quarter. The prospect of victory, and the advan- 
tage they had gained supplied them with strength. Many 
therefore of the common people and faint-hearted were here 
slain, others were choked with thirst. Those who escaped 
alive returned with E-aymond to Talamania, where they passed 
some days. This massacre took place in the month of July, 
and the insolence of the proud was thus punished by the 
hand of God. So we read in the sacred writings that the 
children of Israel were often afflicted, and defeated in battle 
by the Philistines, Edom, Midian, and other neighbouring 
nations, in order to compel them to return frequently 
to the Lord, and to persevere in the ways of his command- 
ments. 

At this time Aimar, bishop of Puy, fell sick at Antioch, 
and having comforted his sorrowing children with paternal 
affection went the way of all flesh, departing in the Lord on 
the calends of August [5th July]. His death caused deep 
affliction among the soldiers of the cross, for he was the 
counsellor of the nobles, the hope of the orphan, the pro- 
tector of the weak, the companion in arms of the knights. 
The clergy he instructed and guided in a becoming manner ; 
he was distinguished by his singular prudence, while his good 
humour and affability made him a general favourite. The 
whole army therefore celebrated his obsequies with much 
lamentation; his body was embalmed with aromatic spices 
and interred in the cliurch of St. Peter the Apostle. 

The count of St. Giles, who never yielded to sloth or idle- 
ness, when the Gentiles could be attacked with vigour, lost 
no time in making an irruption into the territory of the 
Saracens, and assaulted and took by storm a fine city of theirs 
called Albara.^ He put to the sword almost all the inhabit- 

^ Raymond d'Agiles calls it Barra, and the oriental historians Bar6 or 
Elbarie. It was in the neighbourhood of this place and Marrah that the 
crusaders saw for the first time fields planted with sugar-canes. The 
passage of Albert d'Aix, describing their cultivation and use, is curious, and 
worth attempting to translate. 

The inhabitants such the sweet canes ichich grow freely on the level 
plains, and are called zucra, and so much enjoy the delicious juice, thai 
they scarcely tvait till they are ripe to revel in their luscious flavour. This 
kind of produce is cultivated by the country people every year tvith great 
industry. At the time of harvest, the canes are bruised in mortars, and 
the thick syrup is collected, and suffered to stand in vessels until it 



AUTUMN, 1098.] QUAERELS AT ANTIOCH. 153 

ants of both sexes and took the place into Lis owii bands. 
Tbe Cbristians appointed a bisbop there, fitted for bis office, 
and instituted what was required for the worship of tho 
true faith. The bishop of Albara was sent to Antioch, 
and there dulj consecrated according to the rites of the 
church.^ 

As the appointed time approached for resuming the 
journey to Jerusalem,^ all the chiefs assembled at Antioch 
to consider this urgent business, so that they might be no 
longer diverted from their expedition. But there was an, 
implacable quarrel concerning the possession of the city, 
between Duke Bohemond, and Count Eaymond which all the 
ability of the elder chiefs failed in settling, notwithstanding 
their many sensible exhortations. The one demanded the 
sovereignty of the whole city, as it was promised to him during 
the siege and before it was taken. The other alleged the oath 
of fealty taken to the emperor, with Bohemond' s approbation, 
and declared that he could not be absolved from it without 
perjury. Bohemond put the citadel which was given up to 
him in a state of defence, drawing in supplies of arms and 
provisions, and manning it with troops and warders. In. 
like manner the count strengthened himself in the possession 
of the palace of the emir Cassian, which he had before 
occupied, and seized the fort at the bridge towards the port 
of St. Simeon. Their ambition and resentment were carried 
to such a pitch that neither of them would yield to the 
other, and both under colourable pretences aspired to the 
possession of the city. 

It was not ^0 be wondered at either as respected the 

coagulates and hardens like snow or lohite salt. When grated, it is mixed 
ivith tlievr drink, or dissolved in water, is used to swteten pottage, being 
more luholesome and pleasant to the taste than honey itself. Some sag that 
this tvas the kind of honey which Jonathan, the son of King Saul, found 
upon the ground, and dared to eat against the king's command. 1 J?ai]i. 
xiv. 25 — 4 3. Tlte crusaders loere much refreshed, after their severe suffer- 
ings from famine, by sucking these sweet canes during the sieges of Albara, 
Marrah, an dArchas. 

^ This bishop's name was Peter. He was a native of Narboune, and 
was consecrated by John IV., the Greek patriarch of Antioch, who had 
been very ili-vsed by the Turks during the siege, and, who soon after the 
city was taken, not being able to agree with the Latin Christians, retired to 
Cons*^antinople. 

2 November 1. 



154 OEDERTCUS VITALTS. [b.IX. CH.XII. 

honour or the profit of the acquisition ; for Antioch is a verj 
beautiful and strongly fortified place, and has rich and 
ample revenues. Within the city are inclosed four gentle 
hills, on the highest of which stands the citadel commanding 
the whole place. ^ The lower part of the town is well built, 
and it is surrounded by a double wall. The inner wall is 
broad and lofty, and formed of immense blocks of stone, 
squared and closely fitted. It has in its circuit four hundred 
and fifty towers,- the walls of which are of stately architec- 
ture and defended by battlements. The outer wall is not so 
lofty, but is a work of wonderful beauty. The city contains 
three hundred and forty churches,^ and being a great primacy, 
is the seat of a patriarch who has one hundred and fifty three 
bishops under his jurisdiction. Antioch is shut in on the 
east by four hills,* and the river Earfar washes the walls on 
the west.^ Its ancient name was Eeblath,® as St. Jerome 
informs us in his Commentary on the Prophets, but it was 
afterwards augmented by Seleucus Nicanor, who called it 
after his father Antiochus Clarus. The place being of so 
much importance and dignity, as in truth the capital and 
metropolis of all Syria, the Franks were unwilling to part 
with it easily now that it was in their power, hoping by hold- 
ing possession of it to extend their influence far and wide, 
and to reduce even distant regions to obedience to Chris- 
tianity. The siege had lasted eight months and a day,'' and 

1 This description is very exact; the four rising grounds of which our 
author speaks are inclosed within the walls, and the one on which the 
citadel is built is the last but one in going from west to east. 

2 William of Tyre only reckons three hundred and twenty. According 
to j\I. Poujoulat, there were in all one hundred and thirty, fifty-two of which 
are still in tolerably good preservation. The walls were all crenelled, and 
an Arabian writer says that 80,000 crenelles could be counted. The 
modern city of Antaki does not cover a sixth part of the ancient inclosure. 
'I'o give an idea of its extent it is only necessary to mention that Antaki is 
more than an liour's walk from the gate of St. Paul. 

^ Peter of Tudebode reckons twelve hundred churches, and three 
hundred and sixty monasteries. 

* These hills lie to the south rather than the east of the city. 

'^ Read " the Orontes," which according to Fulcher of Chartres and 
William of Tyre was called at this time Fern or Fer by the natives. 

® There seems no authority for Antioch's being identified with this 
ancient name, as St. Jerome supposed. 

7 Our author is not very fortunate in his chronological computations. 



KOYEMBEIl, 1098.] THE CRUSADERS QUIT AJJ-TIOCH. 155 

after its capture they had themselves been besieged within it 
three weeks. During the continuance of which siege there 
was so great a conflux of the Grentiles, that no one remem- 
bered having seen or heard of such an assemblage of nations. 
The crusaders rested at Antioch five months and nine davs.^ 
They were unwilling to relinquish their conquest for the 
many important reasons assigned, they therefore entrusted 
it to safe custody. Meanwhile the count and Bohemond 
had each their own private views regarding it. They there- 
fore fortified the place, as before mentioned, and in the month 
of IN'ovember," proposed to undertake further enterprises, and 
having put things at Antioch in some sort of order, they both 
marched out of the place. 



Ch. XIII. Tlie town of Marrali tahen ly Count Baymond 
and Bohemond — The crusaders suffer from famine — The 
chiefs return to Antioch. 

CouifT E/ATMOis'D put himself at the head of his troops, 
and quitting Antioch, and passing through Eugia^ and 
Albara, arrived on the fifth of the calends of December 
[November 27]^ before Marrah, a wealthy and strongly for- 
tified town, containing a numerous population of Agarenes.^ 
The next day he led his troops to the assault of the place, 
but as the walls were strong and well defended, he could 
make no impression at that time. Bohemond followed the 
count from Antioch on Sunday [the 28th November], and 

This is much. too high ; from October 18 to June 3, there are only seven 
months and seventeen days. 

' This calculation is not more exact than the last. From June 18 to 
November 11, a period during which the crusaders appear to have partiallv 
at least retired to the country, there are only four months and thirteen 
days. To make up the author's reckoning there must be included in the 
time of rest not only the twenty-four days of the blockade, but also that 
of the battle of Antioch. 

* November 11, according to some accounts. 

3 On the subject of this place, see before p. 106. M. Pojoulat was not 
able to obtain any information respecting the site and the present state of 
Albara. 

* On Saturday, November 17. He left Antioch on the 23rd. 

* Marrah, a town some hours to the N.E. of Apamea, has now a popula- 
tion of five or six thousand souls. 



153 OEDEKICUS YiTALIS. [e.IX. CH.XIH. 

also arrived before Marrali.^ A second attack was then 
made by the united forces of the two chiefs, who repeatedly 
assaulted the defenders of the fortifications with great spirit 
but little success. Scaling-ladders were raised against the 
walls, but the violent outcries and threatening demonstra- 
tions of the Turks discouraged every one from venturing to 
mount them. The citizens indeed thought that their resist- 
ance on the present occasion would be as successful as it 
had been against E-aymond Pilet ; but Count E^aymond 
caused a machine to be built of wood, to run on four 
wheels, that it might be easily moved. It was so lofty that 
it commanded the walls and reached to the battlements of 
the towers. This structure was rolled forward against one 
of the towers ; the trumpets and clarions sounded, and the 
troops under arms invested the whole circuit of the walls, 
the cross-bowmen and archers discharged their bolts, and 
the party in the wooden tower hurled below immense 
stones, while the priests and clerks offered earnest prayers 
to the Lord for his people. William of Montpellier and 
many others fought from the machine, overwhelming the 
citizens beneath with stones and darts, and easily killed 
them by crushing their shields, helmets, and heads ;^ others 
made incessant attacks on the defenders of the walls with 
iron hooks. On the other hand, the Tnrks directed their 
arrows and missiles against the Christians from the towers, 
they also threw the Greek fire into the machine, and left 
nothing untried. The Christians lost no time in using oil 
to extinguish the fire;^ and pressing forward to mount the 
walls, were driven back and held in check by those who 
manned the battlements, but still would not draw off. The 

' Not only Bohemond, but a considerable part of the Christian army 
took part in the siege of Marrah. 

' The description of this assault by Peter Tudebode is very curious ; we 
can only quote one passage : " They so hammered the enemy on their 
shields that shields and pagans fell together into the city of the dead." 
The oriental historians assert that the count of Tholouse promised to spare 
vhe lives of the citizens, and that twenty thousand souls were victims of his 
breach of faith. According to the story told by the Latin writers, it must 
rather be imputed to Bohemond. 

* It is manifestly impossible that so combustible a matter as oil should 
have been employed to extinguish the Greek fire. Our author has copied 
the error from his habitual guide Balderic, m whose account only it is to be 
found. 



DEC. 1098.] MAREAn TAKE?T ET STORM. 157 

struggle "was prolonged until the evening. The unwearied 
courage of the Agarenes foiled all the devicee of the Chris- 
tians. At length Gouffier de Tours/ a knight of the Limou- 
sin, of high birth and extraordinary daring, was the first to 
mount the scaling-ladder and readied the top of the wall. 
8ome soldiers, few in number, ascended after him, for the 
ladder was broken and fell in pieces. Gouffier, however, 
held his footing on the battlements manfully, driving back 
the Pagans, and at the same time calling his comrades to 
his aid, both by his gestures and voice. They soon raised 
another scaling-ladder, by means of which so many knights 
and soldiers mounted to the top that they occupied a long 
extent of the wall, from which they entirely drove the gar- 
rison. The Pagans now rallied, and renewed the attack 
with so much determination, sometimes charging the Franks 
with such impetuosity, that some of them in their terror 
leaped from the wall. However, a strong body maintained 
their ground, and resisted the repeated attacks of the 
enemy, until the Christians below had undermined the wall 
and made a breach for the besiegers to enter. The Turks 
discovering this abandoned themselves to despair, and pre- 
cipitately fled. Thus the wealthy town of Marrah was taken 
the evening of Saturday the ides^ phe 11th] of December. 
The Christians spread themselves through the conquered 
place, and mercilessly pillaged it of all the wealth they could 
find in the houses and cellars, giving no quarter to the 
Saracens, but putting them almost all to the sword. Every 
place in the city was filled with corpses, and it was impos- 
sible to walk through the streets without stumbling over 
heaps of the dead. On the capture of the place a great 
number of the citizens, with their wives and children and 
most valuable efi'ects, assembled in the palace over the gate, 
where they submitted to the Christians, Some of these 
were put to death, others, by Bohemond's order, were con- 
ducted to Antioch, and subjected to servitude or sold into 

^ Gouffiers de Lastours, lord of Hautefort and father of Guy de Lastours, 
who married Matilda, daughter of Geoflrey II., count de Perche, and 
widow of Raymond, viscount de Turnenne. The history of the first 
crusade by Gregory Buhade, a vassal of this Gouffiers de Lastours, who 
employed twelve years in composing it in the language of the country, is 
unfortunately lost. 

=* The reading should be '' the third of the ides," that is, December 11. 



15S OliDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.IX. Cn.XIII. 

slavery, and all were stripped of their wealth and scattered. 
The Franks remained at Marrab an entire month and 
three days. 

The bishop of Orange fell sick there, and his spirit, 
released from the body, ascended to heaven.^ A severe 
famine also affected the army, and forced some of them to 
devonr things disgusting, unusual, disagreeable, and even 
forbidden. Some, indeed, partook of the flesh of the Turks,^ 
which, coming to the knowledge of the elders and better 
sort, they w^ere overwhelmed with shame and sorrow, but 
they suspended the punishment on account of the extremity 
of the famine. Nor did they esteem it a mortal offence that 
those who underwent voluntarily such excessive hunger for 
the cause of God should thus make war on the Turks with 
their teeth as well as their hands. The thing, indeed, was 
against all laws, but it was absolute necessity which drove 
them to it. AVhen there is a famine in a camp, everything 
is welcome, nothing rejected. Some ripped open the bowels 
of the Turks to find the bezants and gold they had swallowed, 
and which the}^ thus secured. Numbers perished by the 
prevalence of the famine. 

The chiefs, while they were at Marrah, made fresh endea- 
vours to restore amity between the duke and the count, 
but their efforts were fruitless. In consequence, Bohemond 
was so much irritated that he immediately went back to 
Antioch,^ and the expedition to Jerusalem was hindered, to 
the great injury of the people. The private quarrels and 
animosities of princes disturb and afflict their subjects ; for 
while every one is seeking his own advantage, he is careless 
of the common good ; and the people fall into ruin when 
their chiefs do not protect them. The army of Jerusalem 



^ William, the first of the name, bishop of Orange and vice-legate ; lie 
died December 2. 

^ These accounts are confirmed by the contemporary historians of the 
crusade, who supply details even more disgustipg. The famine appears to 
have been caused by excessive rains which interrupted the communications, 
and caused all the provisions to rot. 

3 Not only Bohemond, but Godfrey and the count of Flanders also, 
returned to Antioch. After the conference at Rugia, Godfrey took 
advantage of this season of leisure to pay his brother BaldM'in a visit at 
Edessa. 



DEC. 1098.] TUE MARCH CONTINUED, 159 

^vas mucli embarrassed by the personal quarrels of their 
chiefs. 

Cil. XIV. ^Reconciliation of the chiefs — 3Iarch of the cru- 
saders hif the sea-coast to Jerunalem — Towns captured or 
surrendered — Arrive under the tvalls of the holy city. 

Count Raymond again sent envoys to the chiefs at Antioch 
and invited them to meet him at Bugia to have another 
conference. In consequence, Duke Godfrey, with Eobert the 
Norman, and Robert of Planders, and other chiefs who were 
summoned, proceeded to Eugia, taking Bohemond with them. 
Much was then said on the necessity of restoring concord 
among the principal nobles, but no means of accomplishing 
it was discovered. Bohemond refused to march on Jeru- 
salem unless Antioch was entirely given up to him, and the 
count would not go unless Bohemond accompanied the rest. 
Raymond returned to Marrah where the Christian army was 
in danger of perishing by famine.^ At length, in the com- 
punction of his heart, a generous feeling prevailed, and, to 
serve the soldiers of Christ, he undertook to prosecute the 
journey to Jerusalem, preferring the cause of God to his 
own will and profit. To subdue themselves is the highest 
virtue of which princes are capable ; in general, they exhibit 
great obstinacy, and cause their subjects extreme perils. 
The count ruled his own spirit that he might not injure all 
Christendom. However, he gave orders to his people to 
maintain a strong garrison in the palace of Cassian.- 

Count Raymond came out of Marrah on the ides 
[13th] of January,^ and, with bare feet, freely joined the 
Christian pilgrims, exhibiting by this token of humility his 
resumption of the pilgrimage. Th%re was, therefore, great 

^ During the absence of the count of Tholouse, the crusaders whom he 
left at Marrah, exasperated at the chiefs delay in leading them to Jerusa- 
lem, destroyed the walls of the place. 

^ This direction shows that the count's repentance was far from sincere. 
Not only the palace of the emir, Bagui-Syan, but also the fortified mosque 
at the end of the bridge of Antioch, weie recommended to the vigilant 
care of his retainers. Bohemond seized the opportunity of Godfrey's 
absence to get possession of the latter, and as to the former, Tancied, in a 
fit of ill-humour with the count, came express from Marrah to seize it and 
deliver it uj) to Bohemond. See Ralph de Caen (xcviii). 

^ January 13, 101)9. 



IGO OrtDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.XIV. 

joy among the people of Grod, and the duke of Normandy 
joined them on their march at the city of Capharda.^ There 
they rested three days, and the king of Caesarea made an 
alliance with the chiefs. He had already sent frequent 
messages to Marrah, firmly promising to keep the peace 
towards the Christians, and furnish them gratuitously 
with many things they wanted, as well as to allow 
them free trade through all his dominions, if only the 
invincible Franks abstained from invading his dominions, 
and devastating his territories. In that case, he swore 
fealty to the Christians. The whole army now marched 
from Capharda, and encamped on this side the river Farfar, 
near Caesarea.^ The king, seeing the Franks stationed so 
near his city, was much troubled, and immediately sent 
them this message : " Unless you remove your camp from 
the suburbs of our city at the first dawn of day, you will 
violate our treaty, we shall forbid the trafiic for supplies, and 
take precautions for our own safety." Accordingly, as soon 
as it was morning, he sent two of his people to the Christians 
to show them where they could ford the river, and to conduct 
the army into a fertile district. They entered a rich and 
fruitful valley, commanded by a castle which formed imme- 
diately a post of security for the chiefs. The army laid 
hands on as many as five thousand cattle, and great abun- 
dance of provisions of all descriptions were found ; so that 
all the soldiers of Christ were refreshed by the gratuitous 
plenty. The garrison also gave them horses, and pure gold, 
and much money, and swore that they would never more 
molest the pilgrims, nor prohibit their trafficking with the 
people of the country. They rested there five days. 

Departing from thence, they came to a camp of the Arabs, 
the chief of whom came forth to talk with the Christians, 

' According to the careful Raymond d'Agiles, this place, wliich appears 
from the researches of M. Poujoulat to be no longer in existence, was only 
four leagues from Marrah, probably near tlie Orontes. It is mentioned iu 
the history of the w.irs of Antioch by "Walter the chancellor, M. 
Poujoulat points out between Lattakia and Aleppo the fortified post of 
Gafar, a corresponding name ; but the distance from Marrah seems to 
preclude its being Capharda. 

® This could not be Czesarea in Palestine, situated between St. Jean 
d'Acre and Jaffa, but another town of the same name on the banks of the 
Oronte.'?, between Apamea and Emessa. 



FEB. 1099.] MARCH THEOUGH STEIA. IGl 

and made a peace with them to the satisfaction of both 
parties. They then journeyed to the city of Cephalia/ 
which stands in a valley, and is surrounded with stately 
walls, and rich in all kinds of commodities. The citizens 
were struck with alarm at the approach of the Franks, and 
deserted the place in a panic, leaving their gardens well 
stocked with vegetables, and their houses stored with provi- 
sions and all kinds of useful articles, without staying to 
look behind them. The Christians took possession of their 
substance in triumph, rendering grateful thanks to God, the 
Griver of all good. They marched forward on the third day, 
and, crossing a high mountain by a precipitous road, 
descended into another rich valley,^ where they rested twelve 
days. "While there they made a vigorous assault on a 
fortified place belonging to the Saracens, which stood in the 
neighbourhood of the valley, and would have stormed it if 
the Grentiles had not driven out to them herds of cattle and 
beasts of burden, which the Christians carried off, and thus 
returned to their camp encumbered with the spoil. The 
Pagans, however, had been so terrified that they retired in 
the night, and at dawn of day the Franks discovered that 
the fort was deserted and took possession of it. They found 
in it plentiful stores of corn and wine, meal, barley, and 
oil, and they spent there the feast of the Purification of St. 
Mary with great devotion. 

"While there, the chiefs received rich presents from the 
king of the city of Camela,^ who offered to make peace 
with the Christians, promising that he would never molest 
them, but rather love and honour them, if the Christian 
army treated him in like manner. 

The king of Tripoli* also sent ten horses and four mules 
with a large sum of gold to the Christians, and demanded 
by his envoys peace and amity with them. But the chiefs 
would neither make peace with him, nor receive his presents, 

^ No remains of this place now exist. 

^ The valley of Lem, or as some authors write it, Sem. Ordericus 
places it in the neighbourhood of Tripoli, aa we shall presently see. 

3 Emes^sa, now Heems. on the right bank of the Orontes, on the other 
Bide Mdnt Let)anon, and! under nearly the same latitude as Tripoli in Syria 
and Palrr,yra. 

* Tripoli of Syria, now called Tarabolos, between Botrys and Archis. 

YOL. III. M 



1G2 OHDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.XIY. 

on the contrary thej boldly replied, " We reject all that 
comes from you until you consent to become a Christian." 
After leaving the rich valley, they came to a castle called 
Archis,^ near which they encamped on the day before the 
ides [the 12th] of February .^ The place was strongly 
occupied by a vast number of Pagans, and frequented by 
hordes of Arabs and Publicans, who defended themselves 
bravely against the assaults of the Christians. Fourteen 
Christian knights sallied forth on the road to Tripoli, which 
was at no great distance from the camp, and fell in with 
sixty Turks, who were convoying a large body of men, 
Saracens, Arabs, and Curds, to the number of about one 
thousand and five hundred, with vast herds of cattle. 
The Christian knights charged the Turks with spirit and 
killing six of them took their horses, and dispersed all the 
rest of the convoy and brought back the cattle to the camp. 
Thus the invincible bravery of the Pranks quelled the 
courage of all the people of the country both far and near, 
God thus working in them, who is always at hand to succour 
his champions. It was owing to the power of Grod such 
success attended his servants, that fourteen Christians 
defeated sixty Turks, and dispersed the rest of the multitude 
carrying off the cattle from before their faces. 

Baymond Pilot, and Eaymond the viscount,^ with a few 
other knights attached to the division of Eaymond, count 
of Tholouse, went on an expedition towards the city of 
Tortosa,* where a considerable number of Pagans were 
collected. It being late, they chose a retired spot for 
passing the night in security, and lit a number of fires as if 
the whole army was present. At sunrise the Pranks 
mustered to attack the city, but found it deserted, and 

* Archis, or Arachis, between Tripoli and Tortosa. 

^ On Saturday, February 12, according to our author; but it appears 
that it was really on Monday the 1 4th. 

2 It is thought that Raymond Pilet was lord of Alais ; as for the other 
person described as " the viscount," and who is called by other writers 
vicecomes de Tentoria or Centoria, seems to be a mistake of the copyists, 
and that the person meant is Raymond, viscount de Turenne, first husband 
of Matilda, daughter of Geoffrey IL, count de Perche. 

* Tortosa, the ancient Antarudos, between Tripoli and Lattakia. Since 
they left CfKsarea, the crusadero' march had continually retrograded towards 
tiie north and Antioch. 



A.D. 1099.] THE CRUSADEES AT LAODTCEA. 1G3 

quartered themselves in it while they besieged the ci- 
tadel. 

The emir of the city of Maraclea,^ which was at no great 
distance, made peace with the CJiristians and planted their 
ensigns on the walls of the city. Meanwhile, Duke Grodfrey 
and the count of Flanders and Bohemond came as far as 
Laodicea,^ which is commonly called Licea. Bohemond 
however again parting from them, returned to Antioch, 
which he greatly desired to possess. The duke and the 
count were besieging the city of Gribel,^ when Count 
Eaymond received intelligence,^ that the Gentiles were at 
hand in great force, and the Christians were threatened with 
a desperate battle. He therefore sent this message to his 
allies who were besieging Gribel: "A battle is certainly 
impending, the Pagan army is marching against us. We 
wish you therefore to make peace with the city you are 
besieging, and to hasten to the assistance of your brethren 
in arms. It is better to unite and conquer than to be 
divided and subdued. Battle makes short work, and the 
gain of the victors is great ; while sieges waste much time, 
and fortified places are not easily reduced. Battles place 

*■ Now Marakia, between Tortosa and Lattakia. The crusaders still 
continued their retrograde movement towards Antioch, probably to meet 
the chiefs who remained there, and to whom Arnold, the duke of 
Normandy's chaplain, had been sent on a mission to prevail on them to 
join the army and make a combined movement on Jerusalem, 

* Laodicea, now Lattakia, twenty-six hours' journey to the S.W. of 
Antioch. Here Godfrey and the count of Flanders, who accompanied 
Bohemond from Antioch, parted from him to continue their route towards 
Jerusalem, while he retraced his steps to his capital. Laodicea had been 
taken and sacked by a fleet of twenty-two vessels, containing adventurers 
from Flanders and Boulogne, before the arrival of the crusaders under the 
walls of Antioch. 

^ The ancient Gabala, now Djebali, between Lattakia and Marakia. 

* It would have been more correct if our author had, instead of audivit, 
'written Jinxit se audivisse ; he "pretended to have leceived intelligence." 
It is not one of the most honourable traits in the character of the count of 
Tholouse, but it must not be disguised that it is an established fact that 
this rigid stickler for good faith, who was ever ready to remind Bohe- 
mond, even unseasonably, of his engagements to the Greek emperor, was 
prevailed on by the gifts presented him by the inhabitants of Djebali to 
draw off Godfrey and the count of Flanders from attacking their city by 
the alarm of an imaginary danger. Albert d'Alais gives the details of 
this false alarm. <« 

M 2 



164 ORDERICITS VITALTS. [b.TX. CH.XIV. 

nations and kingdoms at our feet. Enemies conquered in 
war disappear like smoke. When the war is ended and the 
enemy defeated, a vast empire will be open to us. It is 
expedient therefore that we join our forces, for if we may 
hope to have God for our leader and guide, we shall certainly 
triumph over our enemies in a short time. Hasten there- 
fore, that our adversaries on their arrival may not find us 
unprepared." 

The duke and the count received this message with great 
satisfaction, as they were eager for battle. They therefore 
made peace with the emir of Gibel, and received from him 
at the conclusion of the treaty many presents. They then 
marched to the aid of their comrades, but did not find the 
Turks as they expected. They therefore established them- 
selves on the other side of the river, and laid siege to the 
castle. Shortly afterwards, some of the Christian horsemen 
rode as far as Tripoli, looking for an opportunity of Annoying 
the Gentiles. They found some Turks and Arabians, with 
some of the people of Tripoli, riding about outside the town 
waiting the approach of the Christians, and intending to 
take them by surprise. Presently the squadrons charged 
each other ; the Saracens stood their ground fairly at the 
first onset, and resisted for a time ; at last however they 
turned their backs and fled before the swords of the enemy, 
and lost many of their party in the retreat ; several of the 
principal citizens fell there. The women, both mothers and 
virgins, watching the conflict from the battlements, poured 
forth imprecations on the Christians, and cries of anguish 
for their friends. But in the midst of their grief, some of 
them could not help admiring the valour of the Franks. 
The river which washes the city was coloured red by the 
blood of the Pagans who were slain, and the cisterns fed by 
its stream in the heart of the city were polluted by the 
carnage. The distress of the people of Tripoli was extreme, 
as well for the loss of their principal citizens, as for their 
cisterns, the waters of which were spoilt by the eftusion of 
blood. Thus they suffered two disasters on the same day, 
and their tears flowed for a double misfortune. They were 
in despair that the Franks had unexpectedly triumphed, and 
were troubled at the pollution of the cisterns they valued 
very Bighly. The people of Tripoli were therefore utterly 



A.D. 1099.] THE CliUSADEES AT TRIPOLI. 1G5 

disheartened, and shutting themselves up within their walld 
before they were besieged, did not venture any longer 
outside the gates ; their neighbours were partakers in their 
misfortunes. The Franks, having obtained a welcome victory, 
returned to their friends, giving praises to God. 

Another day, a detachment of cavalry made an irruption 
into the valley of Sem^ to plunder the country, and sweeping 
off oxen and asses, sheep and camels, to the number of 
nearl)' three thousand, they returned triumphant to the 
camp with this great booty. The crusaders were detained 
before the castle of Archis three months and a day,^ for it was 
almost impregnable. They celebrated there the feast of Easter, 
on the fourth of the ides [the lOlh] of April. Meanwhile, some 
Christian ships had anchored in a port near the castle, which 
was a safe harbour, and they were freighted with corn and 
wine, cheese and oil, lentils and lard, and all sorts of 
merchandise for the use of the army. The troops also made 
frequent expeditions to ravage the country, and never failing 
of success, they returned in high spirits and eager for fresh 
incursions.^ However, many of the Christians fell before 
the place, for the swords ot the Saracens were not always in 
their scabbards, nor their chivalry idle, nor their arms weak. 
Thus they slew Anselm de Eibmont,* and William Picard, 
men of high birth and experience in military affairs, who 
had signalized themselves by great aclnevements during that 
crusade. Many others also fell, whose names may God 
record in his book of life. 

* See before, p. 161. This valley, the name of which is differently 
written in the accounts of the first crusade, Lem, Sem, and Issem, is men- 
tioned by almost all the historians. 

^ From February 14 or 15 to May 13. 

^ According to our author, the camp of the Christians must have been 
plentifully supplied during the siee;e of Archis, while so liar from that being 
the case, they were exposed to the severest privations. He also omits the 
trial by hot iron to which the discoverer of the holy lance submitted on 
April 25, which ended in his death, 

* Anselm, count de Ribemont (Aisne), of the family of the ancient counts 
of Valenciennes, and an historian of the first crusade. Unfortunately 
we have only one of his narratives, that which gives an account of the 
capture of Antioch, and the events which immediately succeeded. It is 
printed in d'Acheri's Spicilegium. In the sequel we shall find Agnes, the 
bister of this excellent nobleman, marrying Walter Giffard, earl of Buck- 
ingham, and scandalizing all Normandy by her adulterous connection with 
Duke Robert Curthose. 



166 0"EDEEICTJS TITALIS. [b.IX. CH.XIV. 

The king of Tripoli had frequent communications with 
the Christian chiefs by means of his envoys, and used every 
argument to persuade them to accept his presents and make 
peace with him, breaking up their camp and receiving the 
money agreed on. The crusaders proposed to him to em- 
brace Christianity, and would not be diverted from their 
purpose by any other consideration. The prince heard of 
this change of religion with extreme repugnance, for he 
shrunk from relinquishing the rites of his fathers and the 
customs of his ancestors. Meanwhile, time wearing on, the 
new corn began to be white for harvest, for the climate of 
that country is much warmer than it is on this side the 
mountains, and the summer being earlier, the corn sooner 
ripens. New beans are gathered in the middle of March, 
wheat is cut by the ides [the 13th] of April, and the vintage 
is finished before autumn. 

In consequence, Duke Godfrey, and the counts of Nor- 
mandy, rianders, and Tholouse, with Tancred, held consul- 
tations respecting their departure, because the favourable 
season was pressing on, if not almost past. Eaising there- 
%re the siege of the castle which they had long invested, 
they marched to Tripoli,^ and concluded a treaty of peace 
with the inhabitants. The king delivered to them fifteen 
thousand bezants and fifteen horses of great value, with 
three hundred pilgrims he had long retained in captivity. 
Peace being made,^ and the markets opened, the strength 
of the Christians was universally re-established. The 
king also promised them that if they were successful in 
the battle which the emir of Babylon was then preparing to 
fight with them, he would become Christian, and, for the 
rest, would hold his territories under fealty to the chiefs. 

The crusaders quitted Tripoli in the middle of May,^ 
and marching all day through a mountainous country 
by narrow passages and difficult roads, arrived late in the 

* They arrived there on Friday, May 13. 

^ The emir of Tripoli was defeated in a bloody battle before he 
consented to these conditions. 

3 Peter Tudebode and Guibert de Nogent mention Friday, May 13, as 
the day of their arrival, and Monday the 16th as that of their departure. 
These dates are preferable to those supplied by Robert de St. Remi and 
others. 



: 



■MXY, 1099.] ORDER OF THE MARCH. 1G7 

evening at the castle of Betheren.^ Thence they came to 
Zebari,- a town lying on the sea-coast. Here they suffered 
excessive thirst for want of water, fainting for which they 
hastened forward to the river Braim,^ where men and beasts 
refreshed themselves with abundant draughts. On Ascen- 
sion-day* they had to thread a narrow defile, where they 
were exposed to the attacks of the Gentiles during the 
entire march, but they were not deterred from the attempt. 
The standard-bearers and men-at-arms rode in the van, 
looking out carefully against ambuscades ; next came those 
who had the care of the baggage and the drivers of the 
beasts of burden. The rear was brought up by a body of 
knights ready to give succour whenever it was needed. 
Thus the loaded attendants proceeded daily, and crowds of 
unarmed people were miugled with them. The trumpets 
sounded from time to time, and they marched slowly that 
the weak might not be left behind. They took it by turns to 
mount guard by night, and when there was especial cause 
of alarm, the watch was more on the alert : nothing was done 
indiscreetly or in disorder. Breaches of discipline were 
punished ; the inexperienced were taught ; the insubordinate 
were reproved ; the intemperate were restrained ; and all 
were encouraged to make charitable offerings. The practice 
of frugality and propriety was universal ; and, in a word, the 
camp was a school of moral discipline. Such were the habits 
and dispositions of the pilgrims to Jerusalem ; and as long 
as they observed these strict rules, and displayed their 
charitable feelings, God was evidently with them, and made 
them champions in his wars. I have given this account to 
compare it with the way of life, so worthy of reproach, of 
those disorderly persons who, full of vain-glory, followed in 
the track of this glorious expedition. In fact there is 
nothing like discipline in assemblies of men. 

Having at length traversed the mountains in which they 
expected to be attacked, without meeting an enemy, they 
passed four cities on the sea-coast, Barut,^ Sarepta, com- 

* Botrys, now Batroun. 
^ Byblos, now Gebail. 

2 The Lycus, the Turkish name of which is Nahr-el-Kelb. 

* Thursday, May 19. 

^ Berith, now Bevrout. 



168 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.XIT. 

monly called Sagitta/ Tyre, which is also called Sor, and 
Acharon called Acre,^ and afterwards a fortified place called 
Caiphas.^ Prom thence they advanced towards Csesarea/ to 
find quarters, and rested there on Whitsunday the fourth 
of the ides of June.^ Afterwards they marched to Diospolis, 
called also Eamatha, Arimathea, and Eamula,^ where they 
halted, in consequence of their fatigue; and the inhabitants, 
terrified by the approach of the pilgrims, deserted the town. 
The church formerly boasted a bishop in that place, but 
now the see was widowed and sunk in distress, since it was 
ingloriously subjected to the yoke of the Saracens. The 
Christians re-established a bishop in the city, and gave 
him the tenth of their substance that he might live by their 
offerings, and restore the long desolate church. It was 
there that the illustrious champion St. G-eorge had nobly 
contended for the faith, and gloriously ended his course by 
martyrdom. A church dedicated to his honour stands in a 
little suburb, where the precious remains of the confessor 
rest. The Christians wished to have this saint always 
their patron and companion, whom they had seen acting as 
their leader and guide in the battle of Antioch, and their 
mighty protector against the infidel nation. They therefore 
greatly honoured his church, and appointed a bishop at 
liamula, as we have already related. 

Inspired with religious ardour, the pilgrims set forward 
at day-break, and, on the signal being given, hastened 
onward on the road to Jerusalem, and accomplished on the 



* Our author confounds Sarepta (now Sarphen) with Sidon (now Seide) 
which the crusaders actually passed. Concerning the venomous serpents 
they encountered in the neighbourhood of this city, and the singular remedy 
suggested to them by the inhabitants of the country, see Albert d'Aix, 
b. V. p. 40. 

' St. Jolm d'Acre. 

^ The ancient Caipha stood at the extremity of a promontory to the 
S.W. of a little town which they call Caipha-la-Neuve. 

* Csesarea of Palestine. 

* Insteiid of the fourth of the ides, it should be of the calends, of June 
(May 29). 

® Our author confounds Lydda, the ancient Diospolis, celebrated for the 
martyrdom of St. George, Avith Ramla. The crusaders took both these 
cities successively. It was in the first they established a bishop. He waa 
a Norman, named Robert, a native of the diocese of Rouen. 



JUKE, 1099.] FIESif VIEW OF JERUSALEM. 109 

same day^ their long-clierishcd desire of reachiag the holy 
city ; for Jerusalem is distant twenty-four miles from 
Ramula. When they arrived at a spot from whence the 
towers of Jerusalem could be seen, the pilgrims stopped 
and, weeping with excessive joy, worshipped God, falling on 
their knees and kissing the holy ground. All proceeded 
with bare feet, except those who were compelled by necessary 
precaution to be armed against the enemy. So they went 
forward bathed in tears, and those who had come to pray, 
having first to fight, carried arms instead of scrips. 

Ch. XY. TJie siege of Jerusalem — Stations of the chief 
crusaders — Several assaults — The place taken ly storm — 
SacJc of the city and massacre of the inhabitants — Devotion 
of the pilgrims at the holy sepulchre. 

On the eighth of the ides [6th] of June,^ the Christiana 
invested Jerusalem, not as stepsons approaching a mother- 
in-law, but as children embracing their parent; for her 
friends and sons surrounded her to fetter the brood of aliens 
and bastards, not to deprive her of freedom, but to set her 
free. Eobert, duke of Normandy, laid siege to Jerusalem 
on the north side near the church of St. Stephen the proto- 
martyr, where, stoned by the Jews, he slept in the Lord. 
Near the Normans, the count of JFlanders pitched his tents. 
Duke Godfrey and Tancred besieged the city on the west ^ 
Count Eaymond sat down on the south side* on Mount Sion, 

* This is a mistake. The crusaders passed the night between the 5th 
ami 6th of June at the village of Anathot, which William of Tyre incor- 
rectly calls Emmaiis, where they witnessed an eclipse of the moon. This 
place is now called St. Jeremy. In the course of the day following, they 
arrived under the walls of Jerusalem. 

* On Monday the 6th of June ; but it is probable that the city was not 
invested till the following day, Tuesday, according to the account of 
William of Tyre. Peter Tudebode, does not make them arrive till that 
day. 

" Godfrey encamped at first, with the two Roberts, on the terrace facing 
the north of the ramparts. They were stationed before the gate now called 
the gate of Damascus, and the little gate of Herod, now walled up. It 
was not till afterwards that Godfrey shifted his quarters to the east angle of 
the walls, near the gate of St. Stephen. Tancred occupied the north-west 
quarter, quite alone, having pitched hia camp against a tower, now ruined, 
which took Ms name. 

* Raymond eslablitshed himself first on the west, on the hills of St. 
George, over against the western gate and the tower of David, from v/hich 



170 OEDEEICTJS ^TALft. [b.IX. CH.XY. 

round tlic church of St. Mary, mother of God, where the 
Lord Jesus supped with his disciples. Jerusalem therefore 
was beset and surrounded by her sons, while within she was 
profaned by a bastard population. 

Then Hugh Bunel, son of Eobert d'lge,^ presented 
himself to the duke of Normandy in a suit of excellent 
armour, offering to serve him faithfully as his natural lord, 
and being received with favour did good service in the siege 
of Jerusalem both by his valour and advice. He had long 
before assassinated in Normandy the Countess MabeP who 
had forcibly deprived him of his father's inheritance, and in 
consequence of this flagitious deed had fled to Apulia, with 
his brothers Ealph, Eichard, and Groislin, and he then went 
to Sicily, and afterwards took refuge with the emperor 
Alexius. Eut he could nowhere rest long in safety, for Wil- 
liam the Bastard, king of England, and all the family of the 
murdered countess sent emissaries to seek him in every 
part of the world, promising honours and rewards to any one 
who should despatch the fugitive assassin wherever he could 
be found. The brave Hugh, fearing the strong hands and 
long arms of the powerful king, left Christendom behind him, 
and fearing nothing so much as the whole race of the bap- 
tized, became an exile for a long course of time among the 
Mahometans, whose manners and language he adopted for 
twenty years .^ Being now well received by the Duke of 
Normandy, he was a great assistance to his countrymen, 
being able to detect the skilful manceuvres and stratagems 
which they contrived against the faithful. 

Cosan, also, a noble and powerful chief of Turkish lineage, 
freely came over to the Christians, and aided them in various 

his position was separated by the valley of Rephaim and a vast and deep 
fish pond ; but he removed to the south, on that part of Mount Sion which 
is not enclosed within the walls. All that portion of the city which extends 
from the gate of the Maugrabins to the gate of St. Stephen was not invested. 

' See vol. ii. p. 194. The name of Bunel is still common in Normandy. 

^ If Philip of Montgomery, surnamed the Grammarian, had not died at 
the siege of Antioch, one of the first persons the assassin would have seen 
about the duke would have been the son of his victim. 

' The murder having been committed in December, 1082, only sixteen 
years and a half had intervened in June 1099, during which Hugh d'Ige 
had led this proscribed life. But our author often uses round numbers, and 
is not exact in such computations. Besides years of exile might well be 
counted double. 



JUNE, 1099.] SIEGE OF JERrSALE:W. 171 

■ways in tlie capture of the city. He had become a true 
believer in Christ, and his heart was set on the regeneration 
of holy baptism. Cosan therefore used his utmost efforts 
to second those of his adopted friends and brothers in 
securing the dominion of Palestine and the capital of the 
kingdom of David. 

On the third day of the siege certain Christian knights 
went forth from the camp, namely Eaymond Pilot, Eaymond 
de Turenne,^ and some others, for the purpose of reconnoitring 
the country or obtaining plunder, and falling in with two 
hundred j^abs, attacked, defeated, and put them to flight. 
They slew a great many and took thirty horses. After thiy 
exploit, they returned in triumph to the camp. 

On Monday^ the crusaders made a vigorous assault on the 
city, and it was believed they would have taken it if they had 
been sufficiently supplied with scaling ladders. They made 
a breach in the outer wall, and raised one ladder against the 
inner one. The Christian knights mounted it by turns and 
fought with the Saracens on the battlements hand to hand 
with swords and lances. In these assaults many fell on both 
sides, but most on the side of the G-entiles. The trumpets 
sounding the recall, the Christians at length withdrew from 
the combat, and returned to their camps. Meanwhile, the pro- 
visions they brought with them began to fail, nor could bread 
be purchased for money, nor was any one able to succeed 
in foraging. The country round is entirely without water, 
and is moreover arid and rocky, affording no pasture for the 
subsistence of beasts of burden or other animals. It is also 
naked of trees and therefore produces but little fruit ; bear- 
ing only the olive and the palm, with a few vines. The 

1 Raymond, viscount de Turenne. See before, p. 1 62. 

' Monda}« June 13th. All the cotemporary accounts concur in this date 
excep'" the Belli Sacri Historia, which makes it Friday. Notwithstanding 
this mistake, the narrative will be found worthy of attention. The author, 
after having related, like all the others, that the only ladder they had wa» 
raised against the wall, adds that it was with the greatest difficulty Tancred 
was prevented from venturing to mount it. Raimbaud Creton took his 
place, and at the moment he got to the top and laid hold of the battlement 
to secure his footing, his hand was cut off. They were obliged to carry 
him back to the camp, and reserve the ladder for a more favourable oppor- 
tunity. The posterity of this brave man still exists in the family of the 
counts of Creton-d'Estourmel, who have preserved for eight centuries u 
portion of the true cross, presented by Godfrey to their valiant ancestor. 



172 ORDEUICTJS YITALTS. [b.IX. CH.XV. 

river Jordan is at the distance, it is computed, of nearly 
thirty stadia from Jerusalem. . Connected with it, are six 
lakes, but they lie far away. There are cisterns within the 
walls which supply the city. At the foot of Mount Sion is 
the fountain of Siloah, but its waters could only slake the 
thirst of a very small number. It was, however, in great 
request, and a small quantity of it was sold at a high rate. 
They led the horses six miles to water, at considerable risk. 
Meanwhile, news arrived in the camp that merchant ships 
belonging to Christians had arrived at Japhi, which I think 
was anciently called Joppa.^ This intelligence spread great 
joy throughout the army, and the chiefs took counsel for 
providing for the safety of those who went to and fro between 
the camp and the ships for the transport of necessaries. 
Joppa is about eight miles distant from Eamula; and the 
people of Ascalori, and the wandering tribes of natives in the 
mountains or in the fastnesses of the steep defiles, sometimes 
sallied forth and massacred parties of travellers. Their 
movements, or rumours of them, harassed the convoys 
despatched by the merchants. To put an end to this, Kaymond 
Pilot, Achard de Montmel,^ and William de Sabran,^ v/ith 
one hundred men-at-arms of the division of the Count of 
Tholouse, sallied forth at the da-^-n of day, and, followed by 
a body of foot soldiers, began their march towards the sea- 
coast. They were proceeding to the port, trusting in their 
own valour, when their force became separated into two 
bodies, whether purposely or from mistaking the road, we 
cannot say. However, thirty of the horsemen who took a 
different direction from the rest fell in with a hundred Arabs, 
Turks, and Saracens, belonging to the emir's army, and 
boldly charging them closed with them and engaged in battle. 

* Now Jaffa. 

* Montmel in the Herault. 

' William de Sabran (Card) was living in 1123. He was nephew of 
Emenon or Amaujeu de 3^bran, the first person known of this family, 
whose signature to a document is found in 1029. The descendants of 
William assumed the title of constables by the grace of God of the counts 
of Tholouse. He is thought to be the person who, at the siege of Antioch, 
surprised the wife and family of Bagui-Sya,n in bed, and got from them 
3000 bezants of gold. The historians say it was a person of the name of 
William, one of the followers of the count of Tholouse. 

Peter Tudebode adds to these names that of William Carpinel. 



JUNE — JULY, 1099.] WATER AND PBOYISIONS TAIL. 173 

The enemy gave them a warm reception, and trusting in 
their superior numbers surrounded the small band of 
Christians. Such is the mode of fighting among the 
Saracens. They had already succeeded in this, and were 
talking confidently of the slaughter they looked forward to, 
when a messenger despatched to Raymond Pilot shouted 
aloud, as he called to him : " Fly with the utmost speed to 
the succour of your comrades, for without your aid they will 
all be cut oflT. They are surrounded by the enemy, but as 
yet they are doing their best to defend themselves." 

On hearing this, they gave their horses the reins, and 
spurring onward flew quicker than thought to the spot. 
Each knight clasping his shield to his breast levelled his spear 
at a horseman in the enemy's ranks, and each brought his 
foe to the earth. Appearing thus unexpectedly on the scene, 
they turned the scale, and drawing their swords, by God's 
help, changed the fortune of the day. The Pagans tried to 
rally their forces, and forming them into two troops, prolong 
the conflict, but were not able. Por the Pranks charged 
them again with such impetuosity, that they released their 
comrades who were beset, and who lost only Achard, a brave 
knight and some foot soldiers. Having pursued the flying 
TurJvs four miles, cutting down many of the fugitives, they 
saved one hundred and three horses, and took one man alive, 
who was compelled to give a particular account of all that 
was planned against the Christians. 

Meanwhile, the Christians employed in the siege were 
suffering the torments of constant thirst. The Pagans lay 
in ambush for the people who had to drive the horses six 
miles to water, and occasioned them great losses in the narrow 
defiles. Cedron and the other torrents were dried up by the 
excessive drought. Even barley-bread was dear in the 
camp. The natives, concealing themselves in dens and caverns, 
interrupted all convoys of provisions. 

The chiefs of the army assembled in council to consider 
what was to be done in the midst of these calamities. They 
said: " A¥e are in difficulties on all sides ; bread is wanting; 
the water has failed. We ourselves are, in fact, closely 
blockaded, i»hile we fancy we are besieging this city. We 
can hardly venture outside our camp, and wlien we do, return 
empty. Our long delays have produced the scarcity, and, 



I74i ORDESICXJS VITALIS. [b.IX. CH.XV. 

unless we find a remedy, matters will become worse. This 
place can never be taken by the mere strength of our hands 
and arms without the aid of engines of war. "We have 
to contend against walls, and bulwarks, and towers ; we are 
opposed by a numerous garrison who make an obstinate 
defence. What, then, is your opinion ? Let us undertake 
something which will relieve ourselves and distress the 
besieged. We want timber to construct machines for 
assaulting the walls and towers of the place. As the 
country is not woody, let us take the rafters of the houses 
and beams from the churches, and shape them to our purpose, 
so that we may attack the city in the most determined 
manner; otherwise, we waste our time to no purpose." 

At length the faithful champions of the cross discovered 
some timber at a great distance from the camp,^ to which 
they transported it with vast labour. Carpenters were 
assembled from the whole army, some of whom hewed the 
rough surface of the trees, others squared it and bored it, 
while the rest fitted the beams and planks together. Duke 
Godfrey built one machine at his own expense ; the count 
of Tholouse caused another to be constructed at his proper 
cost. On the other hand, the Saracens used every efibrt to 
strengthen the fortifications, raising the towers higher by 
working in the night, and devoting themselves without 
respite to increase the defences. 

One Saturday^ Duke Godfrey's machine was transported 
in the dead of the night to the foot of the walls, and erected 
before sunrise, three days being employed in unremitting 
exertions to fit the parts together and prepare it for use. 
The count of Tholouse caused his machine, which might be 
called a castle of wood, to be placed near the wall on the 
south of the place, but a deep hollow prevented its being 
joined to the wall. Such machines cannot be guided on 
declivities nor carried up steep places, and can only be 

* According to M. Michaud, this timber was procured from the forest 
districts of Samaria and Gabaon. Gaston, viscount of Beam, who was very 
skilful in constructing engines of war had the superintendence of the works 
The duke of Normandy was one of the chiefs employed to escort the 
convoy. See in the Belli Sacri Historia and the Gesta Tancredi, the very 
unpoctical circumstances which occasioned Tancred to discover beams 
ulready prepared for building the machines. 

2 Saturday, the 9tli of July. 



JULY 15, 1099.] JEEUSALEM TAKEN BY STOllM. 175 

transported on level ground. Proclamiition was therefore 
made through the camp, that whoever should cast three 
stones into the hole should for so doing receive a penny. 
In consequence all the people who were weary of delay lent 
a hand willingly to the proposed work. 

The bishops and priests addressed the multitude in moving 
discourses, pointing with their fingers, while they spoke of 
the death of Christ, to the very spot on which he suifered ; 
and while describing with holy eloquence the heavenly Jeru- 
salem, taking for its type the terrestrial one before which 
they were assembled. In consequence, all the laity flew to 
arms, and made a general attack on the city during Wednes- 
day and Thursday, which was continued by night as weU as 
by day. Again, having been prepared by fasting and 
supplications, tears and alms, and strengthened by the com- 
munion of the consecrated host, they renewed their attack 
at the first dawn of the morning of Eriday, the ides [15th] 
July,^ but without success ; for the besieged to whom the 
defence of the walls and towers was committed mutually 
co-operated in hurling fire and stones on the assailants. 
The count of Tholouse, having filled up the hollow, which 
took three days and nights to accomplish, brought his 
wooden tower up to the wall, and then permitted his troops 
to rest till Monday on account of the great toil they had 
undergone for a whole week. 

After the fatigues of the morning the Franks, by their 
commander's order, withdrew awhile from the assault, and 
the Pagans from the defence. The emir, Guinimond,^ and 
his nephew Frigolind, the Persian, held the tower of David, 
and had assembled there the magistrates and principal per- 
sons of the city for a conference. Meanwhile the women of 
the place collected on the terraced roofs of the houses, as is 
the custom in Palestine, and sang by turns, answering one 
another with shrill voices, a song to the following effect : — 

" Praise be to Mahomet our god !^ sound the glad tim- 

* There had been an assault the evening before, which failed. 

2 Iftikar-Eddaule, the glory of the empire, the caliph's lieutenant in 
Egypt, to whose dominion Jerusalem had been subjected towards the close 
of the precedkig year, by the exertions of the vizier Afdhal ; our author is, 
therefore, wrong in representing the city as still belonging to the Turks at 
the time of the siege. 

" The shrill chant which Ordericus puts into the mouth of the women of 



176 ORDEETCUS TITALIS. [e.IX. CH.XV. 

brels and offer him victims, that our terrible enemies may- 
be overcome and perish. 

" See how they swell and strut with barbaric pride, at- 
tacking without mercy the nations of the east, and eagerly- 
pillaging the rich produce of our land. 

" The strangers are driven by w^ant from their barren 
country to our fruitful soil, where they plunder fertile pro- 
vinces. They curse our people, and regard them as wild 
beasts. 

" Washed by baptism, they worship a crucified God, 
treating our rites, our worship and divinities, with con- 
tempt ; but vengeance and destruction speedily await them. 

" Valiant Turks, repel by your courage the assaults of 
the Franks ! Be mindful of the glorious deeds of your fore- 
fathers! This very day, your enemies will either flee or 
perish." 

"While the Turkish women raised their voices in such 
songs as these from the flat roofs of their houses, the Chris- 
tians listened in astonishment, inquiring curiously from 
their interpreters what these sounds meant. Then Conon, 
li German count, a brave knight and wise counsellor, who 
had married the sister of Duke Godfrey, said : " Do you 
hear, my lord duke, what these women say ? Do you under- 
stand what they mean ? When the men faint with toil and 
apprehension, the women rouse themselves and heap re- 
proaches on our heads, to the shame and discredit of their 
warriors, daring to terrify and mock us by their empty 
cries ; but they will suffer for it ; let us be roused to manly, 
nay, to heavenly resolution. In the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who suffered on the sixth day of the week, let 
us fly to arms, and making a signal assault on the city, 
go this very day to the sepulchre of our Lord. 

Accordingly, at the third hour, being the time at which 
the Jews condemned the Lord in Pilate's presence, the 
Christians, in memory of his passion, took fresh courage, 
and inspired with new daring commenced the assault, as if 
they had suffered nothing before. Duke Godfrey and his 

.Terusalem gathered on the flat roofs of their nouses, would have consider- 
able dramatic effect, w(^re it not disfigured by entire ignorance uf the funda- 
mental doctrines and the rites of Mahonietanism. 



JULY 15, 1099.] TKE FIRST TO ESCALADE. 177 

brother Eustace fought bravely at the head of the troops, 
and the rest followed their lead. Then Letold and Eambold 
Croton,' two brave soldiers, mounted the walls, and, utter- 
ing loud cries, continued to struggle without giving way. 
They were followed by several others, and those who had 
hitherto defended the fortifications fled on all sides, and no 
longer thought of the defence of the city. Crowds of Chris- 
tians then rushed in, and, pursuing the fugitives, gave no 
quarter.^ 

The Armenian, Greek, and Syrian inhabitants of Jeru- 
salem, who had been under the Turkish yoke, and had, 
under great difficulties, maintained Christian w^orship to the 

^ Historians do not agree in the name nor even the country of the 
crusaders who were the first to escalade the walls of Jerusalem. Several 
of them endeavour to claim the distinction for their countrymen, or at 
least a share of it. According to the chronicle of St. Brienne, the first 
■was a Breton followed by two Normans. Ralph de Caen gives the honour 
to a Norman lord, Bernard de St. Valleri, a kinsman of Duke Robert, 
who has been twice mentioned in the course of the narrative. 

It appears, however, plain that the first who actually gained the summit 
of the walls of the holy city were two brothers, natives of Tournay, and 
belonging t(» Godfrey's division of the army. One was called Letalde^ 
Letolde, or Ludolfe, and the other Engelbert. As for Rambold Creton, we 
have already seen that his escalade took place on the assault of the 13th of 
June. The claims of Bernard de St. Valleri to the honours of the 15th of 
July appear better founded. 

The author of the Belli Sancti Historia, who was an eye-witness and 
quite disinterested in the question of national vanity, tells us what really 
passed. A piece of timber having been let down from the wooden tower 
to the wall, so as to establish a connection between them, Bernard de St. 
Valleri immediately began to make his way to the battlements, astride on 
this beam, but while he was accomplishing this jDerilous and difficult 
exploit, the two Belgians ran to the scaling-ladders, mounted them with 
great rapidity, and were the first to leap from the wall into the interior of 
the place. The Norman was, therefore the third who reached the summit, 
and, perhaps annoyed at having been thus distanced, penetrated into the 
city, with those who followed him, by another street. There he signalized 
himself as the author tells us, by a sword-cut, worthy to be compared with 
those of Godfrey and Robert of Normandy under the walls of Antioch, 
already mentioned. 

^ Ordericus has not told us by what quarter the main body of the cru- 
saders penetrated into the Holy City. According to the author of the Belli 
Sacri Historia, it was by the gate of the valley of Jehosaphat, after having 
unhunij the. wicket. This eye-witness paints with fearful vividness the 
multitude rushing in to pillage the place, while the knights were engaged 
in massacring all the inhabitants they met, without distinction of age or 
Bex, and the chiefs were encouraging and directing thia horrible butchery. 

YOL. III. S 



178 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. CH.XT. 

best of their power, as soon as they saw the crusaders 
storming the city, fled in a body to the church of the 
Holy Sepulchre, and began devoutly chanting the Kyrie 
eleison, and other prayers suited to the exigency of the 
occasion, while they waited the issue of events. Meanwhile 
Tancred and his followers, having lost their way, by Grod's 
providence lighted on the church, and discovering by their 
prayers and religious ceremonies that the people were wor- 
shippers of Christ, he said to his followers : " These men are 
Christians, none of you presume to do them any injury: 
we are not come here to afflict the worshippers of Christ, 
but to deliver them from their cruel persecutors. They are 
our brothers and friends, whose worth has been proved by 
severe trials, like gold in the furnace." Then the illustrious 
champion left there Bigod d'Ige, the commander of his 
troops, with two hundred soldiers to guard the church, and 
prevent the pagans from again taking possession of it. 
Tancred himself, with the rest of his followers, marched to 
the assault of other parts of the fortifications, and to assist 
their comrades who were scouring the city and putting the 
Saracens^ to the sword. Meanwhile the Christian na- 
tives, who remained with Bigod d'Ige in the church of the 
Holy Sepulchre, had private conferences with him, and 

' Allophilos. Our author has employed this word before to designate 
the Mahomedan conquerors of the Holy Land. A capital letter is used 
for the initial both in the text of Duchesne, and of the Historical Society 
of France, seeming to indicate that the word represents a nation, tribe, or 
sect, and it has been suggested that it may be translated worshippers (or 
more closely) votaries of Allah. But the text of Duchesne, though in 
general less correct than that of the recent French edition, which follows 
the MS. of St. Evroult,) spells it Allophylos, and it seems most probable 
that Ordericus used the word in the sense of aX\6(pv\oQ {aWoq and (pv\i']) 
of another race, not a Jew, in which sense it is employed in Acts x. 28, 
In the Septuagint the word is used in Isa. Ixi. 5, and ib. 6, for " the 
stranger," and "sons of the stranger." See also 2 Maccab. x. 2, 5, and 
Joseph. Antiq. i. 21, and iv. 8; Diod. Sic. i. 35; Thucyd. i. 102. Allophyli 
is frequently employed by Sulpitius Severua (a.d. 427) to designate the 
Philistines or Syrians: "Israelite subjecti Allophylis," *' Uxorem habuit 
ex Allophylis ;" and several other passnges. As the word was thus used, 
before the time of Mahomet, to represent the inhabitants of the very 
district of which Ordericus speaks, Duchesne's reading of Allophyli, not 
Allof)hili, is probably correct, but without the initial capital. The other 
version, notwithstanding the turn this gives it, besides the sound, would 
liiukc the word a strange compound. 



JULY 15, 1099.] THE HOLY PLACES PliOTECTED. 179 

desirinf( to secure his protection, conducted him and hid 
companions, with great courtesy, to the holy places, namely, 
the sepulchre of the Lord, and other sacred objects, showing 
them some things which they and their predecessors had 
long hidden in concealed recesses, for fear of the pagans. 
Amongst other holy relics, Bigod d'Ige there found, in a 
marble urn, deposited in a place hollowed under the altar, a 
little packet of the hair of St. Mary, mother of God, which 
he afterwards carried with him to France, and reverently 
distributed among the sanctuaries of the cathedrals and 
abbey-churches. For the mother, always a virgin, being in 
the deepest distress diu-ing the passion of Christ, her son 
and Lord, according to the custom of the nation and of 
those times, rent her clothes and tore her hair, and devoutly 
uttered lamentable cries for the death of her illustrious 
friend. The devout women of the neighbourhood who were 
present, and had long attached themselves to the service of 
the divine Master, affectionately supported the weeping 
mother of the King of heaven, and lavished upon her all the 
endearing attentions which her circumstances required. 
They then piously gathered up and carefuUy preserved the 
hair which had been plucked, and John the Divine,^ and 
other followers of Christ, afterwards deposited it in a 
place of security, foreseeing how many would profit by 
it. I have inserted this account in my work, because 
the before-named Bigod d'Ige gave two of these sacred 
hairs to a monk of Chartres, who was his cousin, which he 
transferred to the church of Maule, where many sick per- 
sons were healed by their virtue. 

The emir, who commanded the tower of David, with the 
chief persons of the city, and many others assembled there, 
presented themselves in the greatest terror to Count Ray- 
mond, and opened the gate to him without delay .^ The 

' On this title given to St. John, see vol. i., p. 238. In the printed text 
of Duchesne, the name of this apostle is always spelt Joannes^ but the MS. 
of St. Evroult, and usage of the times rendered it Johannes. 

■-* This small number of Mussulmans were the only persons who escaped 
the carnage, thanks to the vigilant protection of the count of Tholouse, who 
was much reproached for this act of humanity. Tancred was less fortunate, 
as we shall find, in his endeavour to save those who took refuge in the 
mosque built on the site of Solomon's Temple. The brave knight had, 
according to the report of his panegyrist, Ralph de Caen, to submit to 



180 ORBERTCUS YITALIS. [b. IX. Cn. XV. 

eTitrance at this gate was only to be obtained before for 
money, it being here that the pilgrims paid the tax for 
admission into the city, and without it they were mercilessly 
driven from the gate. 

The dispersed citizens again collected, and made a ytand 
in the temple of Solomon, where they resisted stoutly the 
attacks of the Christians, but being at last driven to despair, 
they laid down their arms and submitted to their fate. No 
one knows the number of the slain, but the floor of the 
temple was knee-deep in blood, and great heaps of corpses 
were piled up in all quarters of the city, as the victors 
spared neither age, sex, rank, nor condition of any kind. 
They exercised this bitter vengeance upon the heathen and 
thus massacred them, because they had profaned the temple 
of the Lord and the church of the Holy Sepulchre, and had 
used the temple of Solomon and the other churches for 
their own accursed rites, and foidly polluted them. Some 
had taken refuge on the roof of Solomon's temple and 
begged that Tancred's standard might be planted there, so 
that under its protection they might hope for a better fortune. 
But it profited them little or nothing, for not even these 
were spared by the Christians, except that they sufl:ered 
some few to live that they might employ them in burying 
the dead ; but these were afterwards butchered or sold as 
slaves. Tancred was much grieved at this, but he did not 
quarrel with his companions about it.^ As for the count of 
Tholouse, he conveyed in safety to Ascalon tlie emir who 
had surrendered to him, and given up the tower of David 
with the rest of his party ; for he had made them a promise 
to that effect, and he kept his engagement. The victors did 
not pillage and set on fire this city like other places taken 
by storm, but finding the houses well supplied with all 
conveniences, they reserved them for their own use, and 
many liberally shared with the poor the stores they found. 
Each 'one quietly appropriated the first house he came to, 

another humiliation in having to refund 700 marks of silver, to compensate 
for the rapacity with which he had pillaged this mosque. 

' If we may believe Peter Tudebode, the affair was far less honourable 
to Tancred's character, and he himself caused it to be proclaimed by the 
public crier, on Saturday morning, that v/hoever wanted to kill Mussul- 
ffifins had nothing else to do but to go to the mosque of SolOiiion's Temple. 



' 



JULT, 1099.] GODFBEY OF BOUILLON ELECTED KING. 181 

whether it was large or small, deserted by the Pagans, and 
taking free possession of it with all the wealth, it contained, 
preserves it as his heritage to the present day. 

The crusaders, having thus at length secured their 
triumph, hastened in crowds to cover with kisses the tomb 
of their blessed Saviour, having first cleansed their handti 
from the stain of blood ; and many of them approaching it 
with bare feet and tears of joy, offered their thanksgivings 
and sacrifices of peace. The faithful indulged in transports 
of joy, now that they had gained the object of their long 
cherished hopes, which they had sought through so many 
toils and dangers. They now witnessed wdth delight the 
end of their labours, and being secure for the present 
formed exalted conceptions of their future recompense. 
However their immediate attention was called to the necessity 
of clearing the city of the bodies of the slain, for the 
spectacle was horrid and the stench insupportable. The 
corpses were therefore piled in heaps by the captive Gentiles 
and the poorer pilgrims who w'ere paid for the service, and 
being burnt, the city was thus freed from impurities. 

€h. XYI. Godfrey of Bouillon elected Jcing of Jerusalem — 
A bishop appointed — The 3Iussulmans collect an army 
and threaten the city — The crusaders march out to attack 
them. 

The faithful soldiers of Christ settled themselves securely 
in the city of Jerusalem, rendering due thanks to Grod by 
whose free goodness they bad triumphed over the heathen. 
They restored the churches to their former honours, and 
fitted them all for the work of prayer. A feast was institu- 
ted on Friday the 10th of July, to commemorate the taking 
of the city. They also held a council for the appoint- 
ment of a king, and on the eighth day^ after the conquest of 
Jerusalem, elected Duke Godfrey. He was of royal blood, 
and his ancestors were distinguished for their Christian 
profession. Eustace, count of Boulogne, who w^as with 
William at the battle of Senlac in England, married Ita, 
daughter of Godfrey, duke of Lorraine, by whom he had 
Baldwin, Godfrey, and Eustace, who were by God's grace 

' According to some historians the election of Godfrey took plactj on tho 
ter.th day, Sunday the 24th of July. 



182 O'R.DEPvTCUS VITALTS. [b.IX. Cn.XTT. 

mucli advanced in the world in wealth, and power, and were 
especially proved, strengthened, and elevated in the expe- 
dition to Jerusalem. Godfrey, being the eldest, was raised 
to the throne of King David, because he had triumphed in 
the war conducted with great ability after the French 
manner, being both in heart and arm a most valiant warrior, 
as well as generous and mild, and distinguished for his 
clemency. 

At the same time Arnulf de Zocris,^ a very learned man, 
was elected to fill the functions of bishop. Meanwhile, 
Tancred and Count Eustace, with their vassals and retainers, 
marched to Neapolis^ on the invitation of the inhabitants, 
who gave up the place to them and made a treaty of peace. 
They remained there some days, enjoying their repose, until 
tlie king of Jerusalem sent messengers to them with great 

^ It is singular that, our author has told us so little of this remarkable 
person. His name was not Arnulf us de Zocris, but Armdfus de RoheHf 
Caslello Flandrice, probably Roculx, near Valenciennes. All the historians 
agree as to his learning and ability. He made his profession at Caen 
with great credit, Ralph de Caen, who was one of his scholars, speaks of 
him with veneration and enthusiasm. The princess Cecilia, who was then 
a nun, and afterwards abbess, of the monastery of the Holy Trinity at Caen, 
recommended him as chaplain to her brother, when he embarked on his 
pilgrimage for the Holy Land. Tt appears, even, that Duke Robert had 
engaged to take the first favourable opportunity of making him a bishop, 
( )do, bishop of Bayeux, on his death at Palermo, left him the greatest part 
of his splendid effects. If Ralph de Caen is to be believed. Bishop Adhe- 
mar also bequeathed to him his authority, so as to justify the singular title 
of vice-bishop which the historian gives him from the time of the death of 
the bishop of Puy. 

But as Arnulf had been the principal opponent of the authenticity 
of the holy spear at Antioch, most of the historians of the crusades, and 
especially the fellow countrymen of Peter Barthelemi, have not spared him. 
They afKrm that he was the natural son of a priest, and ought in that 
quality to have been attached as a serf to the service of the church to which 
his birth had occasioned scandal ; that he was not even a sub-deacon, and 
that his irregularities during the crusade had made him the subject of the 
taunts and songs of the people. It is however difficult to believe that a 
j)rince, even so little scrupulous as the duke of Normandy, would have 
received as chaplain from his pious sister a man Avho was not even qualified 
by one of the lowest degrees of holy orders. However this may be, xVrnuif, 
elected patriarch on St. Peter's day (August 1), was deposed before the end 
of the year, which seems a strong confirmation of the charges made against 
him. His predecessor Symon II. died in the island of Cyprus during the 
f-ieje of Jerusalem by the crusaders. 

^ Naplouse. 



AUG. 1090.] THE CRUSADEKS AGATX IN ARMS. 183 

liaste, saying : " We Lave heard for certain that the emir of 
Babylon' is at Ascalon, and making great preparations for 
hostilities against us. Hasten therefore your return, that 
we may encounter him boldly before he shuts us up in the 
city. When once blockaded, both ingress and egress will be 
difficult ; let us meet him therefore on a fair field, and by 
God's help our success will be proportionably easy and 
triumphant. We are more active in our movements and 
the use of arms than the Turks, and we should wish to meet 
them while they think they have nothing to apprehend." 
On hearing this, Tancred and Eustace marched to Ramula 
on the sea coast, and finding a number of Arabs, the 
advanced guard of the emir's army, they attacked with spirit 
and speedily dispersed them. Putting some to the sword, 
they spared others to obtain from them exact accounts of 
the emir and his army. They therefore learnt all particulars 
as to who they were, their numbers, what were their 
intentions, and in what quarter they would make an 
attack. 

Tancred sent to the king the account he had carefully 
gathered from the reports of the prisoners. " Know for 
certain," he said, " that they are really preparing for war 
against us at Ascalon, and that nearly all the world is 
assembling and conspiring against us, thinking to defeat 
and crush us. Collecting then your whole forces, come 
and let us lay hold of this synagogue of Satan. For, as you 
say, if we attack them fearlessly and unawares, we shall 
easily overcome them by God's help, as they are encumbered 
with arms and baggage, and are bringing wath them engines 
of war to assault the city." In consequence, the king caused 
his heralds to proclaim that all should prepare themselves 
for battle, and march immediately under the royal standard. 
The king therefore, with the patriarchs before-named, the- 
count of Flanders and the bishop of Martorano,^ marched 
out of Jerusalem on the third day.^ The count of St. 

1 The vizir Afdhal, who had reduced Jerusalem under his master's 
dominion some months before, as lately remarked. 

2 Amulf, bishop of Martorano, a suffragan of Cosenza, in the Hither 
Calabria. Ralph de Caen does not give us a high notion of the ability of 
this prelate. 

^ Tuesday the 9th of August. 



184 OKDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.IX. CK.XVT. 

Giles and the Normans delayed their departure until they 
hoard more particulars respecting the march of the emir.^ 
When the king had observed the enemy's preparations, he 
sent the bishop of Martorano to Jerusalem to inform the 
princes of the state of affairs ; and after conferring with the 
counts of Tholouse and Normandy, he was hastening to 
carry back their message to the king and the patriarch, 
when he fell into the hands of the Pagans, and whether he 
was slain or carried away captive it is not known, but he 
was never seen afterwards.^ 

The counts of Tholouse and Normandy began their march 
for the scene of w^ar with large bodies of troops, leaving 
Jerusalem on the fourth day of the week.^ The clergy 
offered ceaseless prayers and masses. Peter the hermit and 
a small number of unarmed people who remained behind, 
together with the defenceless women, made processions from 
church to church, and spent their time in prayers and alms, 
imploring God in his mercy to be propitious to his people, 
and signally overthrow the enemy with his mighty arm. 
The chiefs with their respective followers were now assem- 
bled on the banks of the river which runs near Ascalon. 
They found large herds of cattle feeding there of which they 
secured a great number. The Pranks were pursued by 
three hundred Arabs, but they turned upon them and drove 
them to the camp with the loss of two prisoners. After 
this excursion the Christians retired to their camp, where 
they rested during the night, or rather almost all were occu- 
pied in keeping watch and saying their prayers. Late in the 
evening, an order was issued by the patriarch forbidding any 
pillage by the troops until the battle which was to be fought 
on the morrow should be ended. 

^ It was not so much their uncertainty respecting the march of the emir 
which detained the count of Tholouse and the duke of Normandy at 
•Jerusalem to the last moment, as their indiiference for Godfrey's interest, 
which alone they affected to consider as involved in this contest. His 
elevation to a throne, however unstable and far from splendid, immediately 
occasioned much jealousy among his companions in arms. 

'^ This })relate's being carried off by the Mussulmans was generally con- 
sidered a punishment from heaven for the part he had taken in the election 
of the bishop of Jerusalem, his namesake. 

^ On Wednesday, August 10. 



AUG. 14, 1099.] BATTLE OF ASCALO]!f. 185 

Ck. XVII. TJie battle of Ascalon — Victory of the crusaders 
over the vastly superior forces of the injldels — Dispute 
between the king of Jerusalem and Godfrey count of Tho- 
louse about the possession of the town. 

At sun-rise on the day before the ides [the 12th] of 
August/ the holy army of Christ took up its position in a 
level and pleasant valley near the sea, being formed into six 
, divisions. Of these the king, the counts of Normandy, 
Tholouse and Flanders, with Graston, Eustace, and Taucred, 
each put himself at the head of his own knights and cavalry, 
and gave precise orders to his bowmen and foot soldiers. They 
were detached in advance with instructions when they should 
shout their war-cries and make attacks, when they should 
stand firm, when they should press vigorously the close ranky 
of the enemy ; and constantly to watch the advance of their 
standards in the rear, fearing nothing, and never recoiling 
although severely handled by their adversaries. All this 
indeed the Christian soldiers had learnt in many well-fought 
fields. 

On the other side, the Grentiles drew out their troops 
innumerable as the stars, ranging their countless legions in 
squadrons from flank to flank of the Christian army. The 
Ethiopians were placed in the van, with orders not to move. 
They had one knee planted on the ground, and covering the 
upper part of their bodies with their shields were armed with 
arrows and swords. They were forbidden to make the least 
move in retreat, or to advance more than a single pace from 
the ground they occupied. These trained bands held their 
position, according to their orders. To provide against the 
excessive thirst to which they were exposed by the heat, the 
clouds of dust, and the fatigue and length of the battle, they 
had gourds full of water suspended from their necks that 
they might be able to hold their ground, or pursue the fugi- 
tives without respite. As to their flying themselves, such a 
thing was never thought of ; animated as they were by their 

* Friday, August 12, instead of which read Sunday, August 14. Our 
author having spoken of only six divisions of the army, names seven com- 
manders. It would appear that the fifth corps was placed under the 
orders of Eustace, count of Boulogne, and the sixth under those of 
Tancred and Gaston jointly, as waa the case at the battle of Antioch. 



186 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.IX. Cn.XTTT. 

vast numbers, by the fierce courage of barbarous nations, 
and by the order of their commander ^ who had declared that 
fugitives should lose their heads. 

Both armies being thus drawn up in battle array and arived 
on the field, the Christians halted for a short time, and rais- 
ing their eyes upwards knelt on the ground and praj^ed 
devoutly ; for they looked for help from heaven, from 
whence they had often been sensible of receiving it in their 
necessities. After ofiering a short prayer, and reverently 
making the sign of the blessed cross on their foreheads, they 
mounted their horses in great confidence, and, in the name 
of the Lord Jesus, undauntedly charged the enemy ; for 
the Gentiles had now halted, and waited the attack in an 
immovable attitude. The count of Tholouse rode at the 
head of his cavalry on the right wing of the army towards 
the sea. The king's division hastened forward on the left. 
The duke of Normandy, the count of Flanders, with Tancred 
and others, were posted in the centre ; but there were ten 
Mahometans in the ranks for one of our people. At the 
beginning of the battle, E-oberfc duke of Normandy, perceiv- 
ing at a distance the emir's standard, which exhibited an 
apple of gold on the point of a spear, the stafi^ shining with 
silver plates, by which the duke learnt the emir's statiori 
in the line, he singled him out in the midst of the squadrons, 
and rushing furiously at him gave him a mortal wound.^ 
This greatly checked the enemy's daring. The count of 
".Flanders now charged them, and the fearless Tancred dashed 
into the middle of their camp. The pagan cavalry presently 
turned round and fled. The Ethiopians were struck with 
panic but did not move. The king however, and some of the 

' The vizir Afdhal. 

^ This is a correct account with the exception of the word mortal. 
"The standard," observes M.Prevost, "like that of Richard-Coeur-de-Lion ia 
the subsequent crusade, might be a long staif fixed in a car niovinc!; 
on four wheels, and surmounted by a flag, or other ensign, which placed in 
the centre of the army served for a rallying point." We have haci, 
however, several instances of the banners or p(>nnons of the knights being 
])orne in the hand, which we think was also the more usual custom v/irh 
respect to the standards of the commanders, and was probably the case 
with the vizir's at the battle of Ascalon, as we find it was so portable as to 
have been afterwards placed as a t.'-ophy in the church of the Ho!v 
Sepulchre, if not in that of the Holy Trinity at Caen. 



AUG. 14, 1099.] BATTLE OF ASCALO:!^. 187 

Franks, wheeled towards them and halting a moment cut them 
down as corn is reaped in harvest, severing their heads from 
their bodies with strokes of their swords. The field flowed 
with blood and was covered with the corpses of the pagans. 
The Christians pursued the fugitives, who, terrified by the 
Divine influence, had no opportunity of rallying. Their 
sight was so dimmed that, as it was afterwards related by 
some who escaped, although their eyes were open, they could 
scarcely see the Christians, and were wholly incapable of 
resisting them. Even numbers were unable to make a stand 
against a few, but tried every means of getting out of their 
way. Our victorious troops punished the Pagans without 
exception, sparing no one. It was a fatal day to them, for 
they found no means of escaping ; for trees, rocks, and the 
deepest recesses of caves gave them up to the swords of the 
conquerors. 

Count Raymond, whose position lay towards the coast, 
slew immense numbers, and pursued them vigorously towards 
the city which stood at a short distance. They fell on the way 
by fatigue, or were cut down with mortal wounds, or threw 
themselves into the sea, and thus rushed from one kind of 
death to another. The emir's fleet covered the sea wait- 
ing the issue of the battle. Seeing that a diflerent fortune 
from what they expected awaited their friends, the Pagans 
embarked in their ships, and setting sail steered for their owii 
country. It is reported that the emir, half fainting, groaned 
aloud, and thus vented his grief: " Creator of all things ! how 
is this ? How is it that so terrible a fate has fallen to our 
lot ? Alas ! what unutterable disgrace, what endless shame 
has involved our race ? A nation of mendicants, a nation 
small in number, has prevailed against us. How is this ? I 
assembled and led here two hundred thousand cavalry, and 
infantry without number, enough, I thought, to conquer the 
world. Now, to speak the truth, they have been shamefully 
defeated by less than a thousand cavalry, and thirty thou- 
sand infantry. Either their God is omnipotent, and fights 
on their side, or ours is incensed with us, and chastises and 
punishes us in the fierceness of his wrath. However this 
may be, one thing is certain ; I will never again take arms 
against the Christians, but will return to my own country 
where my disgrace will only end with my life." These word's 



188 ORDElilCUS YITALIS. [b.IX. CII.XYII. 

were mingled with siglis and groans from the depth of his 
heart. 

The inhabitants of Ascalon, perceiving the fugitive Saracens 
making for the town, and entering it in crowds, while Connt 
Raymond with his provincials was pursuing and cutting 
them down without respite, shut their gates to exclude both 
their enemies and their allies. For they feared that their 
invincible foes would enter the town along with their friends, 
and massacring the citizens completely subjugate it. 
jN"evertheles3, the undaunted Count of Tholouse halted his 
troops under the walls, and butchered such of tlie Saracens 
as lingered about their asylum, like a flock of sheep. The 
inhabitants therefore, seeing from their battlements the 
determined spirit of the Christians, and apprehensive that the 
indiscriminate slaughter they now witnessed or had heard of 
as the lot of their neighbours, might overtake themselves, 
begged the coui^ to send them his ensign, and promised 
faithfully to surrender the place to him. They were more 
disposed to this because the count was the the nearest of 
the chiefs, and the danger from him was most threatening, 
and also becaase he had saved the emir Guinimund and the 
rest who had trusted to his word. The count sent his standard 
to the citizens who asked for it, and having dispersed and 
slain all the enemy who were under the walls, joined hia 
comrades who were resting after the carnage, and having 
assembled them together, thus addressed them : " Thanks be 
to God, the victory is on our side, and the citizens of Ascalon 
are almost reduced to open their gates to us. They have 
already received my standard, and if you grant permission 
will willingly accept me for their master, and obey my com- 
mands, for the sake of saving themselves." The king replied: 
" Ear be it from me to yield the dominion of this place to 
any one : I will compel it to surrender and submit to my 
authority. Ascalon is very near Jerusalem, and it is expedient 
that both should be under the rule of the same prince." 
Bobert of Normandy and the count of Elanders, and the 
other chiefs remonstrated with the king, saying : " We all 
know well-enough that the count of St. Giles left his rich 
lands and well fortified towns for the service of God. During 
this holy enterprise, he has performed many brilliant achieve- 
ments, and has excelled us all by the resolution he has shown 



AUG. 1099.] QUAllllEL BETWEEI^- GODFEEY AND RAYMOND. 189 

in great trials and sufferings. If therefore he is determined 
to persevere in the duties of the pilgrimage he has under- 
taken, and defend the holy city which he has shown so much 
zeal in recovering to the faith of God, you ought willingly to 
relinquish to him this place, which is not yet in your posses- 
sion, and which he claims. When we are returned to our 
own states, you will doubtless have need enough of his 
counsels and active support. Ascalon will be a noble and 
useful fief of the crown of Jerusalem, and this great 
lord will pay you homage and perform military service 
for it." 

The king refusing to follow the advice of the chiefs, the 
count departed in a rage, and sent word to the inhabitants 
of Ascalon to make an obstinate defence. The king wanted 
to besiege it, but all the chiefs abandoning him through 
fatigue and anger, he could do nothing by himself, and was 
compelled to draw off much chagrined, leaving the place 
uninjured. Neither Godfrey, nor the other kings who 
reigned after him during the course of forty years,^ to their 
shame be it spoken, have ever been able to the present day 
to reduce this capital of the Philistines ; on the contrary, it 
has been the cause of their losing more than a hundred 
thousand men, besides suffering other disasters. Such was 
the consequence of an insatiable ambition. If the king had 
possessed a true spirit of charity, and following the law of 
God, had loved his neighbour as himself, he might have 
obtained possession of the hostile city that very day, and 
thereby secured a free passage for the Christians even to 
Babylon. I acknowledge the great merits of King Godfrey, 
but in this, as St. Paul wrote to the Corinthians, "I praise 
him not."^ 

It is reported that the emir had in the battle two hun- 
dred thousand cavalry, and countless bodies of infantry, 
while the Christians had scarcely one thousand cavalry 
and thirty thousand infantry. After having, by God's 
help, defeated the enemy, they proceeded to plunder the 
tents of the Ishmaelites. They found there, to speak shortly, 

^ This calculation would seem to indicate, if it were not for the little 
confidence we can place in our author's round numbers, that the close of 
this ninth book was not written before the year 1139. 

'■^ 1 Cor. xi. 2-2. 



190 OBUERICUS Y1TALI3. [b.IX.CH.XYIII. 

everything that can be imagined as valuable ; silver and 
gold, corn, meal, and oil, innumerable herds of cattle, rich 
ornaments, piles of arms, and if it be possible things more 
precious. Having pillaged the camp .of this booty, they 
returned to the holy city of Jerusalem, and offered thanks- 
givings to Grod in all the churches for their success. 

^Robert, duke of Normandy, bought the emir's standard, 
for twenty silver marks, from those who took it when he was 
wounded, and placed it in the church of the Holy Sepulchre 
in memory of this victory.^ Some one else purchased the 
emir's sword for sixty bezants. All Christendom was 
filled with unspeakable joy on hearing the issue of the 
war. 

Thus the crusaders delivered Jerusalem from the power 
of the impious Turks in the year of our Lord 1099, having 
often triumphed over them, under Christ their leader. The 
great battle of which we have last spoken was fought on the 
second of the ides [the 12th] of August, and in consequence 
thanksgivings were offered to Grod throughout the Christian 
world. 

Ch. XVIII. Some account of Baldric^ archlishop of Dol, 
from whose account of the crusade the previous narrative is 
taken — Conclusion of the present hook. 

Thus far I have followed the steps of the venerable Baldric,^ 
in giving a true account of the noble army of Christ, which 
by Grod's help, fought the swarms of the Grentiles with such 
signal success in the countries of the East. In many places 
I have quoted the very words used by that writer, not daring 
to alter his language, as I did not think I could improve it. 
Some things I have curtailed, that I might not weary the 
reader with the length of my narrative, and others of which 
he was silent I have added for the benefit of posterity, from 
information I have carefidly gathered from persons who 

^ If Wace may be trusted (t. ii. p. 322), this standard was deported by 
Robert in the church of the Holy Trinity at Caen ; but it is probable that 
with his usual want of precision he has confounded the standard of the 
battle of Ascalon, with some other ensign taken by the duke in a war 
which furnished so many spoils of this description as the first crusade did. 

^ See the note respecting Bishop Baldric at the beginning of the present 
book, p. 59. 



BALDRIC, AECI1BI3H0P OF DOL. 191 

shared the toils and perils of the expedition. I ought to 
respect and venerate the old prelate, with whom I had au 
intimate acquaintance. He was a citizen of Orleans, and had 
been a monk, and afterwards abbot of Bourgeuil, and was 
well imbued with learning, as well as much respected for his 
virtue and piety. His religion and wisdom were the means 
of his election to the diginity of archbishop of Dol.^ But 
when a bishop he still observed the monastic discipline, and 
as often as he had opportunity resided among the monks. 
Having the rude Bretons for his flock, whose insubordina- 
tion he could not bear, he frequently escaped from their 
lawless insolence, and took refuge in Normandy,' where the 
church of Dolhad possessed domains on the river Eisle^ from 
the time of St. Samson, who lived in the reign of Childebert, 
king of the Eranks, which it stdl enjoyed in undisturbed 
tranquillity. There, not only by his writings, but by his 
discoiu'ses, he invited his hearers to the service of God, and 
paid visits to the abbeys of Fecamp, Fontenelles, Jumieges, 
and other monasteries in that neighbourhood, comforting the 
monks in the fear of the Lord, by his holy conversation. 
He died at length in a good old age, and was buried at 
Preaux, in the church of St. Peter the apostle before the 
crucifix. 

I propose to rest here, being fatigued with writing and 
having to make researches concerning events which occurred 
at a great distance in the far countries of the East. I shall 
therefore bring the sixth ^ book of my ecclesiastical history 
to a conclusion. 

^ Our author calls Baldric archbishop of Dol, as that prelate claimed 
metropolitan rights for his see, in succession from St, Simon who lived at 
the commencement of the sixth century. 

'' The necessity under which Baldric found himself of seeking a refuge 
in the midst of the turbulent Normans of the twelfth century, from the 
still ruder Bretons, does not give us a very high idea of the civilization of 
the latter. 

* Conteville, le Marais Vernier, and St. Samson-sur-Risle, near Pont- 
audemer. This monastery was given to the holy bishop whose name it 
took by Childebert I. about the year 550, and was shortly afterwards 
rendered illustrious by the residence of St. Germer in it. See the lives of 
these two saints in the Acta SS. ordinis Benedictij saec. 1 and 2, It w;vs 
still standing in 837, v/hen it was not forgotten in the liberality of Anse-^iBC, 
abbot of Fontenelles. 

* This was in fact the sixth book in the autlior's original plan of hi.i 



192 ORDEMCrS TITALIS. [e.IX. CH.XTII, 

In the seventh book,^ if I live and am well, my Saviour, in 
whom I put my entire trust, being my helper, I shall give 
a true account of the various events, both prosperous and 
adverse, which happened during a period of thirty years ; 
endeavouring, according to the best of my ability, to ha,nd 
them down to posterity in their true colours. I believe 
that in future times there will be men, like myself, who will 
eagerly search the pages of historians for the acts of this 
generation, that they may be able to disclose occurrences 
which have taken place in past ages for the instruction or 
amusement of their cotemporaries. 

work, the three first books in the present arrangement having been subse- 
quently written. 

' The tenth, according to the arrangement which prefixed three chapters, 
as just remarked. 



193 



BOOK X. 

Cll. I. Death of 'Pope Urhan II. — Se is succeeded hj 
Paschal II. — The emperors, Henry IV. and V. — Their 
qua7'rels with the p>opes — Henry V. marries Matilda, 
daughter of Henry I., king of JEngland. 

In the year of our Lord 1098, the sixth indiction, the 
Almighty Creator of all things displayed some extraordinary 
signs in the heavens to terrify mankind, and by such 
unusual appearances predict fearful events. On the fifth 
of the calends of October [the 27th September], the sky 
appeared to be on fire the whole night.^ Afterwards, in the 
seventh indiction, on a Saturday on which the feast of our 
Lord's nativity happened to fall, the sun was eclipsed.- 
After these signs, there were changes among the rulers of 
the world, and terrible disasters and tumults, with severe 
calamities, troubled mankind. Pope Urban, after governing 
the apostolic see for ten years^ with vigour and usefulness, 
fell sick at Eome when Jerusalem was taken, and departed 
out of this life on the fourth of the calends of August 
[24th July], going to his reward above for the good works 
which had distinguished him here. The lamentations of 
his enemies for his loss, as well as his fame spread through- 
out the world, attest how admirable was his life. Peter 
Leo has composed three elegiac couplets, recording his 
worth thus shortly :•* 

" Eheims claims Odo as a canon, Cluni as a monk. Eome 

' The year 1098 appears to have been remarkable for the tiumber of 
meteoiic appearances. This must not be confounded with the Aurora 
Borealis of the month of June preceding. See before, p. 132. 

^ There was an annular ecHpse of the sun at eleven in the morning of 
the day mentioned by our author. This passage is of great importance, as 
it proves that Ordericus reckoned the indiction, not from the 1st of Sep- 
tember, with the emperors of the East, nor from the 24th of the same 
month, with the emperors of the West and the kings of England, but from 
a period of the year later than the 27th. 

^ This calculation in round numbers is not exact. Urban II. filled the 
papal throne eltiven years, four months, and eighteen davs, March 12, 1088 
—July 29. 1099. 

"* It is not the first, but the second, of these epitaphs which was com- 
posed by Peter de Leon. It is given more correctly in tcm. viii. of the 

VOL. III. O 



194 ORDERICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.I. 

invites him, and Ostia makes liim her bishop. When as 
pope, he changed his name to Urban ; the honour which the 
city had lost was restored entire. Eome has here celebated 
his obsequies on the fourth daj before the beginning of 
August." 

Another eminent versifier has treated of the life and 
death and conduct of the same pope, in the following 
verses : 

" Odo, a canon of Eheims, who was made a monk of 
Cluni by [Abbot] Hugh, became an excellent pope. "While he 
lived he was the light of Eome, when he died it was eclipsed. 
The city flourished while he lived, and languished at his 
death. Rome ! the laws which he gave you, and the 
peace he cherished, filled you with happiness, preserving 
you from vices within and from foes without. He was 
never swayed by the wealth of the rich, nor elated by 
praises and fame, nor terrified by the threats of the power- 
ful. His tongue was remarkable for eloquence, his heart for 
wisdom, his conduct by worth, his carriage by dignity. 
Through him the way is open to the holy city ; ^ our religion 
triumphs ; the pagans are conquered; and the faith is spread 
through the world. As tlie rose, the most brilliant of 
flowers, is soon plucked, so fate swept ofl" this distinguished 
prelate. Death possesses his mortal part, rest his soul, the 
tomb his corpse ; nothing is left to us but his glory." 

While Pope Urban was still a shining light in the house 
of the Lord, and engaged in expelling darkness from the 
hearts of men by his preaching and example, Gruibert of Ea- 
venna, who was called Clement, died,' and Peter Leo com- 
posed his eulogy in the following ironical verses : 

Histoire Litieraire de France. It was to the palace of this powerful and 
wealthy nobleman the pope retired to end his days. " Urban, returning to | 
the city after the conclusion of the council of Bari, betook himself, worn 
out with age and infirmities, from the Transteverine island to the neigh- 
bouring residence of Peter Leo, a powerful noble who was his intimate 
friend. The mansion, wliich is strongly fortified, stamis near the church of 
St. Nicholas ; there the pope, who had worthily filled the apostolic see, 
died happily on the fourth of the calends of August (29th of July), 10.09." 

There will be frequent opportunities of referring again to Peter Leo. 
and more especially to his son. 

^ By the crusade to Jerusalem. 

^ Whatever our author may say, this anti-pope survived Urban IL, his 
duith not having occurred till the beginning of October, 1 1 00. 



A.D. 1099—1106.] UEBAN II. EMPEEOE HENEY IT. 195 

" Gruibert ! neither Eome nor Eavenna offers you aa 
asylum ; settled in neither, you are now expelled from both. 
You lived at Sutri,^ a pope under sentence of excommuni- 
cation. Dying, your remains are laid at Castellana.^ You 
were but a name, without substance, but for your empty 
title, Cerberus has prepared you a place in the infernal 
regions." 

On the death of Pope Urban, Eainier, a monk of Yallom- 
brosa was elected pope by the name of Paschal, and 
eanonically consecrated on the sixteenth day from the 
departure of his predecessor.^ He governed the apostolical 
see nearly twenty years, and devoted himself with the 
utmost care to the service of the church of God. He visited 
Prance in the time of King Philip, and spending the feast 
of Easter'* at Chartres, confirmed the privileges of that 
church, on the petition of the venerable bishop Ivo.^ 

The emperor, Henry lY., had disturbed the peace of 
holy church from his youth ; had long violently usurped the 
right of ecclesiastical investitures, and intruded into the 
house of the Lord the profane adversaries of ecclesiastical 
unity. He was now dethroned by his son Charles, covered 
with disgrace for the enormity of his evil deeds, and being 
deserted by all his friends in his declining years, died a 
wretched old man on the seventh [of the ides] of August.*' 
But, as for his crimes, he died under a sentence of apostolical 
excommunication ; his corpse was suffered to decay, like 
that of a beast, uncommitted to the bosom of mother earth, 
not being permitted to receive the rites of burial common 
to all mankind.' His reign lasted nearly fifty years ; but 

^ Sutri, six leagues and a half S.S.E. of Viterbo. 

2 Civita-Castellana, an episcopal city, seven leagues S.E. from Viterbo. 

^ Rainier, a native of Bleda in Tuscany, and a monk of Cluni (not 
Vail ombrosa), afterwards abbot of St. Lawrence and St. Stephen under the 
walls of Rome, and a cardinal, was elected pope the 13th of August, 1099, 
on the nomination of his predecessor, taking the name of Paschal II. He 
died at Rome in the month of January, 1118, after filling the papal chair 
about eighteen years and a half. 

* Easter-day, the 14th of April, 1107 

* This bull has not been preserved. 

^ The 7th of August, 1106, at Liege, at the age of fifty-six years, and 
after a reign of nearly fifty. 

' The body of thits prince was carried to Spires, where it remained five 
years unburied. 

o2 



196 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CII.I. 

he received the dreadful reward of liis subserviency to 
crime. 

The emperor Charles Henry Y. began his reign in the 
year of our Lord 1106, succeeding to his father's authority, 
which he held for nearly nineteen years, and " walked in the 
way of his father," ^ as it is said in Chronicles of the wicked 
son of an iniquitous father. In the fifth year of his reign,^ 
he invested Eome at the head of 30,000 cavalry, and an im- 
mense army of infantry, and having made a treaty with the 
Eomans, was admitted by the terms of it to enter the city,^ 
where by order of the pope he sat on the imperial throne in 
the church of St. Peter the apostle. He then requested the 
pontift' to celebrate mass ; but he refused, unless four nobles 
of the imperial court who had been expressly excommuni- 
cated by him, were excluded. The emperor was so incensed 
that he commanded the pope to be arrested while he was 
standing before the altar. Upon this, one of the imperial 
guards laid hands on the pontiff; but one bolder than the 
rest of the by-standers drew his sword in imitation of 
Simon Peter, and smote the assailant of the pope with more 
resolution and effect than Peter did Malchus, for he killed 
the emperor's retainer M'ith a single stroke. In consequence 
there was a great tumult in the city, and a cruel conflict 
between the two parties, in w^hich blood was even shed in 
the churches, without any regard to decency. Two thou- 
sand Normans from Apulia had marched to the support of 
the Eomans. These, united with the citizens and Latins, 
marched out and put to the sword vast numbers of the 
Germans and other people who were quartered in supposed 
security in the ancient city on the other bank of the Tiber. 
Thrice they expelled the emperor and his followers from the 
city; but they could not release the pope from captivity, 
because the place of his imprisonment was concealed. The 
emperor attempted to march through Eome with his 

* A very common phrase in the book of Chronicles, applied both to 
good and wicked kings. The ref'ercnctj here is piobably to 2 Chron.xxxiii. 
22, He did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as Manasseh his 
father had done. 

* Henry V., emperor of Germany, August 7, 1106 — May 23, 1 125. 

' Tlie emperor made his entrance into Rome on the 12th of February, 
1111. 



A.D. 1111.] EMPEKOR IIEXRY Y. AT ROME. 197 

troops under arms on his road to Campania, but he was 
resisted at the point of the sword, and compelled to retire 
by another way ; and many had to lament the vast numbers 
of his troops who, as we said before, were cut oft" in the 
city. 

Meanwhile, the pope, detained in close custody, and 
deprived of all support, yielded to the emperor's demands.^ 
Having thus obtained his release, he became afterwards an 
object of contempt to many persons. Eobert of Paris," 
"VValo bishop of Leon,^ and Poncius abbot of Cluni,* and 
many more cardinals and prelates of churches, blamed the 
pope,^ affirming without hesitation that all he had conceded 
to the emperor, whether verbally or in writing, was void. 
They declared that he ought to have been willing to die for 
truth and justice, following the example of Christ, with clean 
hands even to death, or to have submitted to imprisonment 
and torture, rather than yield anything to the secular power, 
contrary to the laws and decrees of the fathers. Pope 
Paschal bore the rebukes of his learned accusers with patience, 
confessing that their assertions were just and true. Soon 
afterwards he assembled a council of bishops at Eome,^ in 
which all the acts which the emperor had obtained from him 
under coercion, were plainly condemned, under the advice of 
the jurisconsults, and the emperor was excommunicated for 
his profanation of the house of God, and imprisonment of 
the servant of Christ, and effusion of Christian blood. It 
was thus that the emperor, in the sixth year of his reign, 
soiled the glory of Latium by these great crimes, and 
disturbed to no purpose many nations by his attempt to 
commit such enormities. An Irish scholar has written a 

* The preceding paragraph contains many inaccuracies. It may, 
however, suffice to remark that the bull by which the pope granted the 
emperor's demands in the matter of the investitures, bears date the 11th of 
April, and that he crowned Henry on the day following, 

- Robert of Paris appears to have been distinguished for his skill in 
dialectics. See Hist, de France, t. xii. p. 3. 

3 Gualon, bishop of St, Pol-de-Ldon, was present at two dedications 
made by Calistus II,, in 1 119. 

•* Pontius, abbot of Cluni, will be mentioned again in the sequel. 

^ Our author omits mentioning, among the most violent enemies of the 
pope, Geoffrey, abbot of Vendome and a cardinal, and especially Bruno, 
bishop of Signi and abbot of Monte Cassino, the most determined of all. 

« The 28th of IVIarch, 1112. 



198 OEDERICTIS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.I. 

satisfactory narrative/ in which he relates how severe and 
dangerous were the storms, the snow and the ice of that 
Avinter, what perils and difficulties the army had to encounter 
in narrow and mountainous defiles, and how the emperor, 
liaving collected his forces and sat down before Eome, 
reduced the city more by threats than by arms.^ In that 
expedition the emperor attacked Milan, but was repulsed, 
gaining no advantage. He then also ravaged the extensive 
territories of the powerful countess Matilda who possessed 
Ticinum,^ Placentia, and all that large portion of Italy now 
called Lombardy, having long resolutely opposed the emperor 
and his father, and supported the legitimate popes Gregory, 
Urban, and Paschal.* 

Henry, king of England, gave his daughter Matilda in 
marriage to the emperor,^ and she was conducted on the 
iourney from England to Germany by Eoger, son of E-ichard, 
a cousin of the king's,^ with a brilliant suite. The wealthy 
king bestowed ^ith his daughter a dowry of ten thousand 
marks, besides royal gifts to his son-in-law. The emperor 

^ It is probable that David Scotus was a native of Scotland, the con- 
fusion between the Irish and Scotch being common in the middle ages. 
He was first a scholar at Hurtzburg, then chaplain to Henry V., and 
afterwards preferred to the see of Bangor, which he held from 1120 to 
1139. His narrative, divided into three books, appears to be still extant 
in MS., in the imperial library at Vienna, although it is not mentioned in 
Endlicher's Catalogue. It is probably the same work, which also appears 
in MS. in the catalogue of the library of All Souls Coll., Oxon, under the 
title of Historia Henrici V. Its real title appears to be, Iter sive Expe- 
ditionis Series, &c. William of Malmesbury quotes this " Progress to 
Rome " in the fifth book of his Chronicle (p. 458 in Bohns Antiq. Lib.), 
but he says that " it is far more partial to the king [emperor] than 
becomes an historian," and is " not a history, but a panegyric." See also 
Fabricius, Bibliotheca Medics el infima; Latinitatis, t. ii. p. 16. 

David Scotus is mentioned Avith little respect in the Annals of AVinches- 
ter, which represent him as a native of Wales : " In the year 1120, Ralph, 
archbishop of Canterbury, consecrated one David, a Welshman, to the see 
of Bangor. 

" After having passed the Alps, in the month of August, 1110. 

^ Pavia. 

* The Countess Matilda died the 24th of July, 1115, and the emperor 
again passed the Alps to take possession of her fiefs. 

^ Matilda, daughter of Henry I., Avas betrothed to the emperor Henry 
v., in llOI), but the marriage was not celebrated till the 7th of January, 
1114. 

^ Roger de Bienfaite, or de Clare, whose father, Richard, was cousin- 
german of William the Conqueror. 



/A.D. 1087 1100.] -WILLIAM HUFUS. 199 

was much attached to his illustrious wife, but for his sins he 
was uot permitted to have any issue to succeed to the 
empire. The imperial crown therefore, by God's will, was 
transferred to another family,^ for at his death, Lothaire, duke 
of Saxony, was elected by the nobles of the realm, and for 
his temperance and excellence raised to the throne. After 
her husband's death, the empress Matilda returned to her 
native country, preferring to live among her own people, 
though she was much beloved abroad. The king of England, 
her father, afterwards married her to Geoffrey count of 
Anjou ; and she bore her husband a son, named Henry, in 
the year of our Lord 1133,^ who is looked upon by many 
nations as their future sovereign, if xllmighty God, the 
disposer of all events, shall so ordain. 

Ch. II. Reif/n of William Hvfus — His character — Con- 
duct of ecclesiastical affairs — Promotions to English 
bishoprics . 
Hayikg somewhat digressed from the subject I have taken 
in hand, and dwelt a little on events which happened, beyond 
the Alps, in Italy and Palestine, it is now time for me to 
return to our own affairs, of which Normandy and England 
were the theatre. 

"William Eufus, a warlike prince, succeeded to the throne 
of England at his father's death ; he firmly repressed 
rebellions against his authority, and for twelve years and ten 
months kept all his subjects in submission to his rule. 
He was liberal to his military men and to foreigners, but the 
poor natives of his realm were severely oppressed, and he 
exacted from them what he so prodigally bestowed on 
strangers. During his reign many of his father's nobles died, 
who had acquired in his wars honours beyond any they 
inherited from their ancestors, in whose place the king 
substituted men of low rank who raised themselves to 
' At the death of Henry V. the imperial dignity was lost by the house 
of Franconia, which had enjoyed it since 1024, and passed to Lothaire II., 
duke of Sfixony. 

2 The empress Matilda was betrothed to Geoffrey Plantagenet, count of 
Anjou, on Whitsunday the 2'2nd of May, 1127. The prince to whom she 
gave birth on <.he 25th of March, 1133, was afterwards King Henry II., 
whose high destinies are predicted by our author. 

It is clear that this paragraph, and consequently the whole of book x., 
could not have been written before the summer of 1 1 33,unless the piissage was 
inserted afterward;*, which the appearance of the MS. by no means indicates. 



200 OEDEEICUS VITALI3. [b.X. CH.II. 

eminence, as the reward of their flatteries. William E-ufus 
was never married, having abandoned himself without 
restraint to lewdness and debauchery, setting his subjects a 
fatal example of gross lasciviousness. On the death of the 
bishops and abbots, the king's ofiicers seized their ecclesi- 
astical possessions and all their wealth, which for three years 
and upwards were held by the king. Thus for the sake of 
the revenues which the king's avarice gathered into his 
treasury, the churches were suffered to remain vacant, and, 
deprived of their proper pastors, the Lord's flock were 
exposed to the ravages of the wolves. 

At this time the venerable bishops, Osmund of Salisbury^ 
Walkelin of Winchester,^ William of Durham,^ Eemi 
of Lincoln,^ and several other reverend prelates died, whose 
rents and property were for a long time in the hands of 
Elambard and his brother Eulcher.^ So also, on the death 
of Baldwin, abbot of the holy king and martyr St. Edmund^, 

» He died the 3rd of December, 1099. 

•^ Walkelin, bishop of Winchester, 1071—1098. 

^ William, bishop of Durham, died the 2nd of January, 1096. He was 
surnamed de St. Calais, because he had betn a monk of that abbey, and 
afterwards abbot of St. Vincent-du-Mans. Nominated to the bishopric of 
Durham by William the Conqueror, November 9, 1080, he was consecrated 
at Gloucester, the 3rd of January, 1081. King William Rufus made him 
great-justiciary of England, and heaped benefits upon him, which did not 
prevent him from betraying his benefactor, and joining the conspiracy of the 
bishop of Bayeux, the result of which obliged him to take reluge in Nor- 
mandy. In the month of September, 1091, William restored him his 
bishopric, while he was at Durham on his expedition against the king of 
Scots. The bishop's return to England was fatal to the peace of the 
church, as he never ceased fomenting the quarrel between the king and St. 
Ansclm, in the hope of one day obtaining the primacy in his place. 

* Remi was a monk of Fecamp, and attended William the Conqueror to 
England. He was rewarded with the bishopric of Lincoln (1072 — 1092), 
the seat of which he removed from Dorchester to the city which gave its 
name to the see. Henry of Huntingdon, who was a canon of Lincoln, 
gives him a high character. See his works in Bohns Anli.q. Lib. pp. 220 
and 304. 

^ See before, vol. ii. p. 4G7. These worthies will also appear again on 
the stage, when we shall witness the injury and scandal they occasioned to 
the church of Lisieux, after their expulsion from England. 

^ Baldwin, abbot of St. Edmondsbury. He was originally a monk of 
the royal abbey of St. Denys, and was removed from it as long before as 
10G5, and consequently before the conquest, to undertake the government 
of St. Edmondsbury, which he held for thirty-two years, to the 29th of 
December, 1097. the period of his death. 



A.D. 10S7 — 1100.] ENGLISH BISHOPS AND ABBOTS. 201 

and Siineon of Ely' and other abbots, the king's officers 
seized the monasteries through the whole of England with 
all that belonged to them, supplying the monks with a very 
moderate allowance of food and clothing, and paying the 
surplus of the revenues into the royal treasury. At last, 
after a considerable time, the king conferred these ecclesi- 
astical dignities on clergy or monks who were about his 
court, as if they were mere stipendiaries, promoted not for 
their religion but for the obsequiousness of their services in 
secular affairs. 

Thus Eobert Bloet,^ who had been chaplain to "William 
the elder, and had sailed with William the younger from the 
port of Touque, being the bearer of the king's letter to 
Archbishop Lancfranc respecting the coronation of his son,^ 
was after the death of Bishop Eemi promoted to the see of 
Lincoln, which he held more than twenty years. Gerard, 
nephew of Walkelin, bishop of Winchester, was first made 
bishop of Hereford, and afterwards, in the reign of king 
Henry, created archbishop of York.'' William de Guarel- 
Guest had the bishopric of Exeter.^ John the Physician, 
Bath,^ Ealph, surnamed Luffa, Chichester,' Eanulph Elam- 
bard, Durham,^ and Herbert Losing, Thetford.^ Thus the 

*■ Simeon, abbot of Ely, brother of Walkelin, bishop of Winchester, 
was first prior of that cathedral, and afterwards forced upon the monks of 
Ely against their will in 1081. He died at the age of upwards of one 
hundred years in 1093. 

2 Robert Bloet, bishop of Lincoln, 1093— January 10, 1123. He was 
Henry of Huntingdon's patron. See his account and character of the 
bishop, Works, pp. "250 and 302 — 304, Bohrt's Antiq. Lib. 

^ We learn from this passage the strange detour made by William Rufiis 
at the moment of his father's death (vol. ii. p. 414), in choosing Touques 
as his port for embarking on his voyage to England, instead of one of those 
on the coast of Normandy lying more directly opposite. 

* Gerard, bishop of Hereford, about 1093, translated to the archbishopric 
of York in 1100. 

5 William de Warlewast, bishop of , Exeter, 1107—1127 or 1137. See 
note at the beginning of the next chapter. 

6 John the Physician, bishop of Bath, 1088— December 29, 1122. 

7 Ralph, bishop of Chichester, 1091—1123. 

8 Rnnulf Flam bard, bishop of Durham, May 29, 1099— September, 1128. 

* Herbert Losing, or the flatterer. This prelate, who was a native of the 
Hiemois, was distinguished by acts more scandalous than his flatteries, not 
only having bought his bishopric, but also the abbey of Winchester for his 
father. In 1095 the see was removed from Thetford to Norwich. He 
died the 22nd of July, 1149. 



202 ORBERICUS VITALIS. [e.X. Cn.IIT. 

king's chaplains and favourites obtained the bishopries of 
England, and some of them made use of their appointments 
only to oppress the feeble and amass wealth. Others, 
however, were inspired by divine grace with a deep sense of 
the responsibility of the government of the church which 
they had undertaken, and devoted themselves to profit the 
iiocks committed to their charge, both in spiritual and 
temporal things, while they laudably amended their own 
lives according to the divine will. Men commit many 
crimes to obtain their ends, never satisfied unless they gain 
them through a course of wickedness ; but the wise Disposer 
of events in his wonderful mercy orders all for the benefit 
of the world. Very often thoughtless and unlearned men 
are advanced to the government of the church, not for their 
holiness of life, or acquaintance with ecclesiastical doctrines, 
or knowledge of letters, but on account of their noble 
parentage, and in compliment to their powerful friends. 
Bat the merciful Grod spares and compassionates even such 
as are thus promoted, inspiring them subsequently with the 
fulness of divine grace, and illuminating through them the 
house of Grod with the light of heavenly wisdom, so that by 
their useful labours many are saved. 

Ch. III. Si. Anselm goes into exile — Received by Pope 
Faschal, at Rome — Is present at tlie council of Clermont., 
and at that of Bari. 

The venerable Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury, seeing 
that iniquity prevailed, was often in great tribulation, and 
after the example of John and Elijah gave frequent rebukes 
of what he observed with grief was contrary to the divine 
law. But the haughty king who disdained the wholesome 
restraints of his spiritual guide, was ensnared by the wicked 
devices of perverse counsellors, and incensed against the 
sound exhortations of his pious monitor. In consequence, 
the prudent archbishop was twice exiled during the reign of 
"William Eufus,^ first resorting to pope Urban, and afterwards 

* This is a mistake. St. Anselm left England once only during the 
lifetime of William Rufus, on the 16th of October, 1097 ; he returned the 
23rd of September, HOC, ten weeks after the king's death. Ralph de 
Diceto informs us that Avhen St. Anselm was on the j)oint of embarkinw at 



A.D. 1007—1100.] ST. ansel:>i's exile. 203 

to pope Paschal. His chaplain Eadmar, -uho attended liim 
on liis journey, has givei^ a particular account of his exile 
and of his perilous travels, in a book which he published' on 
liis life and character and sweet doctrines. He was accom- 
panied by Baldwin de Tournai, a nobleman of distinction,''^ 
as well as by the Englishman just named, and their virtuous 
devotion is considered praiseworthy by those who have 
made themselves familiarly acquainted with the state of 
affairs. 

Anselm found pope Urban in Apulia, and having been 
received with great respect, spent some time with him. 
Then Eoger son of Tancred and count of Sicily, had entered 
Campania and besieged Capua, for the purpose of restoring 
his nephew Eichard, the son of Jordan, to his paternal rights, 
and pressed the siege against the rebellious Lombards who 
had driven out the young prince. The pope offered 
himself as mediator, and wdth the assistance of the venerable 
Anselm, proposed conditions of peace betw^een the contend- 
ing parties. At length the count suppressed the rebellion, 
and restored his nephew to his former honours, and the pope 

Dover, William de Warwast, the king's favourite, examined his effects in 
quest of money, but finding none, suffered him to depart. 

On Anselm's return from his journey to Italy, he met the same envoy at 
Milan, whose present employment was to forbid his return to England, 
except on certain conditions. William Rufus's untimely end must have 
been near at hand when the archbishop received this last message. It is 
probable that this envoy of the king's is the same person who was made bishop 
of Exeter in 1107. A Norman by birth, he had been attached to the 
chapel royal from the reign of William the Conqueror, and employed in 
several missions. He was probably born at a place now called Veraval, in 
the commune of Hotol-le-Vatois, and canton of Fauville. In the 13th 
century the name was called Warawast, and also Werehvast. The owners 
of this" fief are often named in the chartulary of St. Wandrille, of which 
abbey Werawast and Hoto formed part of the domains. 

^ Eadmeri, Cantuarensis moiiacM, sancti Anselmi vita, labore ei studio 
D. Gabrielis Gerberon. Paris, 1675, at the end of the same author's edi- 
tion of the works of St. Anselm. 

2 This person was a monk in whom St. Anselm reposed entire confi- 
dence, and who was entrusted with the care of his household as soon as he 
was promoted to the archbishopric. In 1095 William Rufus expelled him 
from^ England out of hatred to the archbishop. It is not supposed that lie 
Wf'.s a native of Tournay in Flanders, nor of a place of the same name in 
the department of the Orme, but of the hamlet of Tournai, in the commune 
of Harcourt and Thibouville, near Bee. He accompanied St. Anselm to 
Rome in 1098. 



204 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.X. CH.III. 

recommended to him the lord Anselm, and the count to the 
archbishop.^ A council being ^convened at Bari, by the 
pope's order, and a number of difficult questions brought 
forward bj the Greeks concerning the faith and other 
mysteries, father Anseim, by the pope's command, made a 
sermon addressed to them all, and satisfied the Grreeks as 
well as the Latins by his subtle and luminous replies to the 
several propositions." "When this pope performed his apos- 
tolical duties to Grod and the Christian world, and determined 
to confer spiritual benefit on the people of France, of which 
he was a native, he held a great council at Clermont, a city 
of Auvergne,^ at which he exhorted the faithful to war 
against the infidels, and established the custom of wearing 
on the shoulder the cross of Christ as a protection against 
the devil and every evil spirit. It was then that the 
extraordinary movement of the people, described in the last 
book took, place. 

Then Godfrey, duke of Lorraine, mortgaged the castle of 
Bouillon with all its appurtenances to the bishop of Liege, 
his lord, receiving from him seven thousand silver marks.^ 
In the same manner, others both rich and poor, made away 
with their lands and possessions to raise money for the Jeru- 
salem enterprise. 

^ This account is not exact. St. Anseim did not join Urban II. 
under the walls of Capua, that pope having received him at Rome, and 
entertained him two days in the palace of the Lateran. It was at the 
request of Count Roger that, sometime after his arrival at Rome and his 
retirement to the Terra del Lavoro, he came to his camp near Capua, 
where the pope did not arrive till two days afterwards. The service which 
Roger rendered to his cousin Richard was not quite as disinterested as our 
author seems to have thought ; for the prince of Capua was only restored 
to his capital on condition of holding it under Roger. 

^ The council of Bari was opened the 18th of October, 1098, and not 
1099, as stated from the local historians in the note vol. il., p. 394. 

' There is an anachronism in this passage, or the order of events is 
transposed. The council of Clermont, which was opened on the 18th 
of November, 1095, was anterior, by three years, to the events of which 
our author has just spoken. 

"* Godfrey of Bouillon neither sold nor mortgaged, as it has has been often 
asserted, the castle of Bouillon, which was the property of his mother, who 
burvived him. 



A.D. 1095.] NOEMANDT PLEDGED TO WILLIAM II. 205 

Cii. IV. The administration of Normandy in the dulce's 
absence hy William Rvfus — Death of Odo, bishop of 
JBayeux — 8ome ecclesiastical appointments. 
Egbert II., duke of Normandy, who was humourously 
surnamed Curthose, demised all his territories for five years 
to his brother King William, and received from him ten 
thousand marks of silver for the expenses of the pilgrimage 
to which he had devoted himself. King William, in the ninth 
year of his reign, being loath to exhaust his treasury, seized 
the ornaments of the churches, which the pious zeal of 
former kings and nobles had enriched with gold and silver 
and jewels, and bestowed on holy mother church to the glory 
of God, and for a remembrance of themselves. William 
crossed over the sea in the month of September, and obtain- 
ing possession of Normandy for the price he paid, trampled 
it under foot for nearly five years, that is all the rest of 
his life. Then Odo, bishop of Bayeux, undertook the 
pilgrimage with his nephew Duke Eobert, for there was so 
much ill will between him and the king on account of their 
former quarrels, that it could not be appeased by any 
mediators. The king was haughty and passionate, and had 
a good memory, not easily forgetting, and suffering to pass 
unrevenged, any injury he received. The proud prince 
therefore bitterly recollected that bishop Odo, his uncle, 
had been the first to oppose him in the beginning of 
his reign and had excited an extensive revolt of the nobles 
against him. At his instigation, Eobert, earl of Morton, had 
held Pevensey, but afterwards being besieged by the king, 
who was his nephew, he made peace with him, and surrender- 
ing the castle, returned to his allegiance. Grilbert Fitz- 
Eichard, also, with his brother Eoger, fortified Tunbridge, 
but the king besieged the fortress in Easter week, and it 
was given up to him on the first assault. Lastly, the 
bishop himself, with Eustace, count of Boulogne, Eobert de 
Belesme and a gallant force, held the castle of Eoch ester, 
until, being blockaded by two forts which the king erected, 
he was forced to make an ignominious capitulation, and to 
depart from the realm of England with the forfeiture of all 
his possessions.^ Afterwards in Normandy, when the king 
^ Our author has related these occurrences in b. viii. c. ii. See vol. iL 
pp. 433—443. 



206 OEDERICUS TITALIS. [b.X. CH.IV. 

souglit for revenge and retaliated on his brother the unjust 
and fruitless attack he had received from him, triumphantlv 
getting possession of great part of the duchy, through the 
fear or the covetoushess which attached the barons to his 
cause, Odo, bishop of Bayeux, opposed him for a long time, 
and did not withhold his succour from the duke, until he was 
wanting to himself. In consequence, when the bishop found 
that King William was master, as we have before related, he 
preferred rather to undertake the pilgrimage than to submit 
to his enemy. The bishop and the duke had a conference 
at Eome with Pope Urban, and having received his benedic- 
tion, crossed the Tiber, and wintered in Apulia. 

; From thence the bishop retired to the city of Panormo, 
commonly called Palermo, where he died in the month of 
February, and was buried in the church of St. Mary, mother 
of God, by Gilbert, bishop of Evreux. Odo was early 
promoted, becoming when young governor of the church 
which he ruled for nearly fifty years. He added to the 
honours and ornaments of his cathedral, respected the clergy, 
and depriving numbers of their property was liberal of what 
he took from others.^ i, As soon as King William heard of 
his death, he gave the bishopric to Thorold, son of Hugh de 
Envermou, who resigned it seven years afterwards for some 
secret motives, and submitted himself to the monastic rule 
under Abbot William at Bee, where he served God a long 
time in the regular discipline to the end of his days." He 
was succeeded in the see of Bayeux by Eichard, son of 
Sampson, who filled it twenty-six years.^ 

I See vol. ii. pp. 428—431. 

* Thorold d'Envermeu, brother of Hugh d'Envermeu, who granted the 
priory of St. Laurent of that name to the abbey of Bee. Circumstances 
as mysterious to us as they were to our author not only induced him to 
resign his bishopric at the end of seven years, but even presented canonical 
obstacles to his taking possession, which he does not appear to have done. 
Still he was a worthy person, honoured with the friendship and correspond- 
ence of St. Anselm. After his resignation, he retired to the abbey of Bee. 
He was there miraculously cured of hernia, and his life prolonged till 
1 146. This passage of our author appears not to have been written till after 
his death, at least it was not till after that of his successor. 

•' It will appear hereafter that this Bishop Richard died in Easter week, 
1 1.")3. He gave the barony of Dover (Dobka), of which he was proprietor, 
to the church of Bayeux. His liberality, also, mateiially assisted in tho 
foundation of the priory of Plessis-Grimoult. 



A..D. 1095 — 1127.] ECCLESIASTICAL APPOINTMENTS. 207 

King William thus possessed Normandy, having secured 
to himself the territories of his father, which his brother 
had foolishly alienated. He committed the churches which 
were deprived of their pastors by death to rulers chosen 
according to his own will ; for the abbeys of Jumieges and 
Dives were both vacant. Gontard, the famous abbot of 
Jumieges, died at Clermont on the sixth of the calends of 
December [26th November], while the celebrated council 
was held there. The king appointed in his place Tancard, 
provost of Fecamp, who, some years afterwards, retired with 
infamy in consequence of a disgraceful quarrel between him 
and the monks. He was succeeded by Drsus of Eouen, 
who had been a monk of the same house from his childhood, 
and was abbot for twenty years.^ Meanwhile Fulk, a monk 
of St. Evroult and abbot of Dives, went to Pope Urban, and 
became an exile at Monte Cassino. His successor Bene- 
dict, who had been a monk of St. Ouen, archbishop of 
Eouen, having died. King William appointed Etard, who 
had been gardener at Jumieges, and a monk there from 
childhood, abbot of Dives, and he diligently fed the flock of 
Christ for several years. But when Eulk returned, under 
the pope's protection, he willingly resigned the government 
of the abbey, and, returning to the place where he made his 
first profession, spent the rest of his life there, until he died 
in extreme decrepitude. Eulk, who had rigorously governed 
the abbey of Dives for twenty years before he was deposed, 
and by his ability much increased the number of the 
monks, and been serviceable to the church in a variety of 
ways, having been unjustly accused and deposed by the 
instigation of the devil, was exiled for seven years.^ On his 
return, resuming the government of his abbey, he conducted 
it prosperously for a further period of seven years, and died 
at Winchester, in the decline of life, on the third of the 
nones [3rd] of April. 

1 The expulsion of Tancard appears to have taken place in 1104. 
Ursus, his successor, died the 27th of October, 1 127, accompanied to his 
grave by universal regrets. 

^ Our author has already supplied us on several occasions with account.-i 
of the quarrels of this troublesome person with his monkd. He is believed 
to have died at Winchester, the 3rd of April, 1 106. 



208 ORDEKICUS VITALIS. [e.X. CH.Y. 

Ch, Y. William Hufus asserts j^'^'^t^^sions to the French 
Vexin — Builds the fortress of Gisors — Makes an irruvtion 
into France as far as Fontoise. 

In" the year of our Lord 1097, the fifth indiction, "William 
E/ufus, having considered his fatlier's acts and the causes of 
his wars, claimed of Philip, king of France, all the country 
of the Yexin, demanding possession of the noble castles of 
Pontoise, Chaumont, and Mantes. The Prench were so far 
from acceding to these demands, that they burnt with 
ardour to resist the invader, so that bloody hostilities broke 
out between the two fierce nations, which involved numbers 
in sad destruction. The whole burden of the war fell on 
the Prench nation, for their king, Philip, was fat and lazy, 
and altogether unfit for military service, while his son 
Lewis was as yet unqualified for it in consequence of his 
tender years. ^ Whereas the sovereign of England was 
devoted to arms, making distinguished warriors his prin- 
cipal friends, and surrounding himself with chosen bands 
of gallant knights. At the head of such troops, if Cains 
Julius Cassar himself, with his Italian legions, had attacked 
him and attempted to do him any injustice, William Rufus 
would doubtless have dared to try the courage and daring 
of his troops in close combat with the Homan. Kobert de 
Belesme was appointed commander of the king's forces, 
enjoying the royal favour in an especial manner, and being 
eminent for his abilities. The illuetrious count Henry, the 
king's brother, Hugh earl of Chester," and Walter Griftard, 
earl of Buckingham,^ with several other counts, captains, 
and officers, led the troops of the king of England, and as 

^ Our author's account must not be taken literally. Doubtless, Louis- 
le-Gros was not in 1097 in a state to make head for any length of time 
against so formidable an enemy as William Rufus ; but as he was nineteen 
or twenty vears of age, and commanded a French army, it is not correct 
to describe him as too young to bear arms. It will be seen presently that 
notwithstanding the incontestable superiority of the king of England in 
every Avay, the success of the campaign was balanced between the contend- 
ing parties. 

2 Hugh, carl of Chester, must have been far advanced in years and 
incapable of exertion in 1097; he died in 1104. 

s He died in 1102. 



A.D. 1097.] "WILLIAM II. CLAIMS THE VEXIX. 209 

variable fortune permitted, often distinguished themselves 
by their gallant deeds. 

Most of the French, called on to obey two lords for the 
rich fiefs which they held under both kings, and being in 
great trouble because no man can serve two masters, chose 
the more enterprising and wealthy of the kings, and placed 
their vassals and castles at his disposition. Thus Robert, 
count of Mellent, received English garrisons into his for- 
tresses, and giving them ready access into the French 
territory, their irruptions caused great losses to that nation. 
Gruy de-la-Eoche-Guion^ also favoured the English for their 
money, and put into their hands his castles of Roche- Gruion 
and Yeteuil. Several others did the same, deserting their 
countrymen to act with zeal in the cause of strangers. 
Then King William caused a very strong fortress to be 
constructed at Grisors, which serves to this day as a bulwark 
to ]S[ormandy against Chaumont, Trie, and Bouri.'^ Robert 
de Belesme selected the site, and directed the works like a 
skilful engineer. One day, when the Normans had attacked 
the French, who did not shrink from the combat, Theobald- 
Paganus of Gisors,^ .AValter d'Amfreville," and Gerold 

* Guy, lord of la Roche-Guion and Veteuil. He was brother of Richard 
de Vernon, and probably gave his name to la Roche-Guion. 

2 All places in the French Vexin, close to Gisors. 

■^ Tlieobald-l'aganus, castellan of Gisors and Neaufle, and father-in-law 
of Richard de Montmorenci, lord of Bantelu. 

* There are no less than eight communes of the name of Amfreville, in 
Normandy. That which gave birth to the person here mentioned is pro- 
bably Amfreville-sur-Iton, which was held by successive lords of the 
name of Simon, and taking their surnames from the fief, in the 13th and 
14th centuries. The Walter d'Amfreville mentioned in the text, gave a 
moiety of an estate he held at Miserei, under the counts of Evreux, to the 
abbey of Jumi^ges. 

According to the English genealogists, the chief of this family was Robert 
de Umfraville, lord of Toures, and kinsman of William the Conqueror, who, 
they say, received from that king the lordship of Kiddesdale in the county 
of Northumberland. His son Gilbert was contemporary with Henry 1. 
A member of this family, of the same name, was earl of Angus in Scotland, 
at the close of the 13th century, and transmitted this title to his descend- 
ants, who kept it till 1384. The name of Umfraville often appears in the 
Monasticon Angllcanum, 

There is only one place in Normandy whose name resembles Toures, 
and that is Tour, in the canton of Trevieres; but it lies far distant from all 

YOL. lit. P 



210 OEDEEICUS VITALTS. [b.X. Cn.T. 

cVEiivermeu/ were taken prisoners, wliose rich ransoms 
inspired the French, who were not wealthy, with ardour for 
the fight. Eobert de Maldestor,^ Odmund de Chaumont,^ 
"Walbert de Bouri,^ and Eichard his brother, with Godfrey, 
and Peter, sons of Herbert de Serrans,^ were at the head of 
the troops of the Vexin, and sometimes had sharp engage- 
ments with the enemy. That province supplies a great 
number of excellent soldiers, distinguished for their intelli- 
gence and valour. They would not suffer the glory of the 
Trench name to be lost, and resisted the enemy to the death 
in defence of their country and national honour. In 
consequence the flower of the Trench chivalry flocked to 
their standard from all parts of the country, and won rich 
spoils in frequent encounters with the enemy. 

On one occasion, when the followers of the English king 
were ravaging the neighbourhood of Chaumont, and the 
daring enterprise of the knights was exhibited on both 
sides, the French made prisoners of Gilbert de Laigle, 
and several others of high rank, while the English took 

the Umfravilles, and belonged to the bishop of Bayeux in spirituals and 
the chamberlain of Tancarville in temporals. "M. Le Prevost suggests that 
for Toures we should read Tourville, a domain contiguous to the principal 
seat of the lords of Amfreville-la-Campagne, from whom Gilbert was pro- 
bably descended. 

This Walter d'Amfreville appears three times on the pipe-roll of the 
31st year of Henry I., for acquittances of the Danegeld and other taxes in 
the counties of Essex, Suffolk, and Cornwall. 

^ Probably a relation of Hugh and Thorold d'Envermeu, mentioned not 
long before, see p. 206. 

2 Mauddtour, near Magni. In 1169, Robert de Maldestor, probably a 
grandson of the one here mentioned, was witness to a charter of Lewis-the- 
Young in favour of Jumieges. In 1193, Hugh de Maldestort was consta- 
ble of the Vexin. 

^ Odmund-le-Vieux, son of Robert, lord of Chaumont in the Vexin. 
His name and those of his posterity will occur again. 

^ Walbert de Bouri was not the head of the family, but his eldest 
brother Eustace, who in 1104, gave the church of Bouri to St. Martin of 
Pontoise. Walbert joined in the grant. He was dead in 1105, when his 
son Ralph restored to the archbishop of Rouen the lands dependent on 
Gisors which they had detached from the see, for which both father and 
son were excommunicated. 

^ Serans-le-Bouteiller near Magni. The father of these two persons is 
mentioned before (vol. i., p. 457) as one of the benefactors of the priory of 
la Chapellc, in the Vexin. 



A.D. 1098.] IRRUPTION INTO PRANCE. 211 

Pagauus de Montjai^ with other knights from the same 
qmirter. 

In the year of our Lord 1098, the sixth indiction, in the 
month of September, King "William collected a large army, 
and on his march into l^-ance rested at Conches on the fifth 
of the calends of October [27th September]. The same 
night a fearful prodigy was exhibited to the world, the whole 
sky being on fire and appearing red as blood to the inhabit- 
ants of the west. At that time, as we afterwards heard, the 
crusaders fought a battle with the infidels in the east, and 
by God's help gained the victory.^ King William carried his 
irruption into France as far as Pontoise, devastating a noble 
province abounding in wealth of all kinds, with fire and 
pillage, and capture of the inhabitants. He likewise invested 
Chaumont with powerful boides of troops, and ordered it to 
be desperately assaulted by his well-armed soldiers. The 
gallant defenders of the place bravely defended their fortifica- 
tions, without however forgetting what was due to the fear 
of God and the claims of humanity. For they mercifully 
spared the persons of the assailants while they vented their 
rage on the valuable chargers of their enemies ; in this way 
more than seven hundred horses of great price fell by their 
arrows and missiles, so that the French dogs and birds ol 
prey gorged themselves with the carrion. Many followed 

^ Paganu3 de Montjai, near Villevaude (Seine and Marne). He will 
appear again at the battle of Bremule and on other occasions. 

The list of prisoners taken on either side is very different in the narrative of 
Suger. According to that historian, Louis-le-Gros took Count Simon, Gilbert 
de Laigle, a nobleman illustrious both in England and Normandy, and 
Paganus de Gisors, the founder of the castle of that name. The prisoners 
of William Rufus were, Matthew count de Beaumont, Simon de Montfort, 
and Paganus de Montjai. , 

It is most probable that the count Simon, made prisoner by the French, 
was Simon de Senlis, who was earl of Huntingdon in right of his wife 
Matilda. 

The captivity had very different results for the warriors of the two 
armies. The wealthy king of England ransomed his partisans without loss 
of time, but the finances of Louis-le-Gro3 did not allow of his doing the 
same. In consequence, the French were kept prisoners a long time and 
escaped from i!, on condition of swearing fealty to the king of England and 
engaging in his service. 

^ We have no information that any important event of the first crusade 
coincided with this phenomenon, whatever may have been the case with 
respect to that in the month of June, 1098, menlioned in the note p. 193. 



212 OHDEEICTJS TITALIS. [b.X. CH.TI. 

the king homewards on foot who had crossed the Epte 
mounted on spirited horses. Although the valiant Erench 
were unable to defend their farms and villages from the 
predatory excursions of the king's troops, whose numbers 
were great, nor risk a regular engagement, without a king 
or general, against a powerful monarch at the head of a 
large army, they defended their fortresses with great 
obstinacy, and, putting their trust in the goodness of God, 
waited for better times. Meanwhile, King William, accom- 
panied by William count of Poitou,^ led a large army, under 
the command of the young Amauri,^ and Nivard de Septeuil,' 
against Montfort and Epernon, ravaging all the surrounding 
country. However, Simon-the-Toung,* by Grod's help, saved 
his castles from injury. Simon-the-Elder defended Neaufle,^ 
and Peter, with his sons Arnold and Theobald stoutly main- 
tained themselves at Maule,^as did also other lords of castles 
whose naipes I cannot furnish individually. Meanwhile, 
King William being recalled to England by affairs in his 
kingdom, a truce was concluded on both sides, and the 
cessation of hostilities restored to the Erench the satisfaction 
arising from a feeling of security. 

Ch. YI. Magnus III., king of Norway — His family — 
Expeditions to the Orkneys and Western islands, to Man, 
Anglesey, and Ireland — Hugh, earl of Shreioshury, hilled 
hy him — His son King Sigurd's adventurous crusade. 

In the year of our Lord 1090, Magnus, son of Olaf, king of 
Norway,'' having taken arms against the Irish, prepared to 

* William VII., surnamed le Vieux, count of Poitiers. 

^ Amauri, who afterwards became lord of Montfort-l'Amauri, and in 
the end count of Evreux. 

■^ Nivard de Septeuil, near Mantes. 

* Simon the Young, lord of Montfort, before his brother. 

* Probably Neaufle-le-Chateau, near Montfort. Simon the Elder 
must have been a collateral kinsman, probably uncle to Simon the 
Younger and Amauri. 

* See a long account of Peter de Maule and his sons, vol. ii. pp. 220, 
221, &c. 

' Magnus III., king of Norway, succeeded his father Olaf Kyrre in 
1093. He received the surname of Barfced, Barefoot, or bare legs, from 
his having adopted the national dress of the Highlanders during his expe- 
dition to the Western islands; " he and his people," as the Sagas relate, 
" going about the streets with bare legs and short kirtles and overcoats." 



MAGlffUS III. A-N'D SIGURD, KINGS OF KOEWAT. 213 

attack them with a naval expedition of sixty ships. Mai2;]ius 
was strong; and handsome in person, of a bold and liberal 
disposition, brave and active, and endowed with many virtues. 
His power extended over the islands in the ocean, and he 
was possessed of great wealth and abundant resources of all 
kinds. He had two sons born in lawful wedlock, Eystein 
and Olaf, to whom he bequeathed his kingdom and wide 
dominions. He had a third son named Sigurd, by an 
English woman, a captive of noble birth, w^ho was educated 
by Thorer, son of Ingerid, the foster-father of King Magnus.^ 
On the death of his brothers he succeeded to the throne 
which he filled for many years, and founded bishoprics and 
monasteries in Norway, establishments unknown there in 
the times of his predecessors. 

Before he came to the throne Sigurd had undertaken a 
naval expedition to the Holy Land, and blockaded by sea 
the rich city of Tyre which stands on the coast, while the 
crusaders from Jerusalem besieged it on the land-side.* 

The kilt or philibeg and plaid appear therefore to have been in use in the 
Hebrides in 1099. 

^ King Mpgnus Barfod married Margaret, the daughter of Inge, king 
of Sweden, but his three ?ons who succeeded him, Sigurd, Eystein, and 
Olaf, were all born before tliis union, of different mothers, and, as it would 
appear, concubines. If Sigurd's mother was " an Englibhwomnn," as our 
author states, she was probably, from her name Thora, of Anglo- Norwegian 
extracti'-n. Her guardiiin, Thorer, son of Ingerid {Turer JnyherricR 
Jilivs), a sister of Olaf, saint and king, although he had been the foster- 
father, nuirilius, of Magnus Barfod, was hanged in his old age in the 
presence of that king for revolting against him. 

Not only were the sons of Magnus '-'not born in lawful wedlock," but 
all three, not " two'* of them, divided his dominions between them ; 
Sigurd succeeding to the southern districts, with the Orkney and other 
islands of whicli he had been declared king in his father's life-time (1098), 
Eystein having Trondhjem (Drontheim) and the nortliern provinces (1103 
—^August 29, 11 27), and Olaf the central districts of Norway (llU3 — 
Dec. 1, 1116), Eventually, on the death of his brothers, Sigurd succeeded 
to the whole, and died in I !30. 

2 Sigurd's voyage to the Holy Land took place, contrary to our author's 
assertion, after he had become kiny; both of Norway and the Orkneys. He 
acquired from it the surname of Jorsalai'ark, the pilgrim to Jerusalem. 
His roman:ic adventures in the East kindled the inspiration of the 
Icelandic Skalds, several of whom he entertained at his court. His Saga 
in the Heimskringla supplies us with full details of the expedition, and 
enables us still further to correct some of our author's statements. Sailing 
for En^^land "■ with sixty long ships," he wintered there (1107, 1108) with 



214 OTIDEEICITS VITALIS. [b.X. CH.yi. 

lloturning to Norway b^ way of Eussia, Sigurd married 
Malfrid the king's daughter, and reaching his own country, 
by Grod's will, shortly afterwards succeeded to the throne.^ 

" There are five cities standing on the sea-coast surrounding 
Norway, Berga,^ Cuneghella, Copenga, Burgus, and Alsa. 

Henry, son of William the Bastard, who was then king." The poem 
opens with these spirited lines : — 

" The king is on the waves 
The storm he boldly braves. 

His ocean steed, 

With winged speed 
O'er the white-flashing surges, 
To England's coast he urges; 
And there he stays the winter o'er: 
More gallant king ne'er trod that shore." 

In the following spring the Norse hero ravaged the coasts of Spain and 
Portugal, then in possession of the Saracens, having first defeated a 
squadron of Moorish pirates ; and passing the straits of Gibraltar, where, as 
well as on the African coast and at Ivica and Minorca, he again had actions 
with " the heathen," he was entertained as a fellow countryman by Roger, 
the Norman count of Sicily so often mentioned in this work. Landing at 
Acre, Magnus completed his pilgrimage to Jerusalem, where he was 
honourably received by Godfrey, and assisted him in the siege of Sidon, 
not Tyre, as Ordericus states. Sigurd returned home by Constantinople, 
where Alexius paid him the highest honours. Presenting his iieet to the 
emperor, he journeyed by land through Bulgaria, Hungary, and Suabia, 
where he met the emperor Lothaire, and in Sleswig was entertained by 
Nicholas, king of Denmark. The expedition occupied three years, and 
Sigurd was only twenty years old when he returned to his own dominions. 
— Laing's Heimskrinyla, vol. i. pp. 149 — 162. 

^ " Sigurd married Malmfrid, a daughter of King Harald Waldemar- 
Bon (Wladimir-Wsewolowitsch, grand duke of llussia), eastward in 
Novogorod," says the Saga already referred to, but it does not appear that 
he returned to Russia after his crusade, as our author states, and that the 
marriage took place at that time. 

^ Bergen, formerly a capital and still the most important commercial 
city in Norway. Olaf Kyrre, the peaceful king, Sigurd's grandfather, 
"founded a merchant town there (in 1070), Avhere soon many wealthy 
people settled, and it was regularly frequented by merchants from foreign 
lands." (Saga.) He granted it great commercial privileges, and its trade 
vastly increased when it became a member of the Hanseatic league. 

Cunegalla, the Koniingahella, Kongehelle, or Konghel, of tlie middle 
ages, is now called Kongelf or Kongshall. The town stands on a' branch 
of the Gotha-elve, not far from Gottenburg. It was ceded to Sweden 
in 1058. 

Copenga, from the Norse word Kiohe, merchandize, (Copenhagen having 
the same derivation) must ?2iean Trondhjem (Drontheim). Its ancient 



A.T). 1093—1130.] DESCRIPTION OF NORWAY. 215 

There is a sixth, called Turesberga, which is situated to the 
eastward towards the Danish territorv. The central districts 
of the island contain many vast lakes, abounding in fish, 
and the natives are well supplied with fish and fowl and all 
kinds of wild game. They conform to the rites of the 
Christian religion, and live under strict laws by which crime 
is punished with the utmost severity. The Orcades, Finland, 
Ireland, and Greenland, which is the furthest land known 
to the northward, together with other islands as far as 
Gothland belong to the king of Norway, and the country 

name was Nidaros, and it was at that time the capital of Norway, and a 
place of commercial importance. 

Burfjtis is Sarpsborg, a town near the falls of the Glommen, founded by 
St. Olaf about the year 1090, and formerly of consequence. It was 
destroyed in the Swedish wars, but has been lately rebuilt by some 
English merchants. See Forester's Uoad Book for Norway, p. 415. — 
Bohn's Ilkist. Lib. 

Aha, Anslo, or Op'^lo, the change of the SL into ls being a very natural 
mistake of a trans^criber comm.itting to writing a foreign name and ignorant 
of localities. Opslo was founded in 1058 by King Harald Hardraade, who 
fell in battle against Harold of England at Stamford Bridge, and being 
destroyed by fire in 1624, its rem.ains now form a suburb to Christiania, 
the modern capital of Norway. 

Turesburga, another name disfigured by the transcriber, is Tonsber]^, 
standing on a narrow branch of the Christiania Fjord, and, therefore, as 
our author states, on the eastern frontier of Norway. In the middle ages 
it was a place of great trade and importance, and one of the largest towns 
in Norway, but it long since fell to decay. 

Fmland does not mean the province on the Baltic, ceded to Russia 
in 1813, but Finmarken, the most northern district of Norway, reaching 
to the North Cape, and inhabited by a people of the race of Finns or 
Lapps. 

Gotlandam, Gothland ; our author probably includes not only the 
island of that name in the Baltic sea, but the province of Gothia in 
the south of Sweden. It was indeed one of the names given to the whole 
of that portion of Scandinavia in the middle ages, and the Swedish kings 
still retain the title of king of the Goths. 

Thus interpreted, the enumeration made by our author of the dominions 
dependent on the crown of the Norwegian kings of that age is perfectly 
correct; beginning with Greenland, Iceland, and Finland, in the far north, 
then embracing the Orkneys to the sovereignty of which the Western Islands 
and those in the Irish channel was attached, and including the province cf 
Gothia, and probably also the island of Gothland in the Baltic, with 
perhaps other districts of Sweden. 

Our author presents us in a few short sentences with a very accurate 
account of the natural features cf Norway, its vast lakes and pasturages, 
with its scattered hamlets, as well as of the pdmitive character and insii-. 



216 0IIDEEICU3 VITALIS. [b.X. Cn.YI. 

is enriclied by the commercial enterprise of the Norwegians 
whose shipa sail to every part of the world. 

My mind is now bent on developing the origin and events 
of the war waged by King Magnus against the Irish, in which 
vast numbers of people perished and great losses were 
sustained. Magnus had married the daughter of an Irish 
king, but as that prince did not perform the engagements he 
had entered into, the king of Norway was so much incensed 
that he sent her back to her father.^ This led to hostilities 
between them. In consequence, in the fifth year of the 
reign of William Rufus, king of England, Magnus assembling 
his forces from all quarters, and favoured by an east-wind 
sailed over to the Orkney -islands,^ and rounding the northern 

tutions of the people, which have been preserved with little change during 
the lapse of so many ages, with a particular reference to their extraordinary 
commercial activity in those early times. Having corrected some mistakes 
in the historical details, errors such as it has often been our task to point 
out, it is a more pleasing task to call attention to our author's unwearied 
industry and general merits. It is indeed surprising that a monk buried 
in the depths of the forests, in a remote district of Normandy, who once 
only in his lite quitted his retirement for a visit of a few weeks to F-ngland, 
should at such a period, when books were scarce and communications 
difficult, have amassed such stores of varied and, for the most part, 
accurate information. 

We take this opportunity, in reference to Norwegian history, of correct- 
ing an error, or rather a slip of the pen in our own annotations, which led 
us in vol. i. p. 464, to confound Kmg Harald Harfaager, who flourished 
853— 93i;, with Hantid Hnrefoot, Canute's successor, 1035—1040. 

^ There is no account of Mugmis III. having married and afterwards 
repudiated the daughter of an Irish king, which Ordericus assigns as the 
cause of these hostilities ; nor is there any reason to believe that the 
Norwegian king's marauding expedition to the Hebrides in the year 
mentioned by our author, 5th William Rufus (iU93), extended to Anglesey 
and the Isle of Man, as we shall presently see. 

2 The Orkney and Shetland islands having been already colonized by the 
Scandinavian vikings, Harald Harfaager com|)letely subjugated them in 
89.5. By degrees the Norwe^'ians also subdued and colonized the Hebrides 
and all the islands on the west coast, from Lewis to the Isle of Man, 
which they called by one name Sudeyjar, or " the southern islands," from 
their situation as respects the Orkneys. 

King Magnus III. engaged in four succe-sive expeditions to establish his 
dominion and settle colonies in these islands, some of which lie extended 
to the coasts of Wales and Itehmd, — 1. In the hrst year of his reign 
(1093) it appears that he only visited the Orkneys and Hebrides. 2. In 
1090", taking the same rout, and touching at lona and Isla, after rounding 
the peninsula of Cantire and ravaging tiie coasts of Scotland and Wales, 



A. D. 1093 — 1103.] EXPEDITIONS or MAGNUS III. 217 

coast of Scotland, after visiting the other islands which were 
under his dominion, penetrated as far as the isle of Anglesey. 
He proposed to make a descent on Ireland, but finding that 
the Irish were assembled on the coast to oppose his landing, 
he altered his course. Sailing to the isle of Man, which was 
uninhabited,^ he settled a colony on it, caused houses to be 
built for thetri, and supplied thera carefully with all neces- 
saries for their subsistence. He also visited other islands 
in the vast Archipelago situated I may say, beyond the 
circuit of the globe, causing them to be inhabited by his 
•royal authority; and thus employed himself for several 
years in extending his dominions and increasing the 
population. 

On one occasion, the commander of king Magnus's" forces 

he advanced m "his foray to Man, which he plundered. 3. In 1098 — 109S, 
the Norwegian king prohmged his expedition to the isle of Anglesey, 
which he reduced, it being a point further south than any of his 
predecessors had extended their rule. During this expedition, which also 
embraced Ireland, his son Sigurd, Ihen only nine years of age, was 
betrothed to Biadmyrea, daughter of Moriartak, king of Connau;.'ht, and 
Magnus created Sigurd king of the Orkneys and Hebrides. 4. In 1102 
king Magnus fitted out a great armament, and, after visiting his insular 
dominions, landed at Dublin, and conquering great part of Ulster, uniting 
his forces with his ally Moriartak, spent the winter with him in Connaught. 
In the spring of 110.3 he was on the point of reimbarking for Norway 
when lie was slain in a skirmish with the Irish, described in a most spirited 
manner in his Saga in the lleimskringla from which these notices are 
taken. After this disaster his son Sigurd, " leaving the Irish king's 
daughter behind," lost no time in returning to his own country. 

Our author has not only made Magnus himself the party in this abortive 
union, but has confused these four expeditions into ( ne, assigning it the 
date of li93, which was that of the shortest and least impor ant, while 
the main facts he has adopted are connected with the third which took 
place in 1098—1099. 

' We think that our author must be incorrect in stating that Magnus 
found the Isle of Man uninhabited, as it would appear that it was 
colonized as early as the ninth century by Ilarald Harfaager, who placed 
it under the government of a Jarl, as part of his dominions ; and during 
the tenth and eleventh centuiies a long series of Psorweuian kings ruled 
there, who were tributaries t<» the crown of Norway, though tiiey aimed at 
independence. It was to establish his rigiit of supremacy in Man, as well 
as the rest of the Sudreyjar, that Magnus Barfod underto<jk these expe- 
ditions. 

2 This appears to have been in the third expe''ition under the immediate 
command nf King Maijnus himself, and the scene of the events described 
was the island of Anglesey. 



21S OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [e.X. CH.TI. 

appeared off the English coast; but he hoisted a red shield, 
which is a sign of peace, at the mast head.^ The maritime 
people who dwelt on the coast of the open sea towards the 
north of England, on seeing strange ships, with fierce crews 
draw near the land, raised shouts of alarm and collected bands 
of armed men from all quarters of the province of Mercia. 
There were then violent hostilities between the English and 
AVelsh, for which reason the loud outcries called the people 
to arms. 

Two earls who had the chief authority in Mercia, both of 
whom had the name of Hugh,^ despatched messengers in 
breathless haste through the whole province, ordering all the 
men who carried arms, both French and English, to assemble 
without a moment's delay and defend the country against the 
foreign bands. In consequence, a large force was collected 
out of the counties of Chester and Shrewsbury, and stationed 
at Diganoth^ near the sea ready for battle. Hugh de 
Montgomery being the first who arrived at the head of his 
vassals with great despatch, took up his quarters there for 
several days, while waiting for the auxiliaries from the 
neighbourhood, guarding the country with great vigilance 
against the irruptions of the Welsh and Norwegians. How- 
ever, one day, when the inhabitants rushed to the shore in 
great confusion to oppose the Northmen wlio appeared to be 
preparing to attack the English from their ships. Earl Hugh, 
putting spurs to his horse, and getting the peop together 
in a body by virtue of his superior authority that they might 

^ Tliis passage is very obscure, and it is difficult to understand what our 
author meant to convey; for if the red shield was a sign of peace it could 
not have caused the alarm he describes, but the Norwegians would have 
had reason to complain of the inhospitable reception they encountered. 
It might be supposed that the red shield was a sign of hostili^ies; but we 
must recollect that red was the national colour not only of all the Scandi- 
navian nations, but of the kindred Anglo-Norman race. It was, probably, 
also that of the Welsh and ancient Britons. We may arrive at that 
conclusion from a passage in the prophecies of Merlin, where the Britons 
are distinguished by the red dragon, and the Saxons by the white. See a 
passage concerning these prophecies towards the close of b. xii. 

^ Hugh, earl of Chester, and Hugh de Montgomery, earl of Shrewsbury; 
they are called in the Saga of King Magnus, " Hugo the Brave, and 
Hugo the Stout." 

* Diganwy ; see vol. ii. p. 445, our author transferring the scene from 
Anglesey to the coast of Carnarvonshire. 



A.D. 1103.] MAGNrS SLATS HUGH MOKTQOMEEY. 219 

not be cut off in detail, arrayed tliem against the enemy. 
Meanwhile, a brutal Norwegian,^ perceiving the gallant earl 
thus actively riding about, suddenly shot him, alas! at the 
devil's instigation, with a whizzing arrow. The earl fell 
from his horse the same instant, breathing his last in the 
flowing tide. A cry of grief arose, and King Magnus 
hearing of this disaster joined in the lamentations, as well as 
those around him, and offered peace and security to Hugh 
Dirgane, that is, the stout.^ "My armament," he said, "is 
directed not against the English, but the Irish, and my 
object is not to invade the country belonging to others, but 
to colonize the islands which are part of my own domi- 
nions."^ 

* The Saga relates that the earl's mortal wound was given by King 
!Magnus himtelf. " King Magnus shot with the bow, but Hugo the brave 
was all over in armour, so that nothing was bare about him excepting one 
eve. King Magnus let fly an arroAV at him, as also did a Halogaland man 
who was beside the king. They both shot at once. The one shaft hit the 
nose-screen of the helmet which was bent by it to one side, and the other 
arrow hit the earl's eye, and went through his head, and that was found to 
be the king's. Earl Hugo fell, and the Britons fled with the loss of many 
people. 

" There was sung the following verse about it : — 

" On the armour arrows rattle, 
Where our Norse king stands in battle; 
From the helmets blood-streams flow, 
Where our Norse king draws his bow: 
His bowstring twangs — its bitiyig hail 
Rattles against the ring-linked mail. 
Up in the land in deadly strife 
Our Norse king took Earl Hugo's life." 

^ Dirgane ; probably a Norse word metamorphosed by the transcriber. 
We can find nothing nearer it than dicerve, strong. 

^ Giraldus Cambrensis, who places this event in the isle of Anglesey, 
and in other respects coincides with the Saga, relates it very diflferently 
i'rom our author. He says : " Pirates from the Orkneys had come into 
the island's sound in long ships, and the earl, hearing that they were near 
the shore, ventured too rashly into the sea on a strong horse to encounter 
them. Then the commander of the fleet, whose name was Magnus, and 
who was standing on the prow of his ship, shot an arrow at him, and 
although the earl was in complete armour of steel which entirely protected 
his person from head to foot, except his eyes, the arrow pierced his right 
eye, and penetrating the brain, he fell dead into the sea. The conqueror, 
seeing him fall, is said to have shouted from his lofty station in the Danish 
language, Lett loupe, which in English means, * Let him depart.' The 



220 OBDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.TII. 

The Normans and English searched a long time for 
the body of Hugh, and did not recover it until the ebbing 
tide left the strand dry. At last, seventeen days after his 
death, they brought it to Shrewsbury and buried it in the 
abbey there v^'ith deep mourning. He was the only one of 
Mabel's sons who was courteous and amiable, and having 
conducted himself with great moderation during the four 
years he held the family honours and domains, to which he 
succeeded on the death of his father Eoger, he fell about the 
close of the month of July. 
Ch. VII. Bolert de Belesme succeeds his hrotlier as earl of 

Shrewshury — Elias, count of Maine ; his conference ivith 

William Bifus — The king commences hostilities against 

him — The Count is tahen 'prisoner, and Maine submits to 

the king. 
Oif the death of Earl Hugh, his brother Eobert de Belesme 
presented himself to William Rufus and offered him three 
thousand pounds sterling for his brother's earldom. Having 
thus secured it, he excercised great cruelties on the Welsh 
during four years. He built a very strong castle at 
Bridgnorth^ on the river Severn, transferring the town and 
people of Quatford^ to the new fortress. He also laid claim 
to the lands of Blythe^ in right of his cousin Eoger de 
dominion of the English in Mona ended from that hour." — Girald. Carnbr. 
b. ii. c. 7. 

The Norse words supposed to have been used by King Magnus are, we 
believe, in the modern Danish-Norwegian idiom, Lade Lcebe, let him run 
or leap. 

^ There was a Saxon burg or fortress at Bridgnorth built by Ethelfeda, 
lady of the Mercians, King Alfred's sister, as earl} as a.d. 912. Saxon 
Chron. p. 369, and Henry of Huntingdon, p. 167, of liohn's Antiq. Lib. 
Robert de Belesme, who was one of the most able engineers of his age, 
surrounded it with walls and erected the Norman fortress, which in after 
times stood many sieges, but no trace of it is left. 

^ There is still a place of this name, probably the site of the castle 
mentioned by our author which was abandoned for that of Bridgnorth, 
from which it is about a mile and a half distant, 

^ B/ida ; Blythe in Nottinghamshire, where Roger de Butlig founded a 
priory dependent on the abbey of Mount St. Catherine. The charter of 
foundation is preserved in the Monasticnm A rif/licanum, under tlie year 
1088. The family sprung from Bulli, near Neufchatel. Roger de Butlig's 
principal seat in England after the conquest was at Tikhill in Yorkshire. 
It appears in Doniesdny-hook that he had a great many other manors. 
Une 01 them, Sand ford, in Devonshire, was granted by Queen Matilda to 



A.D. 1103.] BELE3ME BECOMES EATIL OF SHREWSBURY, 22J 

Butlilei, and obtained a grant of them from the kinj^ for a 
large sum of money. But as his wealth augmented by the 
possession of such vast territories he was inflated with pride, 
and becoming a follower of Belial abandoned himself without 
reserve to flngitious and cruel deeds. 

The English and "Welsh who had long treated as idle tales 
the accounts they had heard of his making his cruelties 
a jest, now tortured in his iron grasp, felt to their sorrow 
that the reports were true. For the more he was 
aggrandized by his wealth and the number of his vassals, 
the more he was inflamed with cupidity to seize the lands of 
his neighbours whatever was their rank, and to repossess 
the domains which his ancestors had given to the saints. 
He had already forcibly erected castles^ on the property of 
others in the county of Maine, I mean on the possessions 
of St. Peter de la Couture and St. Vincent the martyr,' 
using them for the grievous oppression of the peasants. The 
valiant Count Elias hearing this, he did not behave like a 
coward, but encountered Eobert in arms on the river 
Koullic, in the territory of the Saonois and, invoking the 
holy bishop St. Julian in the name of the Lord, gave him 
battle, and defeated and drove him with shame from the 
field, although he commanded superior forces.^ In this 
engagement, Eobert de Courci was wounded, losing his 
right eye ; Goulfier de Villeret, William de Moulins,* GreoflTrey 

him and hie wife on their marriage, cum uxore svd. His wife's name was 
Muriel. The male line of their descendants failed in 121.3, and their 
possessions passed into the hands of the family of Vipont (Vieux-Pont) 
by the marriage of Idonea, their great-giand-daughter with Robert de 
Vipont. 

It may be observed that Ordericus substitutes the Anglo-Saxon th for 
the s or L in the original family name, written BuUi or Buslei, proving 
that the aspirated T was" used by the Normans in the twelfth century, as it 
was by the ancient Scandinavians, and still is in England. Not only so, 
they substituted the a>pirated th for consonants of an entirely different 
character, as, for example, in Drionna, Warrenna, which they pronounced, 
and sometimes wrote, Briothna, Warethna. 

^ Saone, and St. Remi-du-Plain. 

' The rich abbeys of La Couture and St. Vincent-du-Mans. 

' M. Cayvin calls this rivulet Riolt or Riollet. The battle was fought 
between Rene, Toigii^, and Dangeul. 

■* Eldest son of V\ ilUam de Moulins by liis wife Aubrey. Respecting 
this family, see vol. ii. p. 192. The details given by our author are not 
very satisfactory nor consistent with each other. It does not appear why 



222 OBDEEICUS YITALIS. [e.X. CK.YII. 

de Grace^ and many otters were made prisoners. The 
Manceaux obtained large ransoms for them, and thus 
avenged the outrages on the saints and their own losses. 
These hostilities were long continued, and caused the death 
or bitter captivity of numbers. 

It is now convenient that I should unfold the order of 
events and the genealogy of a family which already aspired 
to the royal dignity. Elias, son of John and Paula,^ and 
cousin of Hugh count of Maine, was distinguished for his 
piety to God, and governed his people well in. the fear of the 
Lord* He married au illustrious lady, Matilda,^ daughter 
of Gervase, who was the son of Eobert surnamed Brochard,* 
brother of Gervase, archbishop of Eheims.^ He had six 
brothers, the two eldest of whom, Goisbert and Enoch 
quitted the army to become monks. The other four Geoffrey, 
Lauceline, Milo and William^ were cut off prematurely. 
Elias held the castle of Eleche by inheritance from his father, 
and obtained four castles in right of his wife, namely, 

Robert, the younger son, a person of no merit, succeeded to his mother's 
property instead of William the elder. We have had an instance of such 
succession in Robert de Be'esme, inheriting the Talvas domains of his 
mother Mabel, and it is not uncommon in great English families. After 
Ordericus has told us that Simon and Hugh, cousins of the two brothel's, 
died in their infancy, we find that Simon succeeded Robert at the age of 
fifteen years. 

1 Geoffrey de Gac^ ; perhaps a son or relation of Ralph-Tete-d'Anc. 
It is certain that he had a son named Robert de Gace, who bequeathed 
his estates to William, Count d'Evreux, his cousin-german. 

* On the genealogy of this person, see before, vol. ii. p. 74. 

2 Matilda, daughter of Gervase de ChS,tean-du-Loir, lady of that fief, 
and of Maiet, died in 1099, before Easter. 

* Robert, son of Hammelin, and Hildeburge de Belesrae. His wife's 
name was Aremburge. 

^ Gervase, the third brother, after being bishop of Mans for twentv 
years, was made archbishop of Rheims. In this character he crowned 
Philip I. on May 23, 1059. He afterwards claimed the ofiice of chancellor 
of France as belonging to his see, and obtained it. This prelate died 
July 4, 1084. 

^ It is not clear with whom our author connects these numerous 
brothers. If he meant Matilda, he would have done better to have joined 
them with Hugh de Chateau-sur-Loir, her brother, a person better known, 
v/ho married a natural daughter of William the Conqueror, but died 
without issue. If it was Gervase, it is contradicted by a charter, in which 
he speaks of his three brothers, Adam, Robert, and Gervase, very different 
names from those here mentioned. 



A.D. 1C96.] ELIAS, COUNT OF MAINE. 223 

Chateau du Loire, Mayet, Luci, and Ostilli. His wife boro 
him a daughter named Eremburga, who, when she became 
marriageable, was espoused to Fulk, then Count of Anjou, 
and who is now king of Jerusalem, and gave birth to an 
illustrious progeny, Geoffrey and Elias, Matilda and Sybilla ; 
the daughters marrying the sons of kings, but by God's 
providence which disposes ail things well, they soon became 
widows.^ 

At the time when Duke Eobert pledged Normandy to his 
brother, receiving from him a large sum of money for the 
expenses of his pilgrimage to the King of kings, Count Elias 
came to the court of William Eufus at Eouen. Having had 
a long conference with the duke, he presented himself to the 
king, and thus humbly addressed him : "My lard the king, 
by the pope's advice I have taken the cross in his service, and 
devoted myself to my Lord God for the expedition to 
Jerusalem with many noble pilgrims. I demand your friend- 
ship as a faithful ally, and desire to undertake this journey 
at peace with you." The king replied to him: " Go where 
you please, but yield up to me the city of Mans with the 
whole county, for I wish to possess all that my father held." 
Elias answered : " I hold the county by inheritance from my 
fathers, and by God's help, I will bequeath it to my children as 
free as I now possess it. If you choose to challenge my right, 
I am ready to submit to a legal judgment, and will hold or 
lose my inheritance according to the decision of kings, counts, 
and bishops." The king rejoined : " My pleadings with you 
shall be with swords and spears and showers of arrows." 
Elias then said: "It was my desire to light against the pagans 

> Eremburge, countess of Maine, married in 1100 Fulk V., count of 
Anjou, and afterwards king of Jerusalem. She died in 1126. This 
paragraph was written between 1131, the date of Fulk's being crowned 
king of Jerusalem, and 1142, that of his death. Their children were, 
Geoffrey Plantagenet, count d' Anjou, married to the empress Matilda; 
— Elias d'Anjou, count of Mans, who died in 1154. 

Matilda d'Anjou, married to William Adelin at Lisieux in June, 111.9, 
who afterwards became a nun at Fontevrault in 1 1 28, was made abbess 
there in 1150, and died in 1154. 

Sibylla d'Anjou, affianced in 1 122 to William Cliton, and married in 1 1 70 
to Th'eodoric d'Alsace, count of Flanders. She died in the Holy Land at 
the convent of St. Lazarus at Bethany, where she took the veil, in '1158. 
This lady appears also to have borne the name of Mabire. Neither of 
her husbands were kings' sons. 



224 OBDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.YII. 

in tlie Lord's name, but it appears that I must have a con- 
flict nearer home with the enemies of Christ. For every 
one who resists the right and does injustice, proves himself 
to be the enemy of Grod, who is truth itself and the sun of 
justice. He has thought fit to invest me with the govern- 
ment of Maine, and I ought not lightly to relinquish it, lest 
through my folly God's people should be abandoned to 
robbers, like sheep who having no shepherd become the 
prey of wolves. Listen then, all you lords who are present, 
while I make known the resolution with which Heaven 
inspires me. I will not rehnquish our Saviour's cross which 
I have adopted after the manner of the pilgrims, but will 
place it on my shield, my helmet, and all my other arms, and 
cause the holy sign to be fixed on my saddle and bridle. 
Under the protection of this divine symbol I will encounter 
the enemies of peace and justice, and will defend, sword in 
hand, the country of Christians. My horse and my arms 
shall be distinguished by the holy sign, so that those who 
fight with me will combat a soldier of Christ. I trust in 
Him who governs the world, and knows the secrets of my 
heart, and through his mercy I shall find a favourable oppor- 
tunity for fulfiling my vow." King William made this 
reply '• " Gro where you will, and do what you like ; I am not 
wdlling to make war against those who have taken the cross, 
but I will not give up a city which my father held to the day 
of his death. Lose no time therefore in repairing your 
dilapidated fortifications, hire masons and stone-cutters, who 
work for money, and with all speed restore the old breaches 
in your neglected walls. I will visit as soon as possible the 
citizens of Mans, appearing before the gates with a hundred 
thousand lances, under my standards ; for I will not leave 
you in quiet possession of luy heritage without laying claim 
to it. I will cause waggons drawn by oxen to convey there 
loads of arrows and bolts, but I will come myself to your 
gates with numerous troops of men at arms before the 
drivers can accomplish the journey with their utmost speed. 
Believe that I speak the truth, and let it be known to those 
who are in league with you." 

After this conversation, the count retired and put his 
territories in a state of defence. The great nobles who had 
listened to the altercations of the warlike princes did not 



A.D. 1098.] WILLIAM II. INVADES MATXE. 225 

venture to interfere, fearing the hangbty king to whom tliev 
owed fealty, while they were sorry for the gallant count who 
defended his cause with firmness. Elias was braveand honour- 
able, and dear to all forhis many virtues. He was distinguished 
also for his personal qualities, being strong and of large 
stature, tall and graceful, with black curling hair, and well 
shaved like a priest.^ He was agreeable and eloquent in his 
discourse, gentle to the peaceable and rough to the turbulent, 
a strict observer of justice, and zealous of good works in the 
fear of the Lord. His cheeks often moistened with tears 
showed how great was the fervour of his devotions and 
prayers. He employed himself diligently in defending the 
churches, in giving alms to the poor and in fasting, for he 
made every Friday a day of abstinence from meat and drink 
in reverence to the passion of our Lord. 

Moreover, King William was occupied with many cares 
relating to the French, Bretons, and Flemings, so that he 
put off the performance of his threats for two years,^ and 
forgot the Manceaux. Meanwhile, Elias fortified the castle- 
of DangeuP against Robert Talvas, and placed his retainers 
in it to defend the inhabitants of his territories. In con- 
sequence, that tyrant was grieved because he could not 
ravage the lands in his neighbourhood as he pleased. He 
therefore unseasonably disturbed the king in the month of 
January, and inflaming his anger by the violence of his 
language, induced him to march at the head of his army 
against the castle of Dangeul in the month of February. He 
had said to the king : " The enemy's garrison, abandoned to 
security, are dispersed in all quarters, trusting to the winter 
rains and storms, and believing you and your troops to be 
entangled in other military operations. If we make a sudden 
attack we shall find the garrison and the inhabitants 
unprepared, and the fortress will prove an easy conquest. 

* This is not the first time that our author has given expression to the 
determined resistance made by the clergy of that age against the effeminate 
fashion of wearing long hair. 

* Our author did not consider the king's short expedition against 
Dangeul as an adequate fulfilment of his threats the year before. 

' Dangeul, two leagues from Mamers. The fortification of this castle 
was principally intended to overawe and check the excursions of the- free- 
booters for whom Robert de Belesme had repaired the castlea of Saone 
and St. Remi-du-Plain. q 

VOL IIT. 



226 OEDEEICTTS YITALIS. [e.X. Cn.TII. 

The king engaged in the enterprise, althougli for many- 
reasons he was very unwilling ; but as Eobert urged him and 
made great promises of success, he did not like to defer it 
lest he should be accused of want of courage. Reports 
of the king's march preceded him, and by the orders of the 
count of Maine the country people were summoned to arms 
and posted at the passages of the rivers, along dikes, and at 
the difficult entrances of the woods, for defence against the 
enemy. The king was thus prevented from obtaining success, 
but his fury was rousedto the highest pitch andhe commanded 
Robert to assemble great bodies of troops in his garrison, 
and supplied him with large sums of money, to enable him 
to fortify his castles with trenches and walls and various 
kinds of buildings, and to bestow large donations on his 
mercenary soldiers. The Count de Belesme therefore, who 
was a skilful engineer, lost no time in erecting new fortresses, 
and adding deep ditches to the defences of the old ones. 
He possessed nine castles in that county, viz. Bleve, Per- 
rie, le Monte-de-la-Nue, Saone, St. Eemi-du-Plain, Lurson, 
Allieres, la Motte-de-Gualtier-le-Clinchamp, Mamers,^ and 
several other fortified houses. In this manner the cunning 
manoeuvrer prepared castles for himself at the king's expense, 
placing in them ferocious garrisons, fatal to the neighbour- 
hood, by whose means he satisfied his pride and carried on 
an atrocious war against the people of Mans. In the season 
of Lent, when sinners, inspired with divine compunction, 
relinquish their sins, and have recourse to penance as a 
remedy for their past offences, more than three hundred 
prisoners perished in the dungeons of Eobert. They had 
made great offers for their ransom, but they were cruelly 
refused by him, and his captives perished by hunger and cold 
and other tortures. 

At this time Hoel, by birth a Breton and bishop of Mans, 
died after a venerable life.^ Count Elias nominated Geoffrey, 

1 Bleves, three leagues from Perai three leagues and a half from Mont 
de la Nue, near Contilli, one league and a half from Mamers ; I'Ortieuse, 
in the commune of Val, two leagues from Saone, and two and a half from 
Mamers ; St. Remi du Plain, two leagues and a half, Allieres, one and a 
half,- la Motte-Gautier de Clinchamp, near Chcmilli, in the department of 
(Jrme, one leasrue and a quarter from Mamers. 

^ July -29, iu:(7. 



A.D. 1098.] IIILDEEERT, ARCHBISHOP OF IIOUEX. 227 

a Breton, and dean of the same churcb, to the vacant 
bishopric/ but the clergy had already compelled Hildebert 
de Lavaric' to seat himself on the episcopal throne, and 
sang triumphantly, with a loud voice, Te Deum laudamus, and 
the rest of the service prescribed by the church at the 
election of bishops. Elias, finding this, was greatly 
incensed and offered resistance, but the clergy saying 
to him, "You ought not to prefer your choice to 
that of the church," he was silent through respect, because 
he feared God ; and in order not to introduce a mortal 
schism among the members of the church, he approved the 
choice of the canons.^ Greoffrey, feeling sure of his 
election to the bishopric, had prepared a sumptuous banquet 
for the day of his elevation, and the prepared meats were 
not the less devoured by his greedy followers. However 
the people of Mans would not hear of him as their bishop. 
He was brother of Judicail, bishop of Aleth, and after 
the death of AVilliam was seventeen years archbishop of 
Bouen. 

Hildebert was chosen by the clergy and people archbishop 
of Tours after the death of Gilbert, being thus translated 
by God's providence from the bishopric of Mans to the 
metropolitan see.* This prelate was mild, pious, and 
devoted to the study both of sacred and secular iiteiature.^ 
He was by far the best poet of our age, and composed a 
number of verses equal or superior to those of the ancients. 
The ardent zeal of the learned searches out these poems, 

^ GeofFrey, brother of Judicael, bishop of St. Malo, was elevated to the 
archbishopric of Rouen in 1111, as we shall presently find. 

^ Hildebert, or Aldebert, a native of Larcardin, four leagues from 
Vendome, had been appointed archdeacon of Mans by his predecessor 
Hoel in 1092. 

3 Notwithstanding the deference paid by Count Elias to the choice of 
the clergy of his cathedral, the new bishop, in consequence of the 
opposition of William "Rufus and the friends of his competitor GeofFrey, 
was not consecrated till Christmas day of the same year. He was about 
lorty years of age. 

'* In the beginning of the year 1125. 

^ The nuri.erous works and correspondence of this prelate were 
published in 1708 by Dom Beaugendre. An analysis of them will 
be found in the Hisfoire Litt6ruire de France, t. xi. pp. 278, 412. The 
only ones which appear to be pointed out here are : De querimonid et 
contlktu carnis et spiritus. and de quatuor virlutious vitae honesice. 

Q 2 



228 OKDEEICUS YITALT3. [b.X. CH.YII, 

and diligently studies tliem as more valuable than gold and 
topazes. He has written with elegance and wisdom 
concerning Christ and the church, the body and the soul, 
the acts of the saints and their miracles, and in praise of 
virtue and contempt of vice. The cardinals who frequently 
visit France, because they find the people civilized and 
obedient to their teaching, have carried back with them to 
Eome several of Hildebert's poems, thinking them worthy 
of admiration among the E-oman schools and professors of 
eloquence. This reverend lord exercised the episcopal 
functions for nearly thirty-five years,^ and was particularly 
devoted to useful pursuits both in practice and teaching. 
He worthily ornamented in a variety of ways the church of 
St. Gervase, where the body of Julian, the illustrious 
confessor of Christ reposes, and afterwards consecrated it 
in tbe time of Grumar the Breton, his successor, who is 
known also by his other name of Guy d'Etampes.^ But, for 
their sins, what good men had exerted themselves to 
embellish so richly, and to furnish with various ornaments 
to the honour of God, became eight years after its 
dedication a prey to the flames, which destroyed great part 
of the city and polluted and ruined the church in a horrible 
manner. 

In the year of our Lord 1098, the sixth indiction, Count 
Elias undertook an expedition against Bobert in the week 
preceding the Eogations,^ and having completed it ordered 
his followers to retire homewards after the nones. On their 
return, the count leaving his troops turned aside near Dan- 
geul, attended by only seven horsemen and perceiving some 
men lurking among the thick trees and bushes, immediately 
charged them with his slender company. Eobert himself 
was lying there in ambush, and, seeing the small band 
incautiously galloping on, that experienced and wary soldier 
fell suddenly upon them with superior numbers and quickly 

* He died December 18, 1134. 

* Guy d'!]6tampes (1126 — 1136). It appears that Grumar was the 
Breton form of the name of Guy, of which our author furnishes other 
examples. He has been supposed to have been a native of England, and 
it is certain that he studied there, but most probably was born in France, 
as he went from Mans, where he had been brought up by Hildebert, to 
take lessons from St. Anselm. 

^ In 1098, Rogation week commenced on Sunday, April 25. 






A.D. 1098.] WILLIAM II. INVADES MAINE. 229 

made prisoners of the count, and Herve de Montfort/ his 
standard bearer, with nearly all the rest. The troops in 
advance, after reaching Ballon^ in high spirits, learned from 
those who escaped that the count was taken, and after 
their empty triumph were plunged into the deepest distress. 
Eobert conducted Elias to Rouen, and presented him to the 
king, who committed him to honourable custody, for 
"William was not cruel to the knights, but treated them 
with kindness and generosity, good humour and courtesy- 
Favoured by the smiles of fortune. King William in great 
exultation summoned an assembly of all the barons of 
Normandy and thus addressed them: " Hitherto I have been 
very negligent in recovering my fathers inheritance, because 
I was loth that lives should be lost and the people harassed, 
through my ambition to increase my territories. But now, 
as you see, my enemy has been taken prisoner without my 
knowledge, and by Grod's will, who knoweth the justice of 
my cause, is delivered to me. "What course do you approve? 
What do you advise me to do now? Consult on what is to 
be done, and inform me what you consider best.'* The 
barons, having taken counsel, replied: "Our lord the king, 
we resolve unanimously that the whole army of Normandy 
be assembled at your summons, and we aU will march with 
it boldly and cheerfully to reduce the province of Maine." 

The king was much pleased at hearing this, and heralds 
were despatched with haste far and wide through all 
quarters to proclaim his will, that aU his subjects, allies, and 
friends should come loyally to his aid. In consequence, 
Erench and Burgundians, Flemings and Bretons, and other 
neighbouring nations, flocked to the standard of the liberal 
master and greatly augmented his forces. In the month of 
June King William marched his army by Alen9on, and 
entered the enemy's country at the head of a large body of 
troops. By his command the cavalry suddenly appeared 
before Frenai/ where they skirmished for a time with the 

1 Probably Montfort-Ie-Rotrou, near Conner^, now the chief town of a 
canton. 

* Ballon is also the chief place of the canton of that name. The 
castle belonged at this time to Hammelin de Ballon, one of the favoimtea 
of William Rufus. 

•* Frenai-le-Vicomte, otherwise Frenai-sur-Sarthe. 



230 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.YIT. 

horse belonging to the garrison at the castle-gates. Mean- 
while Ealph viscount de Beaumont,^ hastened to the king 
and humbly proposed a truce which he was anxious to make 
for the term he mentioned. " I ask a truce of your highness, 
my lord the king, until such time as you shall return safe 
from Maine. For the bishop and council are sitting there, 
and daily occupied in deliberations for the common good of 
the state. We will readily concur in whatever shall be 
there agreed between you, and obey your orders in all things. 
I refer this, my lord the king, to the decision of my elders, 
because if I were the first to yield without a struggle, and 
deserting my peers should make a separate peace, I should 
doubtless bring shame and dishonour on my whole race. 
The members ought to follow and not take the lead of the 
head ; good and loyal vassals seek rather to obey their lord 
than to command him." The king approved Ealph's pro- 
posal and discourse, and granted his demand. 

Likewise, Geoffrey of Maine,^ Eotrou de Montfort,^ and 
several others, through whose territories he had to pass, did 
the same, and by their humble entreaties obtained a safeguard 
from him until his return. 

Gilo de Sully ,^ a knight of one of the oldest and noblest 
families of France, and belonging to the household^ of 
Henry, king of France, who had frequently witnessed large 
assemblies of people, now surveyed the troops in arms all 
around as he stood on the summit of a lofty hill, and com- 
puted them at fifty thousand men, declaring that he had 
never seen such an army collected on this side the Alps. 

The king's first halt in the enemy's country was at 
Eoussei-Fontaine f the next day he encamped at Mont- 
Bizot,^ where he passed the night. The third day, he 

^ Ralph de Beaumont, second of that name, viscount of Maine, was 
eldest brother of Hubert de Beaumont II., lord of Sainte Susanne, 
mentioned before, vol. ii. p. 370, &c. He was surnamed Paganus, because 
he was not baptized till a long time after he was born. 

' Geoffrey II., lord of Mayenne, died the year following. 

3 See before, p. 27. 

* Gilo de Sulli, lord of La Chapello and Aix-dans-Gilon, was viscount 
of Bourges, as successor to Stephen his brother-in-law. 

5 Familia. The word, taken in its primitive sense, means that this lord 
was in his early years one of the attendants of Henry I., king of France. 

* Roussei-Fontaine, situate about three leagues S.'S.E. from Alenpon. 
' Mojitbizot, four leagues and a quarter from Mans. 



A.D. 109S.] SUCCESSES IN" MAINE. 231 

reached Coiilans, and commanded the tents to be pitched on 
the meadows of the Sarthe. The cross-bowmen and archers 
were posted in the vineyards on the sides of the road, with 
orders to keep a sharp look out against the enemy, and to put 
them in disorder with showers of missiles if they attempted 
to pass.^ 

Fulk, surnamed Rechiu, count of Anjou, hearing that Elias 
was a prisoner, immediately went to Mans of which he was the 
suzerain lord, and being well received by the inhabitants he 
reinforced the defences with soldiers and slingers. On the 
king's approach to the city, the knights sallied forth to meet 
him, and maintained an obstinate engagement with the 
Normans the whole day, many feats of arms being performed 
on both sides. Yov then renowned champions rejoiced in 
the opportunity of exhibiting their valour, and meriting 
the praises of their bloody conflicts from their chiefs and 
comrades. 

Paganus de Montdoubleaux,^ an old friend of the Normans, 
renewed his alliance with the king, and gave up to him a 
very strong fortress which he had at Ballon, by means of 
which the whole place was kept in subjection. The king 
appointed there Eobert de Belesme commander of the troops 
and joined with him more than three hundred knights well 
armed and of approved courage. He treated the inhabitants 
who resisted with the greatest severity, subjecting them to 
the most serious losses, employing a great number of his 
troops in rooting up their vines, and destroying their corn 

^ Coulans, on the left bank of the Sarthe, about three leagues from 
Mans. It was on his march from Montbizot to Coulans, and between 
the last commune and St. Pavace, that William Rufus fell in with two 
rivulets about which Wace tells a story as gross as it is improbable. 
According to that author, the king of England made a long detour to the 
east, on the territory of Sargi, to avoid these two insignificant streams, 
solely on account of the obscenity of their names. To any one who is 
acquainted with the foul and immoral habits of William Rufus, this 
scruple, if the account can be believed, will appear one of the strangest 
facts recorded in history. 

A single quotation will suffice to give an idea of the licence and promis- 
cuous intercourse allowed in the court of this monarch. History supplies, 
among the exemplary reforms introduced by his successor, the following 
fact : Lucernarum usum noctibus in curid restituit, qui fuerat tempore 
Jratris intermissus. One historian even adds prohibitus. 

« See before p. 27. 



232 ORDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.X. CH.VII. 

and laying waste the province all around. But he was 
unable to continue the siege for any length of time, so groat 
was the scarcity of food felt both by men and horses, because it 
was the season between the old and new crops.^ A quartern 
of oats, without which grain it is difficult to maintain the 
strength of horses in the western provinces, was sold for ten- 
pence of the money of Maine. In consequence the king drew 
off his troops, ordering them to go and gather the corn into 
their barns, and when the harvest was over to be ready to 
besiege the enemy's castles. 

William Bufus returning to Normandy with his powerful 
force, Count Pulk laid siege to Ballon, and attempted for 
some days to reduce the garrison with the united troops of 
Anjou and Maine. The garrison, however, reported their 
danger to the king, and the tidings getting abroad, some 
gallant knights hastened to the succour of their besieged 
comrades. Meanwhile, when the count and his troops were 
at dinner in their tents, and the mendicants from the town 
returned to the garrison with the alms they had received, 
informing them that the besiegers were then taking their 
meal, it being about tierce,^ several bodies of troops sallied 
forth in good order, and falling unexpectedly on the enemy 
while they were eating unarmed, took several prisoners and 
put all the rest to flight. Walter of Mount Sorel,^ Groffrey 
de Briolet,* John de Blaison,^ Berlai de MontreuiP and 
nearly one hundred and forty knights and men-at-arms, with 
a great number of foot-soldiers were made prisoners, and the 
conquerors carried off much booty from the enemy, consisting 
of arms, vestments, and effects of all descriptions. Among 
the prisoners were several noble lords of castles who, possessed 
of large domains, held a high rank among the barons of their 

^ Our author means to say that it was the season when the corn of the 
preceding harvest was consumed, and the growing crops were not yet ripe. 

^ Nine o'clock in the morning. 

3 He was son of Wilham de Montsoreau, the first of that name, and 
son-in-law of Hersende de Champagne, the first prioress of Fontevrault. 

^ Geoffrey de Briolai, son of Artaud de Briolai and Hersende. His 
wife's name was Sarmoise de Jarz6. 

^ John de Blaison-sur- Loire, has the title of proconsul (viscount) in a 
title-deed of St. Maur-sur-Loire. His son Theobald was lord of Mirebeau. 

* Berlai, or Bellai, lord of ?.1ontreuil Bellni, son of Gerard, the first of 
the name. His wile was called the Proud, Orgoillosa. 



A.D. 1098.J THE MANCEAUX SUBMIT. 233 

native country, and had under them by hereditary right 
many very valiant knights. 

In the third week of the month of July/ King "William 
came to the relief of his garrison, bringing with him a body 
of troops formidable to the enemy. On the king's arrival 
the people of Ballon admitted him into the castle with great 
joy. The prisoners in confinement hearing of it, set up a 
loud cry, shouting with one voice: "Noble King William, 
give us our liberty." This coming to the king's ear, he 
ordered them all to be released from their fetters, and to 
have a plentiful repast with his own followers in the court 
of the castle, and that after they had eaten they should be 
dismissed in freedom on pledging their word. His courtiers 
objected that in such a great concourse of people the 
prisoners would easily make their escape, but the king 
reproved their harshness, and taking the part of the captives 
said : " Ear be it from me to think that a brave knight will 
forfeit his word ! If he did so, he would become a contemp- 
tible outlaw all his life." 

Count Fulk had fled from the siege to take refuge in the 
city, where he waited the issue of events in a monastery. 
The leading men of Anjou now consulted with those of 
Maine, and finding themselves inferior to the Normans in 
all respects, procured a conference between the king and the 
count. The result, by Grod's help, was the peace which was 
required, and the people on both sides for various reasons 
made great rejoicings. It was required and granted that 
Count Elias and the rest of the prisoners in both armies 
should be released, and that all the castles which were held 
by King William should submit to his son William Eufus. 
The conditions of peace being solemnly confirmed, the king 
called Eobert," son of Hugh de Montfort, the commander of 
his troops, and directed him to ascend the tower of Mans 
and the other fortifications, placing under his orders seven 
hundred chosen men in complete armour with bright helmets 
and breastplates. They immediately took possession of all the 
defences of the place, the former garrison marching out, and 

' Our author probably means the week which commenced on the 18th 
of July. 

2 Robert de Montfort-sur-lliisle, the youngest brother of Hugh, third of 
that name. 



234 OEDEBICFS TITALIS. [b.X. CH.VTI. 

planted tlie royal standard on the principal towers with 
great triumph. The next day the king reinforced them with 
a thousand of his best troops, and commanding the whole 
city, made whatever ordinances he pleased. The King's 
Tower, Mount-Barbet, and Little-Mount-Barbet^ were 
given up to the king, and justly, because it is known that 
they were erected by his father. All the citizens rejoicing 
in the restoration of peace congratulated their new prince, 
clapping their hands, singing, and making various demon- 
strations of gladness. 

Then Hildebert the bishop, with the clergy and all the 
people, made a joyful procession to meet the king and 
conducted him, chanting thanksgivings, to the church of St. 
Gervase the martyr, where the bodies of the holy bishops 
and confessors Thuribius and Victor, and other saints, 
repose.^ 

Elias, released from confinement at Bayeux, came to the 
king at Kouen, unwashed and unshorn, and humbly said to 
him : " Illustrious king, who reckon such numbers among 
your subjects, assist me I pray you in your great goodness. 
I have long been called count, having possessed a noble 
county by hereditary right, but by change of fortune I am 
deprived of my title to the name and possession. Is'ot 
therefore beseech you to receive me into your household 
with my former rank, and I will do you worthy service. IS'ofc 
that I demand the city of Mans, or any castles until I 
shall have merited them of your mightiness by my loyal 
conduct. I only aspire to be reckoned among your servants 
and enjoy your royal favour. " The generous king readily 
determined to grant this, but Bobert, earl of Mellent, was 
moved by jealousy to dissuade him from it. The crafty 
veteran^ held the first place in the royal counsels and 

* Mons-Barhatus otqne Mons-Barhatulus. There are no remains of 
these several forts. The King's Tower stood in the neighbourhood and to 
the W.N.W. of the cathedral, the others in the same quarter, but to the 
S.W. 

^ St. Julian, first bishop of Majis ; St. Thuribius, second bishop of Mans ; 
and St. Victor, fifth bishop of the same diocese. 

^ Our author, who, a little before, has treated Lewis-le-Gros as quite 
young, when he could not be less than nineteen or twent)'- years old, is 
equally careless in calling Robert de Meulan an old man, seneXj when he 
was about fifty. 



A.D. lOOS.] COUNT ELIAS RETUENS TO MAINE. 235 

judgments, and he was apprehensive of admitting into the 
pahice one who might prove his equal or superior. He 
therefore said to the king : " The Manceaux are crafty and 
faithless, and what they cannot accomplish by their valour 
they bring about by deceit and manoeuvring. Your 
conquered enemy becomes your suppliant, and seeks 
perfidiously to be your intimate friend. Why does he 
desire this? That being admitted to your secret counsels, 
he may be better able, when a favourable opportunity offers, 
to revolt jfiercely against you, and to join your enemies with 
greater means of injuring you." 

The king's determination was changed by these counsels, 
and the brave knight was rejected from admission into the 
royal household. Prom hence great difficulties, with dangers 
and losses, were afterwards occasioned to many people, 
Elias made another attempt to propitiate the king by gentle 
words but in vain. Whereupon he added with firmness, 
"If it had pleased you, my lord king, and I had found 
favour with you, I would have willingly served you. And 
now, I pray you, do not blame me if I try to do something 
for myself. I am unable to bear with patience being 
deprived of my inheritance, and the denial of justice, 
violence prevailing against my rights. Let no one therefore 
wonder if I prosecute my claim and use every means in my 
power to recover my father's possessions. " The king 
replied in great wrath : " Gro, and undertake what you please 
against me. "^ 



* Although the account of this conversation is shorter and more spirited 
than those of Ordericus usually are, we prefer that of William of Malmes- 
bury, which appears to express still better the violence of the English 
king's character. 

" Elias being taken and brought before him, the king said jocularly : ' I 
have you, master.' But he, whose haughty spirit could not brook submis- 
sive language even when he was in such urgent peril, replied : ' 111 luck 
has put me in your power ; if I could get away, I know what I would do.* 
At this, William, almost beside himself with rage, and seizing Elias, 
* You ! ' he exclaimed, ' you ! what would you do ? Begone — depart— fly ! 
I give you leave to do whatever you can ; and by the holy image of Lucca 
{per vultum de Lucca), if you conquer me, I will ask no return for this 
favour.' The common oath of this prince was " par le saint voult (by the 
holy face) de Luques,' as his father sware, ' par la resplendor D^,' by God's 
brightness, and sometimes ' by our Loid's resurrection.' The oath of 



236 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.X, CH.YIII. 

Elias therefore demanded from the king a safe conduct 
through his territories, and, having obtained it, returned in 
freedom to his own domains amidst the great joy of his 
friends. He fortified his five castles,^ with the adjacent 
villages, repairing his losses with extreme diligence, and 
carefully conducting his own afiairs. E-emaining quiet 
from August to Easter, in the meantime he carefully 
considered in what way he should manifest his hostile 
intentions and had frequent consultations with his faithful 
allies. 

William Kufus, having obtained possession of Mans, as 
just related, without much effusion of blood, committed its 
custody to William count of Evreux, Gilbert de Laigle,^ 
and other brave knights, and the royal castle,^ well stored 
with arms and provisions, and all necessaries, to Walter of 
E/Ouen, son of A.nsger. Kalph the viscount, Geoffrey of 
Maine,* Eobert of Burgundy,^ and the other barons of the 
province, came to terms with the king, and giving up their 
castles faithfully submitted to his orders. 

Ch. VIII. Exactio7is of tlie Icing's officers in England 
— Archbishop Anselm hecomes an exile — Joins Pope 
Urban II. at Capua. 

While these events were occurring in Normandy, beyond 
sea, and enormous sums w^ere prodigally spent in useless 

Robert Curthose was per mirahilia Deij by God's marvels; and of Henry I. 
— ' par la mort de notre Seigneur.'" 

William Rufus was not the first who swore " par le saint voult de 
Luques ; it was also the formula of Count Godwin's oath. 

' The five strongholds on his patrimonial domains and those of his wife, 
la Fl^che, Chateau du Loir, Maiet, Luce'-le-Grand, Outille. 

^ These barons had commanded the troops of Normandy on former 
occasions ; see vol. ii., pp. 455, 459. 

^ Probably the castle built by William the Conqueror, which stood, as 
before stated, on the W.N.W. of the cathedral, whilst the original castle of 
the counts of Maine appears to have stood within the circuit of the Roman 
city to the S.S.W. of the cathedral. 

* For these two persons, see before p. 230. 

* It is difficult to believe that Robert, the Burgundian contracted this 
alliance, or rather made this submission to William Rufus, for, besides his 
advanced age, he had joined the crusade, by the persuasion of Urban II. who 
passed through Sabld in the year 1096, on purpose to induce him. The 
person here meant is probably Robert, lord of SabM, third son of Robert 
the Burgundian. 



A.D. 1088.] flambaed's exactions from the cnuEcn. 287 

armaments, E-anulph Flambard ,now made bishop of Durham, 
and the other minions and officers of the king, were robbing 
England, and, worse than thieves, pillaged without mercy the 
granaries of the farmers and the stores of the merchaiits, 
not even restraining their bloody hands from plundering the 
church. On the death of the prelates, they immediately 
intruded themselves into their places by a violent exercise of 
the royal authority, and seized without decency whatever 
they found in their treasuries. They took into the king's 
hands the domains of the monasteries and the revenues of 
the bishoprics, and exacted from the abbots or bishops who 
still survived enormous sums of money. Thus amassing, 
by fair means or foul, an immense amount of contributions, 
they remitted it to the king beyond sea, to be employed 
on his own occasions whether good or bad. Vast sums 
accumulated by these taxes, were presented to the king who 
used them ostentatiously to enrich foreigners. But the 
native inhabitants, unjustly spoiled of their goods, were in 
great distress and cried lamentably to Grod, who delivered 
Israel from the hand of Moab, when Eglon the corpulent 
king was slain by Aoth, the left-handed.^ 

Anselm, the holy archbishop was greatly troubled at these 
exactions, and used all the means in his power to succour 
the oppressed. He endeavoured to stand firmly as a wall of 
defence for the house of Israel against the worshippers of 
Baal. He therefore sent trusty messengers to the king with 
letters, humbly complaining and informing him of the many 
afflictions to which the church was exposed. But the foolish 
king hardened his heart and refused to listen to his suppliant 
teacher, and in consequence Anselm asked for permission to 
retire to Rome. The haughty prince allowed him indeed to 
go to Rome, but prohibited his passing through Normandy. 
Alas ! how far was he blinded by his profane pride when, 
standing on the brink of a precipice, he forbade the servant 
of Grod, who was flying from his tyranny, to approach his 
presence ! The king never had another opportunity of seeing 
him, as he himself was soon afterwards cut off" by a bloody 
death. However, the venerable prelate, obeying the com- 

' Ehud; see Judges iii. 15, — 26. The manner in which Ordericus 
writes this name confinns the observation already made on his incorrect 
method of quoting the Vulgate. 



238 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [e.IX. CII.IX. 

mands of liis prince crossed by way of Boulogne, having 
with him, as the reverend companion of his journey, Baldwin 
de Tournai, a monk of Bee, and Eadmer of Canterbury, an 
Englishman who afterwards wrote the life of this prelate 
with great care, to the edification of souls. Ansel m accom- 
plished a toilsome journey as far as the city of Capua, the 
metropolis of the rich Campania, where he met Pope Urban, 
and, being received with great kindness and respect, made 
known to him the reason of his coming. The pope was at 
that time very much engaged, having undertaken to restore 
peace between the people of Capua, and their prince Eichard, 
the son of Jordan, against whom they had rebelled. The 
young prince, with the aid of his uncle Eoger the Elder, 
count of Sicily, who was much incensed against the citizens 
of Capua, used his utmost efforts to compel them to surrender. 
The aged and venerable archbishop was therefore an exile 
for nearly two years among the people of Italy where he 
was born, and other nations, and preached the word with 
eloquence to his foreign auditors to their spiritual profit. 
If any one desires to have a fuller account of the acts and 
discourses of this prelate, he will find them in the book of the 
aforesaid Eadmer at Bee, which Anselm's predecessor 
Herluin had governed.^ 

Ch. IX. Count Elias renews hostilities in Maine — William 
Bufus crosses over to Normandy to opjoose him — The Icing 
meets with a repulse. 

In the autumn. King "William, having, as has been related, 
subjugated Maine, and settled affairs in Normandy according 
to his pleasure, took advantage of a favourable south wind 
to revisit his wealthy kingdom of Albion. 

The year following, after Easter,^ Elias began to renew 
hostilities, and with the secret connivance of the inhabitants 
ravaged the frontiers and harassed the royal forces. At 
last, in the month of June, he advanced with a gallant body 

'*■ Our author forgets that he has already related these occurrences in 

nearly the same words. St. Anselm was a native of the city of Aosta in 
Piedmont, where he was born in 1033. He quitted England the loth of 

October, 1097, and did not return till the 23rd of September, 1100. It 

would have been, therefore, more correct to have represented his exile as 
having lasted nearly three years. 

^ Easter fell that year on the 10th of April. 



A.T>. 1099.] ELIAS EET^EWS HOSTILITIES. 239 

of troops to Les Planches Godefroi,^ crossed the ford of the 
river Huisue, and challenged the garrison which held the 
place for the king, to the combat. The brave Normans 
sallied forth and fought for a long time, but the numbers of 
the enemy prevailing they were repulsed and driven back 
into the city. The enemy entered pell-mell with the king's 
troops, as the throng was so violent that the garrison could 
not close the gates, but flying through the streets with great 
difficulty made their escape into the castle and other 
fortifications. For Elias was greatly beloved by the citizens, 
and they much preferred his government to that of the 
JN^orraans. The garrison however, who had the custody of 
the fortifications for the king, were amply supplied with all 
necessaries, and therefore prepared to hold out to the last 
extremity, loyally fighting in the cause of their lord. Mean- 
while, Elias was received in the city with the acclamations 
of the inhabitants, but a sad disaster speedily ensued, to the 
public loss. Eor "Walter, son of Ansger, the commander 
in the castle, ordered the smiths he employed there to set to 
work, and caused the burning cinders to be hurled by his 
engineers on the roofs of the houses. " At that time the sun 
was blazing in the lofty Gemini,"^ and the earth was burnt 
up with severe drought. The fiery whirlwind caught the 
roofs'^ of the houses, and the flames burst out with such 
violence that the w^hole city was burnt. 

Clarembald de Lisors,* with AValter and other knights 

^ M, Le Prevost remarks that there is no tradition of the place which 
bore this name. M. Dubois says that it is near Mans. 

2 In the original, an imperfect hexameter verse : — ■ 

" Tunc rutilus Titan sublimes Geminos peragrabat." 
The author means to say that it was between the 2l8t of May and the 
24th of June. 

3 The buildings were probably roofed with shingles, as they still are in 
the district between Mortain and Domfront, notwithstanding there are 
quarries of slates in the neighbourhood. 

* It is considered that the place here spoken of is Lisors-sur-Vie in the 
canton of Livarot. Clarembald was probably son, or at least a kinsman 
and heir, of William de Luisores whose name appears as witness to a 
charter in the early years of William the Conqueror, together with Osmond 
Basset, Robert and Fuscelin his brothers. It was made in favour of the 
abbey of Montivilliers which already possessed the other moiety of the 
lands and of the church of Lisors. See Gall. Chrut. xi. instr. c. 327 and 
328. 



240 OEDEEICUS TITALTS. [b.X. CH.IX. 

carefully guarded their castles. Elias and his followers 
made desperate efforts to storm them and take them with 
their machines, but could do nothing against impregnable 
fortifications. 

Meanwhile Eobert de Belesme increased the defences of 
Ballon, and dispatched his courier Amalgise^ to the king in 
England. The messenger having crossed the sea hastened 
to Clarendon,^ but met the king riding in the New-Porest 
with liis attendants, and to his eager inquiries after 
the news, replied : " Mans has been treacherously taken by 
surprise ; but my lord holds Ballon, and the king's garrisons 
guard faithfully all the fortresses entrusted to them, but 
they urgently demand your royal succour against the hostile 
forces which surround and threaten them." 

As soon as the king had heard the message he exclaimed : 
" Let us cross the sea to support our friends." The same 
instant, without consulting any one, he wheeled his horse 
round, and giving him the spur rode full speed to the coast. 
Finding there by chance an old worn-out vessel, he embarked 
in it without any royal pomp, like one of the people, and 
gave orders for immediately putting to sea.^ He waited 
neither for a favourable wind, nor attendants, nor anything 
else becoming his royal dignity, but, a stranger to fear, com- 
mitted himself to fortune and the waves, and the next 
morning, under God's guidance, arrived safe at the port of 
Touques.'* Several persons, of various degrees, were stand- 

' From his name, this courier appears to have been a native of Lom- 
bardy. 

2 Clarendon, now only a hamlet in the parish of Albury, about three 
miles from Salisbury, was anciently a royal residence. 

^ William of Malmesbury supplies the king's rebuke of the cowardice or 
caution of the nobles who remonstrated against what they considered his 
rashness, as well as his well known answer to the reluctance of the mari- 
ners to put to sea. 

" He arrived almost unattended at the sea coast. The sky at that time 
was overcast, the wind contrary, and a tempest swept the surface of the 
deep. When he determined to embark instantly, the mariners besought 
him to wait till the storm should abate and the wind be favourable, * I 
have never heard,' said William, ' of a king perishing by shipwreck. No ! 
weigh anchor immediately, and you shall see the elements conspire to obey 
me.'" Chronicle p. 340, Antiq. Lib. 

* Touques, not the commune of that name, but the port which it has been 
already remarked waa situated at the mouth of the river which falls into the 



A.D. 1099.] WILLIAM RUrUS CEOSSES TO KORMANDT. 211 

ing about the harbour, as is the custom in summer, and 
seeing a vessel coming in under sail from England were in 
eager expectation to hear if she brought any news. Their 
first inquiry regarded the king, and he was there to give a 
true account of himself He laughed heartily as he gave 
replies they little expected to their questions, and his answers, 
which filled them at first with wonder, soon caused universal 
joy. He then mounted a mare belonging to a priest, and sur- 
rounded by a great concourse of the clergy and country folk, 
who attended him on foot with loud acclamations, he rode to 
Eonneville.^ His presence struck with consternation those 
who were in arms against him on the frontiers of Normandy. 
After sending out his orders he quickly raised a powerful 
army, and proceeded by hasty marches to ravage the hostile 
province. The enemy's troops commanded by Elias, as soon 
as it was known that the king had passed the straits, dispersed 
without loss of time, leaving the city they had occupied in a 
condition much worse than they found it. Hildebert, the 
bishop, who went to meet the king in Normandy as a sup- 
pliant, was received by him graciously as an old friend, for 
neither by his counsels nor active interference had he taken 
any part in the late troubles.^ 

The king full of wrath, having intelligence of the enemy's 
retreat, pursued him closely, without deigning to pass even 
a single night at Mans. Passing on, he saw the city in 
flames, and ordered his tents to be pitched on a wide heath^ 

estuary of the Seine, and is in the commune of Trouville. It was probably 
the cure of that parish who supplied the palfrey which the king mounted 
to proceed to Bonneville. If it had been from the village of Touqucs, the 
distance was so short that he would probably have walked. 

^ Bonneville-sur-Touques, a favourite residence of the dukes of Nor- 
mandy, where it appears that the expedition for the conquest of England 
■was determined on in 1066. It is about a quarter of a league from 
Touques, but as much as a league from Tourville. 

'■* There is some difficulty in crediting this account of the conduct of the 
bishop of Mans to a prince who had tried to annul his election, and had 
always retained the same feeling of ill will towards him. 

^ Epitimio or Epitymo. This word has before occurred with reference 
to the field on which the battle of Hastingsw as fought, and though it 
is somewhat obscure, it was suggested that it may have been derived from 
the odoriferous plants with which heaths are overspread. It seems to have 
been applied by our author to any level spot suited for a field of battle or 
the site of a camp. 

YOL. III. E 



242 OEPEETCTTS VTTALIS. [s.X. CH.IX, 

on the bank of the river Huisne. On the morrow, he took 
severe revenge for his wrongs with fire and sword. But before 
the king could reach the enemy's strongholds and give them 
to the flames, they set them on fire with their own hands, 
and laid waste all the country round, lest the freebooters 
of the royal party should find any thing to pillage, or even, 
a house where they might make their beds and take repose. 
Thus the castles of Vaux and Oustilli^ were burnt, and many 
other villages and hamlets entirely ruined. However 
Eobert de Moutfort, the commander of the royal army, 
pushing forward at the head of five hundred cavalry, extin- 
guished the fire at the castle of Vaux, and strengthened the. 
fortifications for the king's service. 

Elias remained at Chateau-du-Loir with a considerable 
number of troops, and reserving himself for better times, 
waited the course of events. At last, on Friday, the king 
sat down before Maiet,^ and ordered his troops to storm the 
castle on the following day. But when Saturday came, and 
the soldiers were busy in putting on their armour, and pre- 
paring to make a vigorous assault on the garrison, the king, 
by the advice of his counsellors and for the glory of God, 
spared the enemy out of respect to the day of our Lord's 
burial and resurrection, granting them a truce until Monday. 
The besieged took advantage of the interval to strengthe;i 
their defences, and to weaken the force of the bolts and 
stones hurled against them with a quantity of wicker baskets. 
They were resolute men, faithful to their lord, and deter- 
mined to fight for him to the last extremity, so that their 
merit deserves commendation. The assailants had by 
excessive toil filled up the ditch surrounding the fortifications 
with great heaps of wood, and were openly engaged in 
making a road to the foot of the palisades supported by 
immense beams, when the garrison threw down vessels full 
of burning coals, and set fire to the heaps of combustible 
matter which had been collected for their injury, and, assisted 
by the summer heat, speedily reduced them to ashes. Both 

^ Oiistille or Outill^, a hamlet which has given its name to the commune 
of St. Mars-d'Outille, four leagues S.S.E. of Mans. The castle of Vaux, 
in the commune of Monce-en-Belin, three leagues and a half south of Mans. 

* The castle of Maiet, which is seven leagues south of Mans, and rather 
less distant from la Fleche, and is now the chief place of a conmiune. 



A.D. 1099.] THE KING REPULSED BEFORE MAIET. 213 

sides suffered very much in this assault, which took place on 
Monday, so that the king who was witness of it was much 
distressed. While he was tormented with rage and vexation 
because all his elForts to reduce the place proved fruitless, 
one of the garrison hurled a stone at him from the top of a 
turret,^ which by God's mercy did not strike the king, but 
crushed the head of a soldier who was standing near him, so 
that his brains were mingled with his fractured skull. As 
he thus miserably perished in the. king's presence, the sounds 
of scornful laughter were heard from the garrison, who 
raised the loud and horrible cry : " There is fresh meat for 
the king ; take it to the kitchen to be cooked for his supper," 
The king was so much disturbed that he called his principal 
nobles aside, and by their advice gave orders for drawing off 
toward Lucei,^ at break of day. These prudent counsellors 
justly thought that, in so well-fortified a place, a brave 
garrison could make a determined resistance^ and, defended 
by strong walls, had many opportunities of defending them- 
selves against assailants who had no sort of cover. The 
wary advisers plainly gave good counsel, believing it to be 
best for troops thus exposed in the present case, that the 
king should retreat in safety with his forces in good order, 
and find other means of punishing his enemies ; thus securing 
the safety of his army, and contriving the ruin of his enemy. 
They were therefore on the move very early in the morning, 
and employed themselves in laying waste the enemy's country 
in every way, rooting up the vines, felling the fruit-trees, 
levelling walls and buildings, and ravaging the whole district, 
M'hich was very rich, with fire and sword. Then the king 
returned in triumph^ to Mans, and gave leave to the troops 
of many provinces to return home. 

These events happened in the year of our Lord 1099, the 

^ Zeta, from Z,tiv, to warm, in its primitive signification was applied to 
chambers warmed by stoves. We find it, however, used for the Zetce cesti- 
vales, as well as Zetce hyemales, in descriptions of palaces. But here, and 
a few pages before, it is meant to describe vaulted chambers in fortifications 
from whence the sentinels could observe the motions of the enemy, or hurl 
projectiles on assailants through the crenelles and machicolations of the 
defences. 

2 Luce-le-Grand, rather than Luch^, according to M. Pesche. 

3 An expression not very applicable to the repulse the king had received 
before the castle of Maiet. 

E 2 



244 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.X. GH.X. 

seventh indiction, and in the month of July. At this time 
Jerusalem was captured by the holy pilgrims, they having de- 
feated the Grentiles, who had long possessed it, on the seventh 
of the ides [the 7th] of the same month of July, as I have 
related in the last book. Pope Urban also died on the fifth 
of the calends of August [the 28th of July], having lived to 
hear with triumph that the tomb of Christ was surrendered 
to the crusaders. He was succeeded by Pope Paschal, 
enthroned the sixteenth day after his predecessor's death.^ 

Ch. X. The monTcs of St. Evroult dispute the bishop^ s juris- 
diction — Abbot Hoberfs consecration — Dedication of the 
abbey church. 

GriLBERT, bishop of Lisicux, had been often requested by 
the monks of St. Evroult to give his benediction to their 
abbot, but he always refused unless the abbot signed a pro- 
fession of canonical obedience.^ In consequence, there was 
a controversy between them which lasted ten years, neither 
the one nor the other being willing to yield, as each hoped 
to succeed. Serlo, who was elected abbot on the death of 
Mainier, governed the monks for two years without being 
consecrated, because he refused to submit to a profession 
which was a new custom in the abbey of St. Evroult. In 
the same way, Eoger du Sap presided over the brethren 
more than seven years, but the bishop obstinately persisting 
in his views, Eoger did not carry the pastoral staff. In con- 
sequence, the monks resorted to the royal authority, which 
secured their rights, an order being given to the contuma- 
cious bishop that he should observe the customs used by his 
predecessors in Normandy in the time of the king's father, 
William the Conqueror, and consecrate the abbot without 
requiring any innovation. The bishop reluctantly obeyed 
the royal command, and the ancient usage of the abbey was 
confirmed. Ealph, abbot of Seez, conducted to Lisieux the 
brother elect, and dictated the act of election, as the repre- 

^ Urban II. died on the 29th not the 28th, of July. Paschal II. was 
elected the 13th of August, and consecrated the next day. 

2 We have here an instance of the obstinate repugnance of the monks 
to submit to the jurisdiction of the ordinary, that is, of the bishop of the 
diocese. Their pretensions were encouraged by the secular princes and 
maintained by the popes. ^ 



A.D. 1099.] EOGER DU SAP CONSECEATED. 245 

sentative of the convent of monks. Eobert, a monk of Seez, 
iin able penman, engrossed the charter, and Herluin, the 
bishop's chaplain, read it before all the clergy, who made no 
objection, to the following effect : — 

" Christ, the ever-present bishop and shepherd of the ec- 
clesiastical flock and its pastors, has perpetuated it by a 
continual succession of souls, and has also continued the 
pastoral order in perpetuity, appointing a number of priests 
in succession, inasmuch as death interrupts their perma- 
nence. We have no doubt that their consecration ought to 
be performed by the hands of the bishops giving spiritual 
benediction from God himself, and we hold it no less certain 
that their election is the business of their future subjects 
directed by the Holy Spirit. Wherefore we, the convent 
of monks of St. Evroult, following the ancient examples and 
apostolical traditions, after the decease of our father Mai- 
nier, and the elevation of our father, the lord Serlo, to the 
episcopacy, and by the inspiration of the divine mercy, have 
unanimously elected abbot the lord Eoger, our brother, who 
is well known to us with whom he dwelt, as well as united 
to us by the same profession. In this election we have been 
assisted by the presence and opinions of several eminent 
prelates, viz., the said Bishop Serlo, Anselm, abbot of Bee, 
Ealph, abbot of Seez, Arnulph, abbot of Troarne, and others, 
with whom considering, as far as is in our power, after the 
apostle's rule, the worth of the peyson, we adopt one who is 
catholic, instructed in the divine law, chaste, sober, humble, 
gentle, merciful, benevolent, and endowed with the other 
qualities which pastors require. "Wherefore, offering this 
our abbot elect, to the blessing of the divine Majesty, we 
present him to Grilbert, our bishop of Lisieux, demanding 
for him episcopal consecration according to the ecclesiastical 
laws, with the canonical benediction." 

This act of the monks' election having been carefully 
read, was graciously accepted by the bishop and clergy, and 
Eoger was consecrated abbot on the feast of the beheading 
of St. John the Baptist.^ The next day he was received by 
the brethren at St. Evroult with due honours. The same 
day, while the monks were sitting in the cloister conversing 
with each other, and ably exchanging their thoughts on a 
1 The 29th of August, 1099. 



246 OEDEEICUS VITALT3. [b.X. CH.X. 

variety of subjects, the conversation happened to turn, as 1 
think, by Grod's inspiration, on the dedication of the abbey- 
church ; and as it continued, they felt a fervent desire to 
have it accomplished.^ At length, to the satisfaction of 

1 Richly stored as we find our author's work in materials from which we 
may form an acquaintance with the interior life and exterior relations of the 
monasteries of England and Normandy, it must be confessed that, except 
in furnishing the dates at which many of them were erected, he throws but 
little light on their architectural character, although a new style inseparably 
connected with Norman history had sprung up in the times of his cotem- 
poraries or immediate predecessors. This is much to be regretted, and it 
is very singular that an author who has devoted a considerable portion of 
his vv^orkto the history of his own convent, and has entered into such 
minute details connected with it, should have supplied us with such scanty 
notices of his own abbey church, and other conventual buildings. He 
appears to have been so careless on a subject Avhich is interesting to poste- 
rity, for Avhose benefit he is continually telling us he wrote, that he even 
contradicts himself in what he has related. 

We find that when the abbey was restored in the year 1050, after having 
been long deserted, the old chapel built by St. Evroult between the years 
575 and 584, was soon found too small for the increasing numbers of the 
monks, as well as dilapidated by age; and that, consequent!}', Theodoric, the 
first abbot on the new foundation, began to build a new church in a noble 
style of architecture, but was compelled to desist from his undertaking by 
the troublesome times which succeeded. Very little progress had, probably, 
been made in the works, as his successor. Abbot Osberne (1061 — 1066) is 
represented to have " planned and commenced the new church," making 
one of the monks, Richard de Heudicourt, a man of rank, who had seen 
much of the world, overseer of the works, with the charge of the expendi- 
ture and the superintendence of the stone-cutters. 

We hear nothing of the progress of the works during the five years of 
Osberne's government ; but, upon the appointment of his successor, Abbot 
Mainier, in 1066, we are told that he "began" building the new church 
dedicated to St. Mary, St. Peter, and St. Evroult, and which was to con- 
tain seven altars, the old church erected by the saint being, as it has been 
said before, small and dilapidated ; and that, by God's help and the contri- 
butions and munificence of the brethren and his friends, he completed the 
building of a spacious and beautiful church, a dormitory, and cellar, and 
other oflfices for the use of the monks, vol. i., pp. 467, 468. A shorter 
account afterwards given concurs in stating that Abbot Mainier " began 
and completed" the new church and monastery. 

Without stopping to reconcile these conflicting statements by inquiring 
whether the abbey-church, finished by Mainier, was the same as that 
commenced by his predecessors Theodoric and Osberne, as it probably was, 
we may conclude that the building thus completed was that which received 
consecration at the time and in the manner described in this paragraph of 
our author's narrative, and in the year 1099. The works probably occu- 
pied the greater part of the period of Mainier's abbacy, as we find Arch- 
bishop Lanfrar.c contributing to the erection of the abbey-tower and 



1099.] COXSECRATION OF THE ClIUECH AT ST. EYROULT. 217 

their friends and with their assistance, the resolution was 
made, and bj God's help, the church of St. Evroult was 
consecrated on the ides [the 13th] of November. Three 
bishops assisted in the celebration of this office. Gilbert, 
bishop of Lisieux, consecrated the high altar in honour of 
St. Mary, mother of God, St. Peter, prince of the apostles, 
and St. Evroult, the confessor. Gilbert, bishop of Evreux, 
consecrated the altar on the south side in honour of All the 
Apostles, and Serlo the altar of All the Martyrs. The next 
day Serlo blessed the crucifix and its altar dedicated to St. 
Saviour and St. Giles, the confessor ; and Gilbert of Evreux 
consecrated the altar used for the matins mass to All Saints. 
Lastly, on the seventeenth of the calends of December^ 

dormitory in 1078 and at a subsequent time, and Queen Matilda providing 
for the erection of the refectory on her visit to the abbey some time after 
the year 1081. However, Abbot Mainier did not live to see the consecra- 
tion of his noble edifice, and the long delay of its dedication in the time of 
his successors may have arisen from their disputes with the bishop of the 
diocese referred to in the present chapter. 

We may conclude from the dates supplied, and a few words dropped by 
Ordericus, that the abbey-church was in the best style of Norman archi- 
tecture. Of its details and particular character, we have no immediate 
means of furnishing any account, but w^e havvi reason to think that, as in 
the case of many other abbatial and cathedral churches, the Norman 
building, or great part of it, was superseded in after times by a new erec- 
tion in the pointed style. The abbey of St. Evroult shared the fate of other 
monastic establishments in France at the time of the revolution, but it has 
only very recently reached the last stage of ruin, being now (1853) 
nearly levelled to the ground, and the squared and beautifully-worked 
stones piled in heaps for sale as building materials, so that, shortly, there 
will not be left a trace of this once magnificent al^bey. The only remains 
now standing which can be supposed to belong to our author's age, are 
some low Norman arches, in or near the south transept, which appear to 
have belonged to a mortuary chapel. 

The natural features of the neighbourhood, so often described by Orde- 
ricus with more precision than the conventual buildings, have experienced 
of course less change. The little marshy valley is watered by the Charen- . 
ton, pouring its torrent through meadows in which the remains of the 
monk's fishponds are still visible. Its right bank rises rapidly to the verge 
of the wood, where the church of Notre Dame-du-Bois stands on the same 
spot as the original building founded by the munificence of Childebert's 
queen. The forest surrounds the whole, as it did when St. Evroult first 
built his cell in the wilderness. The country people say it is forty miles in 
circumference ; we have traversed it ourselves in nearly a straight line for 
ten miles in more than one direction. 

^ We have ventured to correct the text by substituting the calends of 
December for those of November, notwithstanding all the printed editions 



248 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.X. 

[November 15tli], the lord bishop of Evreux consecrated an 
altar on the south, in honour of All Confessors ; and, when 
he had finished celebrating the mass, proceeded to the 
chapter-house where he strengthened the brethren for Grod's 
service by holy exhortations and affectionate prayers and 
benedictions. At the close of the same year, Serlo, bishop 
of Seez, dedicated the altar in the north transept on the 
second of the calends of January [December 31st], in honour 
of All the Virgins. 

Thus, seven altars were reverently dedicated by the three 
bishops on certain fixed days, and distributed to the praise 
of Grod, according to ecclesiastical rule among the glorious 
orders of saints, who in the heavenly kingdom for ever 
surround the holy of holies in endless bliss. 

Many of the Norman lords were present at this dedica- 
tion, and the faithful of both orders presented to God the 
offerings of their prayers. "William, abbot of Bee, and 
Ealph of Seez, Arnulph of Troarne, and Greoffrey of Cou- 
tances,^ Eichard d'Ansgerville, and William de Grlanville,^ 
Etard and William of Evreux, Hugh, son of Saffred, and 
"William d'Eraines, archdeacons and deans,^ and other digni- 
taries of the church were present, and assisted their bishops 
in the solemn performance of the holy services. 

Then "William de Breteuil gave the same church ten 
pounds yearly from the rents of Gloz.* Bobert de Grant- 
mesnil also gave to God the church of St. Samson on 

of our author's work have the latter reading. For the l7th of the calends 
of November would give the date of the 1 6th of October, long before the 
ceremonies of consecration commenced, whereas, beginning with the dedica- 
tion of the hi'^h altar on the 13th of November, by the bishop of Lisieux, 
it appears they were resumed the next day (the 14th) by the bishop of 
Evreux, and '"'lastly," on the third day (the 15th) or the 17th of the 
calends of December, as we conclude, the bishop of Seez consecrated the 
altar of All Saints. 

* Geoffrey, abbot of Lessai, whose predecessor died as long before as 
June 24, 1094, if the archives of Bee may be trusted. 

^ These two persons are mentioned before, vol. ii. p. 122. Richard 
d'Ansgerville was an archdeacon of Lisieux, and William de Glanville 
(near Pont I'Eveque), dean of the same church, of which Etard and 
William were also archdeacons. 

' Hugh, the son of Saffre and William d'Eraines, in the neighbourhood 
of Falaise, were archdeacons of Seez. 

* For this donation see before vol. ii., p. 19 L 



A.D. 1099 — 1100.] THE SECOIS'D CEUSADE. 24)9 

Mount Calvefc the Greater,^ with one plough land, and the 
tenth of the fair held in the same village, and the tithes of 
the mill and wood. Gilbert de Laigle also gave to St. 
Evroult one moiety of the village of Laigle, in such manner 
that Eichard the knight should hold it of the monks as he 
now held it of the said Gilbert ; for they were already lords 
of the other moiety by gift from Eichard his father. Ealph 
de Conches also granted to St. Evroult Caldecot and Alvin- 
ton- in England, and three acres of vineyard at Toeni, and 
all that he possessed at Guarlenville, and six cottiers on 
three of his domains, and he also freely ratified all that his 
tenants had given.^ 

Ch. XI. The autlior returns to tJie history of the crusaders 
— Stephen, count of Blois — Bohemond and Tancred — 
Maymond, count of Tholouse — Hohert, duke of Normandy. 
At that time there was much disturbance in the west, and 
shame and confusion were attached to the base deserters of 
the crusade, in the sight of all men. Pope Urban had 
sanctioned by his universal authority, and enforced 
apostolical order by an inviolable decree through all the 
Latin states, that those who had assumed our Saviour's 
cross and changing their purpose, had not joined the 
pilgrimage to Jerusalem, should undertake a corresponding 
journey in the name of the Lord, or lying under excommu- 
nication should for their punishment be cut off from the 
church. In consequence, Stephen, count de Blois, who had 
undergone severe sufferings of various kinds, was in great 
distress of mind, and made preparations for a second ex- 
pedition.^ Many thousands were actuated by the same 

' Moiitchauvet, four leagues N.E. of Vire. 

"^ Caldecot in Norfolk, and Alvington in Worcestershire. 

3 This donation is recorded before, vol. ii., p. 109, but there are some 
considerable variations in the details. In the first version there are only 
two acres of vineyard instead of three, and only three cottiers instead of 
six. This may be accounted for if we suppose that Ralph de Toeni, 
whose original grant was made in the reign of William the Conqueror, 
augmented and confirmed it at the dedication of the church of St. Evroult 
as was also done in the case of William de Breteuil. 

The three domains mentioned here are Conches, Toeni, and Acquigni. 

* Stephen quitted the ranks of the cnisaders at the time they were 
preparing their final attempt to take Antioch. See before, p. 122. He 
did not return to the Holy Land till 1001, and died the year following 
under the walls of Ramla. 



250 ORDERICUS VITALIS. [b.X. CH.XI. 

desire, having heard favourable reports of the noble champions 
of the cross, who, armed with faith in the Holy Trinity, 
had fought against the G-entiles, and having obtained a 
glorious triumph by the power of their merciful Saviour, 
had secured to themselves endless fame. 

I propose now, by the aid of the Holy Spirit, to return to 
the pilgrims, and relate shortly the adventures and end of 
those who after their successes remained in Judaea or Syria, 
as well as of those who effected their return home by an 
arduous journey. 

In the year of our Lord 1099, in the month of August,^ 
Godfrey, son of Eustace, count of Boulogne and son of Ita, 
received the sceptre of David at Jerusalem, and reigned 
there three years. In the course of the same month,^ 
while yet supported by the whole force of his fellow crusa- 
ders, he fought a battle with the emir near Ascalon, in 
which by Grod's help he gained a glorious victory. In the 
autumn when the Grentiles were utterly crushed, the God of 
tSabaoth having fought against them, the illustrious chiefs 
with their followers resolved to return, and bidding farewell 
to their friends and comrades, commenced their homeward 
journey. Among these were Eobert, duke of ISTormandy, 
Eobert, marquis of Elanders, and Eaymond, count of 
Thoulouse,^ of whose valour the Turks had received sufficient 
proofs. They met on their road crowds of pilgrims who 
had been prevented from accompanying them in the first 
expedition, but who had taken the earliest opportunity they 
could find of fulfilling their vow of making a pilgrimage to 
the tomb of our Lord. They suffered severely on the road 
from famine, being reduced to the last extremity by want, 
for their precursors, who had in the preceding year wasted 
the country between Antioch and Jerusalem, sowed the 
seeds of destruction in tlieir path by the scarcity they 
occasioned to the pilgrims who followed them ; having either 
slain or driven away the inhabitants of the country, so 
that the lands, not being cultivated, produced nothing that 

' It was not in the month, but during the calends, of August, the 24th 
of July, 1099. 

'^ On Sunday, the 14th of August. 

^ Raymond quitted Jerusalem, but it was not to return to the west of 
Europe, as we shall presently find. 



A.D. 1099—1100.] THE SECOND CEUSADE. 251 

could be eaten. However, tlie chiefs who were returning 
home learnt from the pilgrims they met, that Duke Bohe- 
mond was besieging Laodicea,^ and that the troops of the 
emperor who formed the garrison were making an obstinate 
defence. 

Nearly twenty thousand pilgrims, w^ho were on their road 
from England and the other islands of the ocean to the 
tomb of our Lord, had disembarked there at the time when 
the Gentiles were besieging Antioch and blockaded the 
Christians in the city. The people of Laodicea received the 
island crusaders with great satisfaction, and put themselves 
under their protection against the Turks. The most 
distinguished of them was Edgar Atheiing, who had been 
unsuccessfully raised to the throne of England after the 
death of King Harold. He undertook the defence of 
Loadicea, maintaining its fidelity to Duke Robert, to whom 
he ceded it after his victory over the Pagans. Edgar was 
handsome in person, a good speaker, liberal and high-born, 
being the son of Edward, king of Hungary, but he was 
slow in action. As for the duke, who was of his own 
age, he loved him as a brother who had been nursed with 
him. 

In this manner, Duke Eobert obtained possession of Lao- 
dicea, a city of Syria, and halted there some time with the 
i^ormans, English, and Bretons. He stationed a garrison 
of his own followers in the fortifications of the place, while 
he continued his pilgrimage to the tomb of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

Meanwhile, Eavendinos, the protospathaire of the emperor 
Alexius, and some of his other ofiicers, arrived by sea and 
laid siege to the city with a powerful army.^ The towns- 

^ The siege of Laodicea by Bohemond is wholly apocryphal. 

2 When Jerusalem was taken, the count of Tliolouse was the first who 
held Laodicea, as a vassal of the emperor Alexius. After the battle of 
Ascalon, the inhabitants of that place consented to receive him as their 
lord in consequence of their having formed a favourable opinion of his 
character, from their commercial relations with Montpellier. Raymond, 
who was the only one of the crusaders who had vowed never to return to 
his own country, had a great desire to find some settled establishment in 
the East, after his pretensions had been rejected at Antioch and Jerusa- 
lem. Godfrey, refusing his concurrence, the inhabitants of Ascalon declined 
to receive Raymond, and he withdrew iu disgust from the army and with 



252 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.XI. 

men, taking the part of their countrymen, expelled the 
Cisalpines, and thus the imperial commander was introduced 
by the Grreeks and Syrians. Bohemond learning this, lost 
no time in hastening to the spot with his troops, and 
besieged the city a long time, making frequent assaults upon 
it. But when the inhabitants of Laodicea and the Thracians 
heard that the crusaders were returning from Jerusalem, 
fearing that if the two armies united they would be invin- 
cible, they sent messengers to meet them, carrying presents, 
and adroitly requesting them to hasten securely to the 
defence of their city. The crusaders received this invi- 
tation with great satisfaction, and continuing their march, 
were peaceably admitted by the inhabitants within the 
walls. These occurrences being ascertained, and everything 
quiet on both sides, Duke Robert and his confederates inti- 
mated to Bohemond that he should retire peaceably, or else 
make instant preparation for battle. On receiving this 
message, Bohemond assembled his council, and demanded 
what he was to do in these difficult circumstances. All his 
friends persuaded him to depart without a struggle, and, 
content with his own states, not invade those of others to 
which he had no claim, in hostility to his brothers and brave 
companions in arms, lest he should become a scandal to 
Christians and a laughing-stock to Pagans, and stain, by the 
effusion of Christian blood, the glory acquired by his valour. 
The duke, with his usual moderation, clearly perceived the 
soundness of this reasoning, and comprehending the wisdom 
of the prudent counsels he received, and, acquiescing in them, 

only hia own followers took possession of Laodicea, of which place he 
received the investiture from the Greek emperor. After his departure to 
Constantinople, Tancred, who governed the principality of Antioch, got 
possession of Laodicea, by force or favour, as the historians state. 

As to the occupation of that city by Edgar Atheling on behalf of Robert 
of Normandy, it took place after the siege of Antioch as our author states, 
but it was merely temporary, and it might be anticipated from the well- 
known character of the two princes that it could not be permanent. What 
became of it in the interval between the two occujjations, we do not learn, 
but it is not probable that Bohemond conquered it from the Greeks, to 
demand the investiture of it from their own emperor. 

M. Le Prevost remarks that the whole of this episode respecting Lao- 
dicea will not bear a serious examination. It must have been gathered 
from the romantic stories of some ill-informed pilgrims, and does not merit 
the honour given it of finding a place of our author's history. 



A.D. 1100.] EETURN OF THE CRUSADERS. 253 

drew off his forces, though with great regret, out of respect 
for his compauions. 

The Greeks and Syrians, thus freed from alarm, con- 
sulted respecting their own affairs, and a few days after- 
wards, having summoned our countrymen to a conference, 
thus addressed them : — " Illustrious lords, M'hose worth and 
courage are now known throughout the world, listen to what 
we have now to say to you in good faith. "We well know 
that you abandoned rich territories for the sake of your 
pilgrimage, and that now, having fulfilled your vows, you are 
anxious to return to them, but principally for the love you 
bear to your dear wives and children, and your regard for 
kindred and friends whom you left for Christ's sake. Hear 
now, with indulgence, the advice we offer towards the 
accomplishment of this object, which doubtless, by God's 
guidance, you will approve as sound and advantageous. 
Give up to us, for the emperor's use, the cities and towns 
which you possess in Syria and Eomania : we, on our part, 
will completely equip a fleet for your use and convey you 
and all who choose to follow. you, free of charge, to Constan- 
tinople, supplying you plentifully with bread and wine and 
all other necessaries during the voyage. We know the 
emperor's wishes in this matter, and we desire to please him 
by such service ; for he is flattered by having the Franks 
about him, admiring and valuing their determination and 
spirit of enterprise. Take our advice, and present your- 
selves to him in full confidence, and you will find that we 
have given you profitable counsel." 

The Tranks consulted together, and each gave his opinion 
on various matters after due consideration. The chiefs w4th 
their iriends had a separate meeting, and the following is 
the substance of what passed between them : " Wr are far 
away in a strange country, and earnestly desire to return 
home ; but there is a double difficulty in our way. We 
can neither remain here honourably, as becomes our rank, 
nor go back to France without great danger. Bohemond, 
who is possessed of Antioch and the adjacent provinces, has 
widely extended his rule, and will permit no equal to exist 
here. We are without vessels to cross the sea, and there is no 
route by land, except through the dominions of the emperor. 
Besides, we should find it perilous unless we enjoy his 



254 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.X CH.XI. 

favour, having everything to fear in journeying among bar- 
barous tribes and through difficult roads. We are suffering 
many privations, and tormented by the apprehension of a 
variety of dangers. Worn out with fatigues, our great 
desire is, as before observed, to return to our own country, 
which is out of our power, either by land or sea, without the 
emperor's co-operation. AVhat then shall we do ? We 
cannot linger here, for want stares us in the face, weak and 
weary exiles as we are. It is better for us to be satisfied 
with the promises of these Greeks, although we know them 
to be crafty, and, as they are Christians, to accept thankfully 
their peaceable offers, which we might have been compelled 
to implore with earnest prayers." 

At length the I'ranks commended themselves to God, 
in whose hands all things are, and gave a willing assent to 
all that the Greeks proposed. The latter rejoiced greatly, 
and faithfully fulfilled what they promised. 

The emperor received the Franks on their arrival with 
diie honours, and having heard the terms of the treaty con- 
cluded between the Greeks and themselves, he was highlj' 
pleased with it, and ratified it by his imperial authority. 
He offered high dignities to those who were willing to 
remain with him, and made magnificent presents to those 
who returned to the western states. The count of Thoulouse 
was entertained by him as long as he lived, being admitted 
among the number of his most favoured guests and trusted 
counsellors. The emperor had an especial regard for him, 
and listened to him with great pleasure, because he knew 
that he had firmly opposed Bohemond at Antioch in conse- 
quence of his fidelity to him. Haymond's wife, who was 
daughter of Ildefonso, king of Gallicia,^ and had been the 
companion of his long pilgrimage, gave birth at Constan- 
tinople to a son called Ildefonso,^' who became count of 

^ Elvira, natural daughter of Alplionso VI,, king of Leon and Castille, 
was affianced to the count of Thoulouse as his third wife in 1094. 

2 Alphonso- Jordan, so called because he was baptized in the water of 
this river, was born in 1 103, but not at Constantinople as our author states, 
but at Mont-Pelerin, near Tripoli. He was conducted to France in 1107, 
and succeeded his brother Bertrand as count of Thoulouse in 1112. He 
died in Palestine, about the middle of April, 1118, having been poisoned 
by Queen Melisent. 

Count Raymond, his father, was at the emperor's court at Constantinople 



A.D. 1100.] RATMO^'D, COUNT OF THOULOUSE. 255 

Thoulouse as his father's heir upon the death of his 
brother Bertrand, and still governs the Goths in Provence. 
Count Eaymond long preserved in his chapel at Byzantium 
our Lord's spear, which Peter Abraham discovered at 
Antioch. The emperor honoured with many presents, and 
enriched with liberal pay the other knights who were 
willing to reside among the Greeks. 

He also presented rich gifts to Eobert the Norman and 
Robert the Fleming, and their fellow soldiers, who were 
hastening their return, giving them a free passage through 
his dominions and liberty of the markets. Thus he either 
retained about his own person or sedulously despatched to 
the coast of Italy those who left the expedition into the 
countries of the east, making it his great object to weaken 
the force which was hostile to him in Syria and to place 
difficulties in the way of all who hastened to the aid of his 
enemies. 

The active Bohemond hearing what we have just related, 
viz. that the emperor's officers and all the Franks had crossed 
the sea with their troops, he quickly assembled a powerfid 
army of Normans, Armenians, Allobroges, and other nations, 
and laying siege to Laodicea with great vigour, forced it to 
surrender, and having held it twelve years left it to his 
successors who still possess it. He was also signally suc- 
cessful in reducing under his dominion, to the glory of God 
and the support of the Christian cause, Mamistra, Albara, 

when the crusaders of 1101 arrived there. At first he refused to be their 
guide, but he afterwards joined them and accompanied them as far as Tor- 
tosa, Avhere he established himself, and thus escaped their fearful disaster. 
From thence he sat down before Tripoli in Syria, and built the castle of 
]\Iont-PeIerin to maintain the siege. He died there the 18th of February, 
1105. Tripoli did not surrender to the crusaders till 1109, when it was 
given up to Bertrand, his eldest son. 

Raymond's mother, Almodis, was a woman of such irregular habits that 
she married successively three husbands while they were all living, the 
counts of Aries, Thoulouse and Barcelona. Raymond himself was very 
debauched in his youth, but was induced by the counsels of his friend the 
bishop of Cahors to devote himself entirely to the deliverance of the Holy 
Land. They were on their journey in company to Clermont, where they 
had invited Urban II. to preach the crusade, when the bishop died on the 
road. Raymond did not abandon his design in consequence of this misfor- 
tvme, but continuing his route, was the first layman who took the cross. 

Raymond had lost one eye, but he was proud of'the blemish because he 
received it in single combat. 



25G OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.XI. 

Marrah, and other fortified places around Eeblath. He 
treated with great reverence the G-reeks, Armenians, and 
Syrians, who observed the monastic discipline in their con- 
vents, according to their own rules, and confirmed to them the 
possessions with which they had been endowed from old 
times. Besides which, some monasteries which had been 
ruined by the cruel Turks, and from which they had 
expelled the religious inhabitants, were given by this valiant 
lord to Latin monks or clerks, with a liberal provision of 
ample possessions, that they might be plentifully supplied 
with all things necessary for the worship of God, and perform 
divine service according to the rites of the Latin church.'^ 

In the year of our Lord 1100, the before -named counts, 
having been honoured by many gifts from the emperor, as 
already mentioned, departed with their followers, and were 
received with great favour in Italy by the Normans, who 
possessed there great wealth. E,oger the elder, count of 
Sicily, and his nephew Eoger, duke of Apulia, with Geofi"rey 
de Conversana,^ nephew of duke Guiscard, and their other 
countrymen or kinsmen rejoiced at their safe return, and 
did all in their power to gratify the champions of Christ 
worn by their numerous conflicts in his cause. "While there, 
Eobert duke of Normandy fell in love with a noble young 
lady, Sibylla daughter of Geoffrey de Conversana, and 
marrying her took her with him to Normandy. She was 
distinguished for her worth, of most agreeable manners, and 

^ This paragraph is as contrary to the fact as all that we have already 
been told with respect to Laodicea. Bohemond never had possession of 
that city ; remaining master of Antioch after the departure of the crusaders 
in 1098, he was made prisoner by a Turkish emir in 1100, and did not 
regain his liberty till 1 104. He then entrusted the government of his prin- 
cipality to his cousin Tancred, and returning to the West, died there in the 
month of February, 1111, just as he was on ih^ point of returning to the 
Holy Land. Most of the acts, whether military or civil, attributed to hini 
by our author, must, therefore, be assigned to Tancred. All the places 
mentioned in the present paragraph are referred to in the notes to b. ix. 

2 Roger I., count of Sicily, who died in the month of July, the year 
following. Roger, eldest son of Robert Guiscard, and consequently Bohe- 
mond's elder brother, became duke of Apulia and Calabria on his father's 
death, 1085 — 1111. Geoffrey de Conversana, Robert Guiscard's nephew, 
as it is most probable, by his second wife, Sichelgaire, daughter of Waimare 
IV., prince of Salerno. ♦Conversana is an episcopal city of the province of 
Bari, situated in the mountains about five miles from the sea. 



A.D. 1100.] HOBERT CURTKOSE's MARRIAGE. 257 

much beloved by those who knew her. Three years after- 
wards she had a son born at Eouen, who was baptized by 
"William archbishop of that city, I'rom whom he received his 
own name. 

While Duke Kobert was wanderijig in foreign countries, 
he did not forget that he had borrowed of his brother ten 
thousand silver marks,^ and had pledged Normandy to him 
for five years. He therefore procured from his father-in-law 
who was lord of Brundusium (the place where, as Lucau 
relates Caius Ca?sar blockaded Pompey the Grreat), and his 
other friends, large quantities of gold and silver and valuable 
effects, from which sources he amassed a vast sum of money 
with the prudent intention of paying his creditor in order 
that he might have the possession of his duchy peaceably 
restored.^ 

' Modern historians have not thought proper to give any account of the 
origin of this transaction between Duke Robert and his brother, nor of the 
motives which induced him to join the crusade. The circumstances, as 
they are detailed by Rudborne, the annalist of Winchester cathedral, are so 
curious that they deserve to be mentioned. 

According to this writer, Robert Curthose promised his father when he 
was on his death-bed, to make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem for the good of 
his soul. His natural indolence and the embarrassments of all kinds in 
which he was speedily hivolved, for a time suspended the performance of 
his promise, but it was brought vividly to his recollection by the preaching 
of the crusade which summoned all Christendom to hasten to the deliver- 
ance of the holy places. He, therefore, took the cross with enthusiasm, but 
the funds required for so expensive an enterprise were wanting in his case, 
as well as in those of most of his fellow pilgrims. In order to raise them 
he had recourse to his brothers in England, appealing to their filial regard 
for assistance to perform a vow which had for its object the good of their 
father's soul. William Rufus gave him a harsli refusal, telling him, with 
bitter irony, to go to his friend the king of France. Henry, who was 
younger, and of a more kindly disposition, declined at first to lend his 
brother any assistance, but was at length moved to give him a thousand, 
pounds. Upon this, William, unwilling to yield in generosity to Prince 
Henry, and calculating on the advantages he might gain both to his ambi- 
tion and avarice, agreed to lend Robert 10,000 silver marks for five years, 
on condition that Normandy was made over to him as security for repay- 
ment of the money at the time specified. These details which disclose so 
well the character of the three brothers, appear to be worthy of mon» 
notice than they have received from most of our cotemporaries. 

2 We believe Geoffrey was really lord of Brundusium, although at fiist 
sight the name seems introduced for the opportunity it afforded of display- 
ing our author's classical learning. It is more to the purpose to remark 
that the lord of Conversana gave his son-in-law a marriage portion more 

VOL. III. S 



2oS OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.XII. 

Ch. XII. Tlie count of Poitiers, Iwving talven tlie cross, mort- 
gages Ills states to William llufus to raise funds for his 
expedition — The Icing's ambitious designs. 

The memorable achievements performed in tbe east to the 
honour of Christ by the princes and other faithful servants 
of the cross were quickly known by report in the western 
world, and the sons of the church in that quarter exulted in 
the signal deliverance of Jerusalem and the downfall of 
Eabylon. AVilliam count of Poitiers/ having heard of these 
splended triumphs, was inflamed with the desire of under- 
taking the pilgrimage. An army of three hundred thousand 
men from Aquitaine, Gascony, and other provinces of the 
south enlisted under his banner. He determined on mort- 
gaging to William Eufus, king of England, the duchy of 
Aquitaine and all his territories, on condition of receiving a 
large sum of money from his treasury to enable him to 
accomplish the journey he proposed with great splendoin\ 
Ambasadors of proved ability were therefore despatched to 
the king who conveyed to him their master's wishes. The 
proud monarch, who the more he had the more he coveted, 
like the thirst of a dropsical man, received the envoy's pro- 
posals with great satisfaction, and longed to add the duke's 
ample possessions to the ancient dominions belonging to his 
father's duchy and kingdom. He therefore gave orders for 
the equipment of a powerful fleet, and for a large body of 
English cavalry to accompany him, that having crossed the 
sea he might be ready in arms, lion-like, to seize on his prey, 
oppose by force his brother's return to Normandy, purchase 
the duchy of Aquitaine, at a vast expense, and reducing to 
submission all who opposed him, extend the frontiers of 
his dominions to the bank of the Garonne. Such were the 
designs of the proud youth, and to such objects his ambition 

than sufficient to redeem the duchy of Normandy if he had not spent it on 
the disreputable favourites who were always about him. 

^ William VII., surnamed the Elder, count of Poitiers, who has been 
already mentioned by our author as taking part in the expedition of William 
Rufus against Montfort I'Amauri and ]6pernon in 1098. He assumed the 
cross in 1100, and went to the Holy Land the year following. His 
arrangements with the king of England had been so precisely concluded, 
that when William was asked a few days before his death, where he meant 
to spend the ensuing Christmas, he replied, " At Poitiers.'' 






A.D. 1100.] eobeht's son killed in the new eouest. 259 

OTrogantly aspired; but the Almiglity Creator, who rules 
the world, disposed otherwise. 

Ch. XIII. Hicliard^ the duke of Normandij' s natural son, 
killed ivliile hunting in the New Forest — His origin and 
character — Bemarks on the forest. 

TnEN, about the season of Rogations,^ a lamentable event 
took place in the New Forest. "While the knights of the 
king's court were engaged in hunting, and shooting does 
and bucks with bolts from their cross-bows, a certain knight 
aiming at one of the beasts of chase with an arrow chanced 
to strike an illustrious young prince, Richard, duke Robert's 
son. He fell instantly dead, to the great sorrow of his 
numerous friends. The knight, terrified at his great mis- 
fortune, fled with all speed to the priory of St. Pancras,^ and 
there became a monk, avoiding by that means the two-fold 
penalties he had incurred. For, retiring from the world, he 
expiated by penance the guilt of homicide ; and escaped at 
the same time the bitter revenge of the friends and relations 
of the young prince. Many persons had predicted extraor- 
dinary good fortune to the knight referred to, but men, 
when the Grod of Sabaoth orders otherwise, are frequently 
deceived and deceive others; for, clouded by the darkness of 
ignorance, the thoughts of man are vain. 

Let me say something of this young prince. At the 
time that Duke Robert was foolishly engaged in rebellion 
against his -father, and harassed Normandy from the place 
of his exile by pillage and other aggressions, he fell in love 
with the handsome concubine of an old priest, who lived 
somewhere on the frontier of France,^ and had by her two 
sons, Richard and William. Having nourished these 
children for many years with great care, when they came 
to riper years, she took them to Normandy, and presented 
them to the duke as his sons, recalling to his memory many 
well-known tokens of their familiar intimacy in his youthful 
days. He partly acknowledged the truth of these asser- 
tions, but affected to doubt the children being his ; the 

1 The fiTstfday of Rogations was Monday, May 7. 
^ St. Pancras at Lewes; see vol. ii., p. 472. At a later period the 
Norman priory of Mortemer-sur-Faulne was a dependence of it, 
^ Probably in the French Vexin. 

s 2 



260 ORDEUICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.XIT. 

motlier, therefore, publicly carried red-hot iron, and, receiv- 
ing no injury, clearly proved that she had conceived by the 
king's son. Both these brothers were worthy and amiable, 
but they perished in a moment like the flower of grass ; one, 
as we have seen, was cut off" by a wound he received in 
hunting ; and the other, after Henry made Eobert prisoner 
at Tinchebrai, went on pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and after 
much distinguishing himself, soon fell in the wars. 

Learn now, my reader, why the forest in which the young 
prince was slain received the name of the New Forest. 
That part of the country was extremely populous from 
early times, and full of well-inhabited hamlets and farms. 
A numerous population cultivated Hampshire with un- 
ceasing industry, so that the southern part of the district 
plentifully supplied Winchester with the products of the 
land. "When William the First ascended the throne of 
Albion, being a great lover of forests, he laid waste more 
than sixty parishes, compelling the inhabitants to emigrate 
to other places, and substituted beasts of the chase for 
human beings, that he might satisfy his ardour for hunting. 
Two of his sons, Eichard and William Eufus, as well as his 
grandson Eichard, of whom we have lately spoken, perished 
in this forest ; and apparitions of various kinds were seen 
there, to the great alarm of some persons ; and in this way 
the Lord manifested his displeasure that consecrated 
churches had been ruined to make a shelter for wild beasts. 

Ch. XI Y. William Riifus Icilled hy a cliance sJiot while 
hunting in the New Forest — Jle disregards warning 
dreams — The king's character and funeral — Account of 
Walter Tirel, his family and end — • Prince Henry seizes 
the treasures at Winchester. 

Ik the month of July, while the king's fleet was being 
fitted out with every circumstance of royal pomp, and 
he himself, having collected from all quarters an immense 
sum of gold, was waiting on the coast the moment of sailing 
with great ol3stinate wilfulness, terrible visions respecting him 
were seen in the monasteries and cathedrals by the clergy of 
both classes, and becoming the common talk of the vulgar in 
the market places and churchyards, could not escape the 
notice of the king. 



A.D. 1100.] WAEXINGS TO WILLIAM EUFUS. 261 

A certain monk of good repute, and still better life, who 
belonged to the abbey of St. Peter at Gloucester,^ related 
that he had a dream in the visions of the night to this 
effect : " I saw," he said, " the Lord Jesus seated on a lofty 
throne, and the glorious host of heaven, with the company 
of the saints, standing round. But while, in my ecstacy, I 
was lost in wonder, and my attention deeply fixed on such 
an extraordinary spectacle, I beheld a virgin resplendent 
with light cast herself at the feet of the Lord Jesus, and 
humbly address to him this petition : ' Lord Jesus Christ, 
the Saviour of mankind, for which thou didst shed thy 
precious blood when hanging on the cross, look with an eye 
of compassion on thy people which now groans under 
the yoke of William. Thou avenger of wickedness, and 
most just judge of all men, take vengeance, I beseech 
thee, on my behalf of this William, and deliver me 
out of his hands, for, as far as lies in his power, he has 
polluted and grievously afflicted me.' The Lord repHed : 
' Be patient and wait awhile, and soon you will be amply 
revenged of him,' I trembled at hearing this, and doubt 
not that the divine anger presently threatens the king; 
for I understood that the cries of the holy virgin, our 
mother the church, had reached the ears of the Almighty, 
by reason of the robberies, the foul adulteries, and the 
heinous crimes of all sorts which the king and his courtiers 
cease not daily of committing against the divine law.^ 

On being informed of this, the venerable abbot Serlo^ 

' The abbey of St. Peter at Gloucester was founded during the reign of 
King Ethelred in the year 680. 

^ A foreign monk relat* d to Robert Fitzhamon a still more frightful 
dream, in which he saw William Rufus come into a church with his usual 
menacing and insolent gestures, looking contemptuously on the standers-by 
- and gnaw the legs and arms of Jesus Christ on the crucifix. The 
image bore this foi a time, but at length struck the king with its foot in 
such a manner that he fell backwards. Then such volumes of flame burst 
from his mouth that the smoke darkened the sky. Robert Fitzhamon 
thought it right to tell this dream to the king, who' heard it with shouts of 
laughter ; '' He is a monk," he exclaimed, " and dreams for money ; give 
him a hundred pence." Still he hesitated a long time before he decided 
on hunting, <ind did not go till after dinner, having taken a more than 
usual quantity of wme. William of Malmesbury, p. 344, BoJm's Aniig. 
Lib. 

3 Serlo, who was first a canon of Avranches, in the time of Bishop 



2G2 OEDERICUS VITALIS. [b.X, CH.XIY. 

wrote letters which he despatched in a friendly spirit from 
Gloucester, informing the king very distinctly of all that 
the monk had seen in his vision. On the calends [1st] of 
August, they were celebrating the feast of St. Peter-in- 
Vinculis, in the same monastery, and immense crowds of 
people of all ranks were drawn together on that spot. 
Then Fulchered, a zealous monk of Seez^ and first abbot of 
Shrewsbury, an eloquent expositor of the holy scriptures, 
being chosen as one of the oldest clergy, ascended the 
pulpit, and addressed a sermon to the congregation on the 
word of salvation. In the course of it he openly denounced 
offenders against the divine law, and filled, as it were, with 
a prophetic spirit, boldly advanced predictions such as this : 
" JBngland," he said, "is allowed to become a heritage 
trodden under foot by the profane, because the land is full 
of iniquity. Its whole body is spotted by the leprosy of 
a universal iniquity, and infected by the disease of sin 
from the crown of the head to the sole of the feet. 
Unbridled pride stalks abroad, swelling, if I may say it, even 
above the stars of heaven. Dissolute lust pollutes not 
only vessels of clay, but those of gold, and insatiable avarice 
devours all it can lay hands on. But lo ! a sudden change 
of affairs is threatened. The libertines shaU not always bear 
rule, the Lord God will come to judgment of the open 
enemies of his spouse, and strike Moab and Edom with the 
sword of his signal vengeance, and overthrow the mountains 
of Gilboa with a fearful convulsion. The anger of the 
Lord shall no longer spare transgressors, and the wrath of 
heaven shall rage against the unbelieving children. The 
bow of divine vengeance is bent on the reprobate, and the 
swift arrow taken from the quiver is ready to wound. The 
blow will soon be struck, but the man who is wise enough 
to correct his sins will avoid the infliction." 

This discourse with others of the same tendency, were 
addressed to the people in the temple of God on Wednesday, 
and suddenly the scourge began to be exhibited with full 
Michael, and afterwards a monk of Mont St. Michael, was elected first 
abbot of the Norman abbey of St, Peter at Gloucester in 1072, 
at the instance of King William. He rebuilt the church, which was 
consecrated in the month of July, 11 00, a few days before the monk's 
dream. 

^ Fulchered, first abbot of Shrewsbury. See vol. ii. p. 202. 



A.D. 1100.] WILLIAM EUrUS SLAIN". 263 

elleci. The morning^ of the day following, King William, 
having dined with his minions, prepared, after the meal 
was ended, to go forth and hunt in the JSTew Forest. Being 
in great spirits he was joking with his attendants while his 
boots were being laced, when an armourer came and 
presented to him six arrows. The king immediately took 
them with great satisfaction, praising the work, and uncon- 
scious of what was to happen, kept four of them himself 
and held out the other two to Walter Tirel.^ " It is but 
riglit," he said, " that the sharpest arrows should be given 
to him who knows best how to inflict mortal wounds with 
them." This Tirol was a French knight of good extraction, 
the wealthy lord of the castles of Poix and Pontoise, filling 
a high place among the nobles, and a gallant soldier ; he was 
therefore admitted to familiar intimacy with the king, and 
became his constant companion. Meanwhile, while they 
were idly talking on variou's subjects, and the king's household 
attendants were assembled about him, a monk of Gloucester 
presented himself and delivered to the king a letter from his 
abbot. Having read it, the king burst out laughing, and 
said merrily to the knight just mentioned, " Walter, do 
what I told you." The knight replied, "I will, my lord." 
Slighting then the warnings of the elders, and forgetting that 
the heart is lifted up before a fall, he said respecting the letter 
he had received, " I wonder what has induced my lord Serlo to 
write to me in this strain, for I really believe he is a worthy 
abbot and respectable old man. In the simplicity of his 
heart, he transmits to me, who have enough besides to attend 
to, the dreams of his snoring monks, and even takes the 
trouble to commit them to writing, and send them a long 
distance. Does he think that I follow the example of the 
English, who will defer their journey or their business 
on account of the dreams of a parcel of wheezing old 
women?" 

Tlius speaking, he hastily rose, and mounting his horse, 
rode at full speed to the forest. His brother. Count Henry, 

" Wednesday, August 1,1] 00. Malmesbury, whom we have just quoted, 
tells ub that the kmg did not go out to hunt till after dinner, but that waa 
an early meal in thoyo days. 

'^ Walter Tirel, lord of Poix (Somme), and keeper of the castle of 
Pontoise. 



264 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.X. CH.XIY. 

with "William de BreteuiP and other distinguished persons 
followed him, and, having penetrated into the woods, the 
hunters dispersed themselves in various directions according 
to custom. The king and Walter de Poix posted themselves 
with a few others in one part of the forest, and stood with 
their weapons in their hands eagerly watching for the coming of 
the game, when a stag suddenly running between them, the 
king quitted his station, and Walter shot an arrow. It 
grazed the beast's grizzly back, but glancing from it, 
mortally wounded the king who stood within its range. 
He immediately fell to the ground, and alas ! suddenly 
expired.^ The death of one man caused the greatest confu- 
sion among numbers, and the wood echoed with fearful 
shouts occasioned by the death of their prince. Prince 
Henry lost no time in riding as fast as his horse could carry 
him to Winchester, where the royal treasure was kept, and 
imperiously demanded the keys from the keepers, as the 
lawful heir. William de Breteuil arrived at the same instant 
with breathless haste, for he anticipated Henry's deep 
policy and resolved to oppose it. "We ought," he said, 
" to have a loyal regard for the fealty we have sworn to 
your brother Eobert. He is, undoubtedly, the eldest son 
of King William, and both I and you, my lord Henry, have 



* William de Breteuil, son of William Fitz-Osberne. 

* Walter Tirel, the third of that name. He must have undertaken 
the pilgrimage to the Holy Land in which he died after he founded the 
abbey of Selincourt in 1134. He also founded the priory of St. Denys at 
Poix". He lived in the Vexin in 1091, at which time he appears as witness 
in a charter of King Philip I., being a donation of the abbey of St. Melon 
at Pontoise to the archbishop of Rouen. We must not be surprised to 
find him sometimes at Pontoise and at others in Picardy. as the counts of 
Amiens were both counts of Pontoise and the French Vexin. 

Richard Giffard, his wife's father, was probably brother of Walter 
Giffard, earl of Buckingham. 

Hugh Tirrel, son of Walter III. and Anne, went also to the Holy Land 
in 1146. 

3 Malmesbury informs us that on receiving the wound the king uttered 
not a word, but breaking off tlie shaft of the arrow where it projected 
from his body, fell upon the wound by which he accelerated his death. 
The sun was declining, and the king, at the time he was shot, was holding 
up his hand to screen his eyes from the sun's rays athwart the glades of 
the forest, while he was keenly gazing at a stag which he had just slightly 
wounded. 



A.D. 1100.] rUNEEAL OF WILLIAM EtTrUS. 2G5 

paid him homage.^ Therefore we ought to keep our 
engagements to him in all respects, whether he be absent 
or present. He has long laboured in God's service, and 
the Lord now restores him, without a contest, the duchy 
which he relinquished for the love of heaven, as well as his 
father's crown." There was now a sharp contention between 
them, and crowds flocked round them from all quarters ; 
but the influence of an heir present in person to claim his 
rights began to prevail. Henry hastily seizing his sword 
drew it out of the scabbard, declaring that no foreigner 
should on frivolous pretences lay hands on his father's 
sceptre. 

At length, through the intervention of friends and 
prudent counsellors, the quarrel abated on one side and 
the other, and by a wise resolution, to prevent a serious 
rupture, the castle, with the royal treasures, was given up 
to Henry, the king's son. This had been long before pre- 
dicted by the Britons, and the English desired to have for 
their lord a prince they regarded as illustrious because he 
was nobly born on the throne.* 

On the king's death, many of the nobles hastened at once 
from the forest to their own abodes, and began to put their 
aftairs in order, in anticipation of the troubles which they 
feared would follow. Some of the servants wrapped the 
king's bloody corpse in a mean covering, and brought it, 
like a wild boar pierced by the hunters, to the city of Win- 
chester. The clergy, the monks and citizens, with the poor 
widows and mendicants, went in procession without delay 
to meet the body, from respect to the royal dignity, and 
buried it in the old minster of St. Peter.^ Notwithstanding, 

* Our author, so far from applauding the loyalty of William de Breteuil, 
already exhibits his great partiality for Henry I. Robert Curthose was 
odious to the clergy not only on account of his licentious conduct, but 
because he afforded them no protection against the rapacity of the barons. 

^ He was the only son of William the Conqueror i)orn after his acces- 
sion to the throne of England, being what the Greeks of the lower empire 
called Porphyrogenites, born in the purple, a circumstance to which the 
Anglo-Saxons attached great importance, regarding it as a strong confirma- 
tion of the right to the throne. 

^ The king was interred within the court of the castle. That part of 
the building soon afterwards fell to the ground, and it was regarded as a 
cign of the divine wrath against the king. It was rebuilt from funds left 
by Bishop Walkelin. The funeral procession was not so mciin a.s our 



266 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.XIT. 

tlie doctors and prelates of the eliurcli, taking into con- 
sideration his debauched life and tragical end, did not 
hesitate to pass sentence upon him, and thought, that as 
they had been unable to inflict salutary punishment upon 
him for his iniquities while he lived, he must be treated as 
a reprobate," and one who did not merit absolution. In 
Bome churches the bells did not ring his knell, although 
they often are tolled long for paupers and w^omen of the 
lowest rank. Of the immense treasure he had amassed, 
wrung from the labours of the wretched people, no alms 
were given to the poor for the soul of their former ava- 
ricious owner. The soldiers who served for hire, the bullies 
and common w^hores missed their gains at the death of the 
debauched king, and lamenting his miserable end, not so 
much from regard, as from their loss of the supplies which 
ministered to their detestable vices, sought carefully for 
Walter Tirel, threatening to tear him in pieces in revenge 
for the death of their patron. However, the moment the 
deed was done he huiTied to the coast, and crossing the 
sea took repose in his castles in France, where he laughed 
in security at the threats and curses of his malevolent ene- 
mies. He married Alice, daughter of E-ichard, of the noble 
family of Giffard, who bore to her husband Hugh de Poix, 
a very valiant knight. Many years afterwards Walter went 
in pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and died penitent on the holy 
journey.^ 

author infers: multornm procerum conventUy pavcorum planctu. Many of 
the nobiliiy attended, though there were few mourners. 

' Bioihdnatnm. Tiie portrait of this king is thus drawn by a contem- 
porary writer: " He was square-built, the colour of his skin red, and his 
hair of a yellowish tint, his brow was open, his eyes were of different 
shades, varying with certain glittering specks. His strength was prodigious, 
though his frame was not large, and his belly was rather protuberant. He 
had no pretensions to eloquence, but was rcm<irkable for stammering in his 
speech especially when angry. He had so little inclination or leisure for 
learning that he never attended to it." — Malmesbury. 

It appears, therefore, that his surname was given him more from the 
florid tint of his face than the colour of his hair. He was more than forty 
years old at the time of his death. One of the principal grievances of the 
Anglo-Saxon people in his time, as well as his father's, was the destruction 
of churches and churchyards in extending the forests. Stephen Ber- 
chington, Vitts Archiepiscop. Cautuar. attributes to him no less than twenty 
desecrations of this sort. 

^ It appears that Walter Tirel denied to the last his having been the 



A.D. 1100.] ACCESSION OP HENET I. 267 

Ch. XV. Coronation of Henrif I. — His character — Protects 
the church — Fills the vacant bishoprics and abbeys — Conduct 
of the nobles — Henry marries the Anglo-Saxon 'princess 
Matilda. 

In the year of our Lord 1100, on Thursday, the fourth of 
the nones [20th] of August, William Eufus was mortally 
wounded by an arrow in the New Forest, after having pos- 
sessed the kiugdom of England twelve years and nearly ten 
months. Thereupon Henry hastened to London with Eobert 
earl of Mellent, and the following Sunday^ was placed on 
the throne in the church of St. Peter the apostle, at AYest- 
minster, being anointed by the venerable Maurice, bishop of 
London. Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury, was then an 
exile, as it has been already observed, and Thomas, arch- 
bishop of York, being lately dead,^ that metropolitan see 
was still vacant. Henry was thirty years old when he 
ascended the throne, and his reign lasted thirty-five years 
and four months.' He ruled the dominions, divinely com- 
mitted to him, with prudence and success in prosperity and 
adversity, and was distinguished among the princes of 
Christendom for his love of peace and justice. In his time 
the church of Grod was brilliantly endowed with wealth and 
honours, and all orders of the religious increased to the 
glory of the Creator. This is shown by the monks and 
clergy, who, during his reign, augmented their numbers and 
their dignity ; this is proved in the case of anchorites, who, 

person by whose hand William Rufus fell. Suger, a cotemporary historian, 
and, as it seems, a friend of Tirel, in his life of Louis-le-Gros, king of 
France, alluding to the death of Rufus, remarks: " One Walter Tirel, a 
nobleman, was accused of shooting the king with an arrow ; but I have 
often heard him assert on his solemn oath, at a time when he had nothing 
either to fear or hope, that on that day he was neither in the part of the 
forest where the king was hunting, nor saw him at all while he was in 
the wood." This testimony, however, can hardly avail against the con- 
current agreement of tradition and history. 

^ Sunday, August 5. 

' This is incorrect; the archbishop of York survived till the end of the 
following November. It is not even quite certain that he did not assist at 
the coronation of Henry I., placing the crown on his head, after the 
royal unction had been given by the bishop of London. At any rate the 
archbishop did not die till Sunday, November 28. 

^ In the MS. of St. Evroult the figures have been erased, and the six 
last words, "reigned five years and six months," interlined. 



268 ORDEUICUS TITALIS. [b.X. CH.XV. 

felling dense woods, and rearing among them the lofty- 
spires of churches and abbeys, exult in their labours, and 
sing the praises of Grod with heart-felt peace, where once 
robbers and outlaws, abandoned to all wickedness, found 
their retreats. 

Prom the beginning of his reign, Henry had the wisdom 
to conciliate all parties, attaching them to his person by his 
royal munificence. He admitted the nobles to a high place 
in his favour, loaded them with wealth and honours, and 
secured their fidelity by his flattering caresses. The com- 
mon people among his subjects he indulged with equitable 
laws, and protected by his authority from unjust exactions 
and pillage. This illustrious prince thus distinguished him- 
self above all the lords and kings of the west, and obtained 
the favour both of the clergy and laity, who were delighted 
to find themselves governed with reason. 

Henry began to console the widowed churches, deprived 
of their pastors, by giving them learned men, with the advice 
of his council. He promoted William Giffard,^ who was the 
chancellor of the late king, to the see of Winchester, and 
Gerard, bishop of Hereford, to the archbishopric of Tork.^ 
He also despatched messengers in haste over the sea, recall- 
ing to his see the venerable Anselm, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, who had been driven out by the indecent persecutions 
of King William.^ Henry gave the abbey of Ely to Eichard, 

1 This bishop must have been of the family of the Giffiirds, lords of 
Longueville and earls of Buckingham. He was chancellor to three kings, 
William I. in the latter years of his reign; William II. 1093 — 1100; 
Henry I. 1100 — 1108. Not having been willing to receive consecration 
from the archbishop of York, he left England with St. Anselm, and did 
not return till that prelate was recalled. 

2 Gerard, nephew of Walkeline, bishop of Winchester, and of Simeon, 
abbot of Ely, was first a canon and precentor of Rouen, and afterwards 
attached to the royal chapel. He was made bishop of Hereford in 109b", 
and archbishop of York on the decease of Thomas his predecessor in the 
month of November, 1100. Gerard died in 1108. He was only a 
sub-deacon when he was appointed bishop, and Anselm had to ordain him 
deacon and priest the same day, and consecrated him bishop the day 
following. 

" St. Anselm was at the abbey of Chaise-Dieu in Auvergne when he 
received the first intelligence of the death of William Rufus. He decided 
immediately to listen to the request of his clergy and return to England. 
He had not reached Lyons on the road from Cluni when King Henry's 



A.D. 1100.] HENRY FILLS THE YACANT ABBEYS. 2G9 

eon of Eichard de Bienfaite, a monk of Bee/ and the abbey 
of St. Edmund, king and martyr, to Eobert, a young monk 
of St. Evroult, son of Hugh, earl of Chester.^ He appointed 
Herluin, of Caen, abbot of Griastonbury, and Earicius, of 
Malmesbury, to Abingdon.^ 

Hugh, earl of Chester, and Eobert de Belesme, with other 
barons, who were at that time in JNTormandy, on learning 

letter met him, and caused him to accelerate his jom-ney. He arrived at 
Dover, September 23. 

' Richard, &bbot of Ely, was the fourth son of Richard de Bienfaite. 

* Robert, abbot of St. Edmundsbury, was the third son of Hugh Lufus, 
earl of Chester. 

The king bestowed these two abbeys on the day of his coronation. His 
good understanding mth the abbot of Ely did not last long : at the outset 
Abbot Richard refused to be consecrated by the bishop of Lincoln in 
whose diocese his abbey stood, and afterwards he lost the royal favour for 
three reasons, — for having come to court with too pompous a retinue, for 
not obeying with sufficient punctuality the royal commands, and for 
shamefully dismissing a jester belonging to his household for foul words. 
This last charge is not very intelligible ; conviciantem, the phrase used 
having also a good sense, being used by Martial for a merry jest, besides 
its common acceptation of railing or brawling. However, for these 
offences Richard was deprived of his abbey. He retired to Rome, where, 
meeting St. Anselm, he had the courage to espouse the cause of King 
Henry against that prelate, upon hearing which Henry restored him to the 
possession of his abbey. He retained it till his death, which happened in 
1107, just at the time that he was making arrangements, with the king's 
consent, for its being erected to a bishopric, which took place soon 
afterwards. 

The election of Robert de Chester was quashed in the council held at 
London by St. Anselm in the end of September, 1 107, on the ground that 
the monks of St. Edmundsbury had the right to choose their own abbot. 
They forthwith exercised it, and substituted Robert their prior for Count 
Hugh's son. In general the English monks had a great aversion to 
Norman abbots on account of their arrogance, avarice and tyranny. 

* Glastonbury abbey had been stripped by William the Conqueror of 
great part of its domains. Abbot Herluin proved a vigilant and 
economical steward of its property, and recovered part of what had been 
alienated. 

The last two appointments were made soon after King Henry's corona- 
tion; for the new abbot of Glastonbury was instituted at the feast of All 
Sa^ts, the same year, by the bishop of Lincoln. He had been a monk 
of Malmesbury, and Henry appears to have placed great confidence in his 
medical skill, so much so th;it we are told he frequently trusted for the 
restoration of "iiis health to the abbot of Malmesbury 's prescriptions only. 
So highly did the king esteem him that he had some intentions, after St. 
Anselm's death, of raising him to the archiepiscopal see of Canter):)ury. 
Faricius died February 23, 1117. He was a native of Arezzo. 



270 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.X. CH.XT. 

tlie fate of their unfortunate prince and tlie sudden change 
of events, put their affairs in Normandy in order, and 
hastening over to England offered due submission to the 
new king, and having done homage to him received con- 
firmation in their possessions and all their dignities, with 
royal gifts. 

King Henry did not listen to the counsels of rash young 
men, like Eehoboam, but wisely followed the advice of the 
wise, and the recommendations of experienced persons. He 
admitted to his councils Eobert de Mellent, Hugh of Ches- 
ter, Richard de Eeviers, Roger Bigod,i and other able and 
sagacious men, and receiving with deference their prudent 
admonitions, ruled with success many states and nations. 

This king, four months after he succeeded to the throne, 
disdaining to abandon himself to illicit connections, and be 
like horse and mule which have no understanding, married 
with royal pomp Matilda, a noble lady, by whom he had 
two children, Matilda and William.^ She was daughter of 

1 The reader is already sufficiently well acquainted with Robert de 
Meulan (or Mellent) and Hugh, earl of Chester, as well as with Richard 
de Reviers, son of Baldwin, the subject of a long note, vol. ii. p. 498. 

As for Roger Bigod, or Bigot, he already held Vast domains in the 
county of Norfolk of which we shall presently find his posterity securing 
the possession by a double perjury. Roger Bigod was probably the son of 
that Roger Bigod, a kinsman of Richard d'Avranches, who disclosed the 
ambitious designs of William Werlenc. See William of Jumieges, Ivii. 
c. 22. This Robert Bigod seems to have become speedily an important 
person. In the charter of donation of St. Philibert-sur-Risle, in 1106, he 
appears as a witness to a release by Robert de Beaufoy, with Duke 
William and Roger de Beaumont only. 

Our author forgets to mention among the great nobles attached to Henry 
I., Robert Fitz-Hair on and Henry, earl of Warwick, vir integer ct sanctus, 
says William of Malmesbury. 

2 It may suffice to observe that Henry's desire to ally himself with the 
grand-daughter of Edward the Confessor was neither inspired by his purity 
of morals, which history flatly contradicts, nor attracted by very ardent 
passion for that princess, of Avhose exterior advantages all that William of 
Malmesbury can say is, that she was not very ugly — nsquequaque despica- 
bilis formcB, and whose monastic habits and virtues were far from suiting 
the habits of the Norman princes. It was not without regret that she 
found herself compelled to quit the cloister and the veil (wnich she had 
really taken) to re-enter the world even upon a throne; and she again left 
it when she had borne two children to her husband, retiring to West- 
minster, and dividing her time between her devotions, the care of the sick, 
and the pleasure of listening to church music. That was her predominant 



A.D. 1100.] IIENRT I. MAERIES MATILDA. 271 

Malcolm, king of Scotland, and his queen Margaret, and 
descended from the race of King Alfred, son of King 
Egbert,^ the first who possessed the sovereignty of the whole 
of England after the massacres of the Danes and the death 
of St. Edmund, king and martyr. After the Angles came 
into Britain from the isle of Angle, in which the metropolis 
of Saxony is situated, and, under Hen gist their principal 
chief, conquered or exterminated the Britons, now called 
the Welsh, they named it England, after their native coun- 
try. Eive kings then reigned in it, as we find in the works 
of Grildas the Briton, and Bede the Englishman.^ 

The wise Henry, reflecting on the illustrious birth of the 
princess I have named, and having been long attracted by 
her many graces and virtues, chose her for his partner in 
Christ, and shared his throne wdth her, causing her to be 
crowned by Gerard, bishop of Hereford.^ Having given 

passion, and she spared neither promises nor expense to draw round her 
proficients in that art. 

It seems to have escaped our author that political motives were Henry's 
chief inducement to form this alliance. Received with coldness by the 
Norman barons, who preferred his brother Robert, he found that he could 
do nothing better than to conciliate in this way the English people, who 
preserved their devotion to the race of their ancient kings, and who saw in 
Matilda not only the restoration of the blood of Edward the Confessor, 
but his piety and miOnastic habits. Thus, long after her death, her memory 
was cherished under the name of Mold, the Good-Quene. 

^ King Alfred was not son, but grandson of Egbert. 

* It is unnecessary to follow the author in his digression on the isle of 
Angle, and the Anglo-Saxon Heptarchy, of which he is pleased to make a 
Pentarchy. Every one knows that the Angles were only one of the 
three tribes who invaded and colonized Britain in the fifth and sixth 
centuries, the others being the Jutes who had Hengist and Horsa for their 
chiefs, and establit^hed themselves in the isle of Thanet in 449; and the 
Saxons who settled in Sussex and Surrey (491), Westsex (494), and Essex 
(527). The Angles v/ho came from the S.E. of the duchy of Slcswig, 
established themselves in the eastern counties, East Anglia (527), the 
northern, Northumbria, and lastly in Mercia, the central districts between 
the Thames, the Humber, and the Severn, in 528. 

^ The marriage was celebrated on bt. IMartin's day, November 11, three 
months after Henry's coronation. St. Anselm was with difficulty induced 
to consent to it, because Matilda had actually taken the veil. Fortunately 
witnesses were found to swear " that she had merely worn it to get rid of 
her suitnrs wi*:hout making her profession." The princess herself only 
yielded from fear of violence, and by the persuasion of her abbess. It was 
not the bishop of Hereford, as our author states, but St. Anselm, who gave 
the nuptial benediction to the royal couple, and crowned the young queen. 



272 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.XYI. 

these brief details of events in England, I must now add to 
my work what concerns the affairs of Normandy. 

Ch. XVI. Disturbances in Normandy on tJie death of Wil- 
liam Miifas — Duke Bohert, returning from the crusade, 
takes possession of the duchy — Disorders in consequence 
of his indolence. 

In the month of August, no sooner was the disastrous 
fate of the king known in Normandy, than the unbridled 
rage of the Normans vented itself in tearing open the 
wounds in the entrails of their own country ; for the very 
same week William, earl of Evreux, and lialph de Conches 
made an incursion on the territories of Beaumont with a 
powerful force, and swept off a vast booty from the lands of 
Eobert, earl of Millent, on the pretext of some iD juries he 
had inflicted on their allies arising out of the perfidious 
counsels which he had long since given William Rufus 
against them.^ In like manner, others who had long har- 
boured anger and malice, which they were unable to vent in 
open hostilities on account of the rigour of their prince's 
government, now that the reins of justice were relaxed, flew 
to arms against each other with the utmost violence, and 
desolated that unhappy country, while it had no sovereign, 
with mutual slaughter and ruin. 

In the course of September, Duke Eobert returned to 
Normandy, and being received by his subjects, undertook a 
journey with his consort Sibylla to Mount St. Michael-in- 
peril-of-the-Sea. There, having offered thanks to God for 
his safe return from his long pilgrimage, he afterwards knew 
his wife,^ who was daughter of Geoffrey, count de Conver- 
sana, and the year following she bore him a son, who, beiug 
baptized by William the archbishop, received that prelate's 
name. E-obert took possession of his duchy without any 

* The vast domains of the couDt of MelJent at Beaum on t-le- Roger lay, 
in fact, contiguous to those of the count of Evreux and the territory of 
Conches, the lords of which had for several generations maintained hos- 
tilities with those of Beaumont, the objects of their constant jealousy. 
Robert de Beaumont's haughty and rapacious character was little calcu- 
lated to extinguish these hereditary feuds. 

* Our author would seem to intimate that Robert Curthose did not con- 
summate his union with the duchess Sibylla until after his pilgrimage to 
Mount St. Michael, which is not very probable. 



A.D. 1100.] SIEGE OF THE CASTLE OF MATfS. 273 

opposition, and governed it, in name at least, for nearly 
eight years/ But he desperately^ abandoned himself to 
indolence and effeminacy, and thus rendered himself con- 
temptible to his restless and turbulent subjects. Eobberies 
and ravages were carried on in all quarters without restraint, 
and calamities were multiplied to the ruin of the whole 
country. 

Ch. XYII. Count Elias regains the town of Mans, and 
hesieges the citadel — Singula^' transactions during the 
siege — Its surrender — JElias restored to the county of Maine 
— His subsequent acts and his family. 

Elias, son of John de Tleche, having heard the welcome 
news of the death of King William fully confirmed, put 
himself in march for Mans at the head of a body of his 
armed retainers, and, being well received by the citizens 
who were well affected to him, took possession of the city 
without opposition ; and, calling to his aid Tulk, count of 
Anjou, his suzerain lord, besieged the citadel for a long 
time. Haimeric de Moira and Walter of Eouen, son of 
Ansger,^ held the town with a sufficient garrison and plenti- 
ful stores of provisions and arms, and all that was required 
for the besieged to make an obstinate resistance. The two 
parties had daily conferences, and threatened each other ; 
but their menaces were frequently mingled with jokes. 
Count Elias was allowed the privilege, whenever he wished 
to confer with those who had the custody of the citadel, of 
doing so without molestation on his putting on a white 
tunic. Trusting without hesitation to the good faith of 
persons of whose honour and loyalty he felt assured, and 
being distinguished by his white dress, he frequently went 
among the enemy all alone, and did not hesitate to hold long 

1 Our author in this paragraph is, as usual with him, incorrect in the 
chronology. Between the month of September, 1100, and the 28th Sep- 
tember, 1100, it is impossible to count eight years, even commenced. 

^ Damnabiliter. 

^ We have often heard before of this Walter, son of Ansger, as com- 
mander of the citadel of Mans, As for Maimer " de Moria" his name 
ought to be written " Moira." There are still existing traces of two fiefs 
80 called, one at St. Vincent-des-Pres, the other at Cclombiers. A charter 
of William Rufus is extant, addressed, " Hamerico de Moira," relating to 
the church and canons of St. Julien at Mans. 
YOL. III. T 



274 OBDEEICUS VITALIS. [l3.X. CH.XYII. 

conversations with them. Those within the castle and those 
without mutually indulged in good-humoured banter on a 
variety of subjects, jesting with each other without ill-will, 
so that their discourse became the admiration and delight of 
the people of that country in future times. 

At length "Walter and Hameric, after some days, said to 
Elias, " We guard this strong castle, which our master has 
committed to our custody, and we fear neither you nor your 
warlike engines as long as we choose to resist you. It is in 
our power to annoy you with stones and arrows, having the 
advantage of you from our higli tow^er ; but from the fear of 
God and our natural regard for you, we do not injure you, 
especially as we really do not know in whose service we now 
are, and for whom we hold the place. We think it, there- 
fore, would be right and convenient that a truce should be 
made on both sides until a messenger returns from our 
lords, the princes of England and Normandy. On his 
return we shall do what reason tells us.'' Elias was 
delighted at this proposal which he communicated to Fulk, 
and both readily agreed in accepting the terms offered 
by the Normans. 

Meanwhile, the messenger who was despatched to the 
duke of Normandy thus addressed him : " Walter and 
Hameric guard the citadel of Mans, according to King 
W^illiam's orders ; they are besieged by the forces of Maine 
and Anjou, and they demand succour from you, wishing to 
learn w^hat they shall do to follow your washes. If you 
desire to hold the place, come to their relief with a strong 
body of troops, and release them from the enemy who is 
besieging them. Otherwise instruct them what they are to 
do that they may escape destruction." 

The duke, exhausted by the fatigues of his long pilgrim- 
age, and liking better to enjoy a quiet bed than to encounter 
the toils of war, sent word to the besieged by their messen- 
ger that they were to make peace on honourable terms with 
the besieging army. "I am worn out," he said, " with my 
protracted labours, and am contented with the duchy of 
Normandy. I am also invited to cross the sea by the barons 
of England, who are ready to acknowledge me king." 

The messenger from the garrison, on receiving this 
answer, did not return to Mans, but embarkiu«r in all haste 






A.D. 1100.] ELTAS, COUxVT OF MAINE, RESTORED. 275 

went to the court of the kingof England, and communicated 
to him in detail with great clearness what the duke had just 
said to him, as I have quoted it. Henry, however, was so 
occupied with the affairs of his transmarine states, that he 
wisely preferred devoting himself to the care of what was 
lawfully his own, than to burden himself through ambition 
with foreign enterprises which had no just claim on his 
attention. He therefore returned his thanks to the keepers 
of the citadel for their good will towards him, and honour- 
ably dismissed their envoy with royal gifts. The messenger 
accordingly returned to his employers, and detailed to them 
the answers he had successively received from King Wil- 
liam's sons. 

In consequence, Walter and Hameric, having laudably 
proved their fidelity, caused Elias to put on the white shirt, 
which was the occasion of his being called " The White 
Bachelor ;" ^ and he lost no time in obeying the summons. 
The keeper of the citadel, seeing him coming in great haste, 
called out to him merrily : " White Bachelor, you may well 
be glad, now that the moment you have long expected is 
arrived. If you have plenty of money in your treasury, 
you will be able to make a good bargain with us." Elias 
asking what sort of a bargain they meant, they replied : 
" The great William, king of England, built this citadel ; his 
successor entrusted it to our keeping ; but now, alas, he is 
dead. We therefore give it up to you, and acknowledge 
you as count of Maine. We do so under no compulsion, 
and under no alarm at your valoiu* ; if we wished to make a 
longer resistance, we have the means of protracting the 
siege, for our hearts are bold, and arras and provisions are 
not wanting. But we have no legitimate master, to whose 
service we may devote our powers, and, therefore, noble 
sir, well assured of your merit, we choose you ; and liaving 
surrendered the citadel into your hands, declare you count 
of Maine from this day." 

' The text reads Bacularis, one who carries a baton or staff, but Bacca- 
lar'uis is evidently the word meant. The name was given to Count Elias 
not from his being a knight, bachelor, or banneret, but because he waa 
deprived of his honour m3 count of Maine, and consequently held an 
inferior position to that which properly belonged to him. He was therefore 
a pretender, an aspirant to the county, as the bachelors were to the rank 
of knights-banneret. 

t2 



276 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.X. CH.XYIT. 

Tlie gallant soldiers, having tlius addressed Elias, con- 
cluded a treaty with him, and delivered to him that strongly- 
fortified citadel, with all the stores collected in it by William 
iiufus. Peace being restored, the brave garrison marched 
out with their arms and baggage, and were received by the 
two counts,^ not as vanquished foes, but as faithful allies. 
Count Elias conducted them in safety through the streets at 
the head of two hundred men-at-arms, for their protection 
against the citizens, whose houses they had burnt the year 
before. In this manner Count Elias recovered his county 
after three years, and he governed it with honour until the 
time of his death, nearly ten years afterwards.^ 

Meanwhile, in the course of a few years, he contracted 
his daughter Eremburge in marriage with Fulk, count of 
Anjou, his suzerain's son,^ and appointed him his successor 
as count of Maine. He afterwards made alliances with 
Duke Bobert and King Henry, and took a distinguished 
part in the wars between them,* to the great injury of one 
of those princes and advantage of the other. On the death 
of his consort, not liking to submit to a life of celibacy, 
he married Agnes, daughter of William, duke of Poitiers, 
and relict of Alphonso the Elder, king of GaHcia.^ The 
marriage was celebrated with great rejoicings, but the 
princess unhappily died the year following. Bishop Hilde- 
bert interred her remains in the church of St. Peter the 
apostle, at Couture. 

^ Fulk, count of Anjou, and Elias, count of Maine. 

' Count Elias died July 11, 1110, and was buried in the abbey church 
of La Couture. His tomb was to be seen there as late as the year 1790. 
He Avas represented upon it in chain armour, with his helmet on his head, 
and holding a triangular shield on which was embluzoned a cross " ancrde." 

2 This marriage also took place in 1110, according to the chronicle of 
St. Aubin. 

* At the battle of Tinchebrai. 

^ This marriage was contracted in 11 Of). Agnes, daughter of William 
VIII., count of Poitiers, was not a widow. She had been divorced in 
1080, on account of consanguinity, from Alphonso VI., king of L6on, 
Castille, and Galicia, to whom she was married in 1074. 



A.D. 1101.] EOBERT CURTHOSE PEETENDS TO THE CROWN. 277 

Ch. XVIII. The Norman harons in England form a league in 
favour of Robert Curihose — He crosses the channel, and 
claims the crown — Treaty between him and Henry I. — 
Flamhard committed to the toioer — Escapes — His career in 
Normandy — Death of Gilbert Maminot, bishop of Lisieux 
— And affairs of that see. 

In the year of oiir Lord 1101, great disturbances broke 
out in England and Normandy. The turbulent barons, 
dreading the firmness of King Henry, and preferring the 
inactive government of the imbecile Duke Robert, which 
gave them licence for their malpractices, began to entertain 
treasonable designs, and invited him to equip a fleet and 
cross over to England. Eobert de Belesme and his two 
brothers, Eoger of Poitiers^ and Arnulph,^ together with 
William de Warrenne, earl of Surry ,^ Walter GrifFard,* Ivo de 
Grantmesnil,^ and Eobert Eitz-Ilbert,^ and several others 
were parties to the league, and aided the duke's cause, at 

' Roger de Montgomery, sometimes called earl of Lancaster, third son 
of Mabel and Roger de Montgomery, received the surname of the Poitevin 
on account of the vast domains he possessed in Poitou in right of his wife 
Almodis. 

' Arnulph de Montgomery, castellan, not earl, of Pembroke, as the 
French writers call him, was the fourth son of Mabel and Roger. 

'* William de Warrenne, earl of Surrey, the second of that name. 

* Walter GifFard, second of the name, and earl of Buckingham; he 
died the year following, as we shall presently find. 

* Ivo de Grantmesnil was one of the Funambules at Antioch, see before, 
pp. 128, 129. 

^ Robert, son of Tlbert de Laci, who held the castle of Pontefract in 
Yorkshire, and sixty-three other manors, most of them in the same 
county. This Robert de Laci founded at Pontefract a priory of the order 
of Cluni, in v^hich he placed monks from the celebrated abbey of La 
Charite-sur-Loire. In the charter of foundation he mentions his father 
Ilbert and his mother Havise. — Mon. Angl. i. 648. 

Ilbert de de Laci and his mother Havise were owners of Bois I'Ev^que, 
near Darnetal. Emma de Laci, when she took the veil at St. Amand of 
Rouen, some time before the year 1069, gave to that abbey twenty-two 
acres of land in Boos on Mount Mainart, probably Mount Main, which 
the abbess sold to a monk of La Trinit^-du-Mont. 

In 1080 Enguerrard, son of Hilbert (probably Ilbert de Laci), gave to 
the Trinite-du-Mont two thirds of the tithes of Bois I'Eveque. This 
Enguerrard was apparently a great person, as his signature precedes that of 
the count of Morton. There is great reason to believe that he was a son, 
hitherto unknown, of Ilbert de Laci. For the genealogy of this family in 
England, see Monastic. Anglican,, p. 859. 



278 OEDERTCUS TITALIS. [b.X. CH.XYIII. 

first in secret, but afterwards openly. The weak duke, 
instead ' of guarding his own dominions, imprudently 
hazarded and lost them, led away by his ambition for a 
crown which his abler brother firmly wore. 

The duke at this time granted to E/obert de Belesm.e the 
bishopric of Seez,^ with the castle of Argentan and the 
forest of GroufFern ; and to Theobald Paganus the castle of 
Gisors," because on one occasion he had found an asylum 
with him. He also made large presents from his treasury 
to other lords, and promised if he became king far more 
than he could perform. As, also, he did not give up the 
society of harlots and buffoons, but shamefully encou- 
raged them, he so wasted his means, that, in spite of 
the wealth of his wide duchy, he w^as often penniless, and so 
much in want of clothes that he lay in bed till twelve o'clock, 
and could not go to church to hear mass, because he had 
nothing to wear; for the idle scamps and loose women 
with whom he was constantly surrounded, knowing his 
weakness, frequently robbed him with impunity of his 
breeches, hose, and other articles of dress. In him was 
fulfilled the saying of a wise man : 

Who waste their wealth at liome must emigrate.^ 

' By the bishopric of Seez must be understood not the ecclesiastical 
revenues of that see, but the possession of and feudal rights over the country- 
dependent on it, better known as the Hiemois. 

- The castle of Gisors had been erected by William Rufus on the 
domain of that place belonging to the archbishop of Rouen. Theobald 
(Tibaud) Paganus held the fief of Gisors and that of Neaufle under the 
archbishop ut casamcnlum. This kind of tenure seems to have been a sort of 
stewardship, at least in its origin, and applied particularly to church lands. 

Although the family of Paganus was ancient and distinguished, and had 
been for several generations in possession of Neaufle and Gisors, there was 
the greater imprudence in the duke's granting him the royal castle of 
William Rufus, the key of Normandy on this side, because the domains, 
the connections, the sympathies, and even the pious foundations of these 
lords of the castle of Gisors, were all on the other side of the Epte. In a 
word, it was a family of the French Vexin transplanted to Gisors, without 
ever taking root there. All these considerations were set aside for the 
sake of recompensing an act of hospitality. This was consistent with the 
character of Robert Curthose, but it was paying the bill for his entertain- 
ment a little too dear. 

^ The text is a rhyming hexameter verse: 

" Qui sua demergunt, hi post extrania pergunt." 



A.D. 1101.] THE BARONS TAKE DIFFEREXT SIDES. 279 

The Norman barons, holding cheap their own duke, and 
disposed to favour the cause of the king of England, 
resolved on transferring to him the duchy of Normandy, 
and sent frequent messengers to rouse his ambition to this 
point. Thus both parties were depraved by growing treason, 
and, faithless to their sovereigns, engaged in conspiracies to 
their injury. Some, breaking into open insurrection, flew 
to arms against their loyal neighbours, and stained their 
country's fertile soil with ravages, flames, and cruel slaugh- 
ters. The venerable Archbishop Anselm, and all the bishops 
and abbots, with the clergy and the w^hole English people, 
adhered firmly to their own prince, and prayed without 
ceasing to the Lord of Sabaoth for the safety of their king 
and the stability of his throne.^ Eobert de Mellent also, 
and many other loyal and prudent barons, maintained their 
fealty to their lord, and supported him with their forces and 
their counsels. 

Ranulph Elambard, bishop of Durham,^ was the chief 

1 It was quite natural for the Norman barons, who were daily witnesses 
of the disorderly conduct and follies of Robert Curthose, to have 
more sympathy for King Henry, whose yoke, as yet easy even to his own 
subjects, could not be so heavy on them as on their neighbours over the 
sea. But the clergy on both sides the Manche were devoted to Henry, 
whose more regular habits and respectful conduct to the church gave no 
offence to public decency. There was a still more powerful motive for the 
ecclesiastics' predilection for the king ; it was the severity with which he 
administered justice and maintained order in his states, the protection he 
gave tor their persons, their property, and their revenues, against the 
rapacity of the nobility and soldiery. In consequence of this, the English 
barons in his reign complained of their straitened resources, and were 
anxious for a government which, less firm, would allow them to pillage and 
extort money at their own pleasure. 

^ For the character of this bishop, see vol. ii. pp. 466, 467. Historians are 
not agreed either as to the Christian or surname (or rather the nick-name) 
of this person. He is called Radulfus, Randulfus, and Ranulfus, probably 
three forms of the same name, and Flambard, or Passeflabere. At first 
he had been dean of the college of Twineham in Hampshire, but having 
quarrelled with the bishop, entered the service of William Rufus, becom- 
ing his chaplain as early as 1088, at which time the king made him abbot 
of Winchester. The year following, on the death of archbishop Lanfranc, 
he was appointed to administer the revenues of that see, and in 1091, 
those of the see of Lincoln and abbey of Chertsey were added to his 
charge. In 1097, the number of bishoprics and abbeys entrusted to hia 
administration for the king's profit was sixteen, " which," say the Annals 
of Winton, "he reduced to extreme poverty . . . both the clergy and 
laitv were in such distress that they were weary of their lives." Ranulf 



28^0 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [e.X. CH.XTIII. 

instigator of this mad enterprise. He was a man of low 
origin, v/ho, by his flatteries and crafty policy, had so crept 
into the favour of William Eufus, that he was raised by 
that king above all the nobles of the realm. Being made 
lord high treasurer and justiciary, he brought on himself 
the hatred and fear of numbers of the king's subjects, by 
the cruel severities with which he performed his functions. 
Amassing wealth and enlarging his property in all quarters, 
he became enormously rich, and was advanced to the epis- 
copacy, although he was very illiterate, not for his piety, 
but for his worldly power. But as all earthly prosperity is 
of short duration, on the death of his patron. King William, 
the bishop was thrown into prison by the new king as an 
inveterate robber of his country. Tor the many injuries he 
had inflicted on Henry himself and the other children of 
the soil, both rich and poor, by which he had in various ways 
heaped constant troubles upon them, he was, thanks to 
divine providence which changed the current of affairs, 
hurled from his proud elevation,^ and committed to the cus- 
tody of AVilliam de Magnaville,^ to be confined in fetters in 
the tower of London. But, as Ovid says, speaking of 
Daedalus : — • 

" The wits misfortune happens, . ."^ 

held at the same time the offices of justiciary and treasurer. He was 
named to the bishopric of Durham by William Rufua on Whitsunday, 
May 24, 1099, and consecrated the Sunday following, ^ 

^ Historians are not agreed respecting the exact date of Kanulf's 
imprisonment, varying it between the 8th and 18th of September. 

^ This person belonged to the family of Magneville, or Mande\ille, 
afterwards earls of Essex. He appears as witness to a charter of Geoffrey 
de Magneville in favour of the priory of Hurley. His name occurs imme- 
diately after that of Lasceline, wife of Geoffrey, from whence it may be 
supposed that he was her brother. See Mon. Anglican, i. p. 363. It is 
not known from what place the numerous branches of the Norman family 
of Mandeville, Magneville, or Manneville sprung, but it is certain that it 
was not from Magneville near Valognes, which was then the property of 
the lords of Briquebec. It is also known that their Norman estates lay 
partly in the neighbourhood of Creuli (from whence M. Delisle places 
them at Mandeville le Trevi^res), and the rest round Argentan, where at 
a later period they held the honour of Chamboi given to William de 
Magneville, nephew of the person here named, by Philip d'Alsace, count 
of Flanders, who possessed it in right of his wife Isabel de Vermandois, 
heiress of the counties of the Vexin and Amiens, which were the gift of 
Duke Richard II. with Elbeuf on the Seine. 

' " Ingeuium mala sa^pe nionenl." 



A.D. 1101.] FLAMBAED ESCAPES FROM THE TOWEE. 281 

the crafty prelate contrived his release from prison, effecting 
his liberation by the adroit use of his friend's assistance. 
Indeed, he had great ability and fluency of speech, and 
although he was cruel and passionate, such was his genero- 
sity and constant good humour, that he rendered himself a 
general favourite, and was even beloved. By the king's 
command, he was allowed every day two shillings for his 
diet while in confinement, so that, with the assistance of 
his friends, he fared sumptuously for a prisoner, and kept 
daily a splendid table for himself and his keepers. One 
day a cord was brought to the bishop in a flagon of wine, 
and, causing a plentiful banquet to be served, the guards 
having partaken of it in his company, washed it down with 
Falernian cups in the highest spirits. Having intoxicated 
them to such a degree that they slept soundly, the bishop 
secured the cord to a mullion in the centre of the tower 
window, and, catching up his pastoral staff, began to lower 
himself by means of the cord. But, now, having forgotten 
to put on gloves, his hands were excoriated to the bone by 
the rough cord, and as it did not reach the ground, the 
portly bishop fell, and being much bruised, groaned piteously. 
Faithful friends and tried followers were waiting at the 
foot of the tower, where they had swift horses in readiness 
for him, though they were in great terror.^ Having mounted 
on horseback with them, they fled with the utmost speed, 
and escorted by his trusty companions, who had charge of' 
his treasure, he lost no time in hastening on shipboard, and, 
crossing over to Normandy, presented himself to Duke 
Eobert. 

riambard's mother, who was a sorceress, and had frequent 
conferences with the devil, in the course of which accursed 
familiarity she lost an eye, was sailing to Normandy in 
another ship with her son's treasure, and during the voyage 
was often exposed to the derision of the crew by her hellish 
incantations. Meanwhile, meeting with pirates on the 
passage, the ship was plundered of all the treasure, and the 
sorceress, half-naked and very sorrowful, with the guards 
and steersmen, was set on shore on the coast of Normandy. 
The fugitive bishop, being received with welcome, was 
entrusted with the government of the duchy ; and, as far as 

Ranulf made his escape either on the 1st or 4th of February, 1101 ; 
it is not certain which. 



282 OEDEEICTJS VITALIS. [b.X. Cn.XYIII. 

his indolence permitted, Eobert availed himself of his 
counsels. His principal object M-as to rouse the duke to 
engage in hostilities with his brother, using all his'efforts to 
exasperate him against the king. He pointed out the best 
mode of securing the crown of England, and promised him 
his aid under all circumstances. 

At leDgth, during the autumn, Robert passed the Straits, 
and landing in England, and being well received by the 
illustrious and powerful persons who had joined the league 
and were expecting him, made preparations for war with 
the king. His fleet was vastly inferior to that with which 
his father had invaded England, and he landed at Ports- 
mouth,^ more by the contrivance of the traitorous conspira- 
tors, than by the strength of his armament. The duke was 
immediately conducted by those peers of the realm who had 
already done homage to him into the province of "Winchester, 
where he fixed his quarters, and, at the instance of the 
disaffected barons, challenged his brother to battle, unless he 
chose to abdicate his throne. Many of the nobles who had 
hitherto kept appearances with the king, welcomed the duke 
on his landing, and augmented his army with their troops.'^ 
Thus Eobert de Belesme, William, earl of Surrey, and 
several more, deserted from the king's standard; while 
many others, that they might find pretexts for leaving him, 
preferred unjust demands, threatening that they would 

^ Robert Curthose embarked at Treport, and landed at Portsmouth the 
1st of August. King Henry expected him in the neighbourhood of 
Hastings, that part of the coast being the point of a regular course of 
navigation, but the duke deranged his combinations by landing at Ports- 
mouth, from which place he marched towards Winchester. 

' The English were much embarrassed in deciding to which of the two 
brothers they should give the preference. Henry had in their eyes two 
great advantages, that of having married the heiress of the line of their 
Anglo-Saxon kings, and that of having been born after the Conquest, and 
of being consequently what the Greeks of the Lower Empire called 
Porphyrogenites. But the people of England had not yet recovered from 
the terror of the Norman arms which the battle of Hastings had inspired. 
Henry was compelled to have the English troops often arranged in his own 
presence, and to teach them himself military exercises and the use of 
arms to give them some degree of confidence on the field of battle. The 
Norman lords, indignant at all these attentions to the sympathies and 
wants of a conquered race, called Henry in derision Godric, and his wife 
Goddith, or Godiva. 



A.D. 1101.] DEATH OP HUGH LUPUS. 283 

abandon his cause unless their pretensions were satisfied. 
On the other hand Eobert de Mellent, Eichard de Eevieres, 
and many other stout barons, rallied round their king. The 
people of England, to a man, repudiating the claims of the 
other prince, were firm in their loyalty to their native king, 
and demanded to be led to battle for him. 

Meanwhile, Hugh, earl of Chester, took to his bed, and, 
after a long illness, having taken the monastic habit in the 
abbey founded by himself at Chester, died in the course of 
three days, on the sixth of the calends of August [July 27].^ 
His son Eichard, a young man of handsome person, his 
only child, by Ermentrudo, daughter of Hugh de Claremont, 
succeeded to the earldom, which he held for nearly twelve 
years, beloved by all. He married Matilda, daughter of 
Stephen, count de Blois, by Adele, sister of King Henry, 
but they both unhappily perished in the wreck of the 
Blanche-Neuf, on the seventh of the calends of December 
[JSTovember 27], as will be hereafter fully related.^ 

The earl of Mellent, observing the plots and defection of 
his countrymen, and endeavouring to keep his fealty to his 
friend and sovereign, in adversity as well as prosperity, 
reflected secretly with much acuteness on the state of 
aflairs, and used every exertion that the settlement of the 
crown should not be shaken. He therefore said to the king : 
" Every honest and just m.an, when he sees his friend in 
distress, ought, if he wishes to have his faithfulness believed, 
to employ all his efi^orts to succour that friend in time of 
need. In doing this, he should look less to the future 
reward of his services than to the means in his power for 
rendering aid. But we see many persons acting quite other- 
wise, and staining their honour by a shameful breach of the 

' Hugh Lupus, viscount of Avranches and earl of Chester, who has been 
80 often mentioned before, had brouglit St. Anselm to England in 1092 to 
restore the ancient monastery of St. Werburgh at Chester, in which he 
substituted Benedictine monks for the regular canons who had before 
occupied it. See Monast. Anglic, i. 199. His wife was daughter of Hugh, 
count de Clermont in Beauvoisis, and of Margaret de Rouci. 

^ Richard, earl of Chester, son of Hugh Lupus, married Matilda of 
Blois, niece of Henry I., and perished with her in the shipwreck of the 
Blanche'-Neufy after enjoying his hereditary honours, not twelve, but nine- 
teen years. 



284 OEDEEICUS TTTALIS. [b.X. CH.XVIII. 

fealty they have pledged to their lord. Doubtless, this is 
clear enough, and it causes us the most poignant inward 
pain. We, however, to whom the care of the commonwealth 
is divinely committed, ought to look well to the safety of 
the realm and the church of God. It should be our chief 
concern, that, by Grod's grace, we may live in peace, gain 
the victory without the effusion of Christian blood, and that 
the loyal people may live in the enjoyment of a state of 
tranquillity. Now, then, my lord king, listen to my advice, 
and condescend to follow my counsels. Speak graciously to 
all your knights ; caress them as a father does his children ; 
soothe them with promises, granting their requests, and in 
this manner adroitly conciliate the attachment of all your 
adherents. If they should even ask for London or York, 
do not hesitate to make magnificent promises, befitting a 
royal liberality. It is better to give away a small portion of 
the kingdom, than, by making a number of enemies, to lose 
both victory and life. When, however, we get happily to 
the end of this aflfair, by God's help, useful advice can be 
given as to reclaiming the domains which treasonable 
deserters may have usurped during the war. It is certain 
that whoever voluntarily deserts his lord when in peril of 
his life, and attaches himself to another for love of gain, or 
makes a market to his king of the military service which he 
is bound to give freely for the defence of the realm, and 
attempts to rob him of his royal domains, should in the 
eyes of justice and equity be considered a traitor, and, 
incurring the forfeiture of his hereditary estates, be driven 
into exile." ^ 

All the great men who were present approved the earl's 
discourse and advised the king to follow his advice. Henry, 
who was endowed with great sagacity, thanked his faithful 
counsellors and fully acquiesced in their prudent recom- 
mendation. He therefore conciliated by promises and gifts 
many of the lords whose fidelity was suspected. At length, 
he advanced with a powerful army to meet his brother, 
sending envoys to him with instructions to demand dis- 

^ Although it is impossible to vouch for the authenticity of this discourse, 
its tenor is quite in harmony with what we know of the very relaxed 
notions of honour entertained both by Robert de Meilcnt and his sovereign. 



TEEMS BETWEEN HEIfRT I. ATfD EOBEET CTIETHOSE. 285 

tinctly for what reason he dared to enter England at the head 
of armed troops. Eobert sent the following answer by his 
own messengers : " I have come to the kingdom of my father, 
in company with my barons, to claim it as my own by right 
of primo-geniture." 

The two brothers pitched their camps near each other for 
some days on a certain level tract,^ and interchanged 
messengers by noble envoys. The turbulent traitors 
desired war rather than peace, and looking more to their 
private advantage than the public good, their wily emissaries 
perverted the words of the princes, and promoted strife 
rather than concord between the brothers. The wise 
Henry soon discovered this, and in consequence sought a 
conference with his brother face to face, and on their meet- 
ing both felt the gentle influence of brotherly affection. 
Their numerous troops formed a magnificent circle round 
them, displaying the terrible but brilliant spectacle of the 
Normans and English under arms. The two brothers met 
unattended in the centre and conversed together in the 
presence of the troops, and while all eyes were fixed upon 
them, they gave free vent to the thoughts of their hearts 
by words of sincerity. After a short conversation they 
embraced each other with loving kisses, and were reconciled 
without reserve. I cannot insert here the words used at 
this conference, not having been present at it, but I have 
learnt from what I heard the results of this meeting of the 
illustrious brothers. 

Imprimis, Duke Eobert renounced the claim which he had 
preferred to the crown of England in favour of his brother, 
and released him, in consideration of his royal dignity, from 
the homage he had paid him a long while before. On his 
part, King Henry engaged to pay his brother yearly three 
thousand pounds sterling, and ceded to him the whole 
county of Coutances and all his other possessions in Nor- 
mandy, except Damfront. He retained the castle of Dam- 
front only, because he had pledged his oath to the people 

^ According to Wace, whose authority is somewhat doubtful, the two 
brothers met in a forest district called Hantone (Hampton), probably near 
Hampton Court. It may be that Robert Curthose marched in this direction 
in consequence of having learnt that his sister-in-law had not recovered 
from the effects of childbirth at Winchester, at which city it was hia 
original design to take up his position. 



286 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.X. CH. XVIII. 

there, when they gave him admission, never to let the place 
pass out of his own hands, nor to change their laws and 
customs. The brothers agreed on the articles of their 
treaty without the intervention of any umpires, and, in the 
sight of all those who formed the circle round them and 
beheld them with admiration, resolved that they would 
mutually aid each other as brothers should, that they would 
recover all the territories possessed by their father, and would 
punish on both sides, those who had infamously sown 
dissension between them.^ 

Peace being thus concluded, the traitors were covered 
with confusion, and became contemptible even to those on 
whom they had lavished their flatteries, being compelled in 
disgrace and pale with fear to fly from the presence of the 
king. The loyal commons, devoted to their honest labours, 
were clamorous with joy, and the armed troops w'ere dis- 
banded by the king's licence and returned rejoicing to their 
respective abodes. The whole realm of England enjoyed 
the still delight of renewed tranquillity, and the church of 
God, flourishing during a long season of repose, exhibited 
the beauty of the divine law, and rendered its service to God 
in security, undisturbed by the clash of arms. 

The truth of oiu- account is evidenced by the number of 
new churches and chantries recently erected in the villages 
of England, as well as by the cloistered buildings of the 
abbeys and other monastic ofiices constructed during King 
Henry's reign. Eor all the religious orders, being in the 
enjoyment of peace and prosperity, rivalled each other in 
manifesting their zeal in all that belongs to the worship of 
the omnipotent Deity, both internally and externally. In 
the fervour of their devotion the faithful undertook to demo- 
lish the temples and habitations that they might substitute 
for them edifices on a better scale. The buildings which 
were erected in the times of Edgar, Edward, and other Chris- 
tian kings, were therefore levelled to the ground, that they 
might be succeeded by others, larger and loftier, and of more 
elegant architecture, to the Creator's glory. 

* Ordericus omits mentioning what might have proved the most import- 
ant article in this treaty to the interests of Robert Curthose, the provision 
that " the survivor of the two brothers should be heir to the other, dying 
without issue." Henry of Huntingdon, p. 240; Bohn's Antiq. Lib. 



A.D. 1101.] DEATH OF GILBERT ilAMINOT. 287 

Duke Robert spent two months with his brother the 
king, and then, as winter approached, returned to Normandy 
loaded with royal gifts, and taking with him William de 
A¥arrenne and several others who had been disinherited for 
their share in his enterprise. 

A short time afterwards Gilbert, surnamed Maminot,^ the 
bishop of Lisieux ^ died in the month of August at an 
advanced age, upon which Fulcher, the brother of Flambard 
was consecrated bishop of that see by William the archbishop 
in the month of June. Being almost illiterate, he had to 
thank his brother's interest for pushing him forward from 
attendance at court to become a bishop. However his mu- 
nificence was commendable ; and having filled the see only 
seven months, he died in January following. Then Ealph 
Elambard, who lived in Normandy, a banished man, and was 
deprived of his bishopric of Durham by the king's hatred of 
him, obtained the see of Lisieux for his son Thomas a mere 
child, governing it himself for three years, not as a bishop 
but as a provost. Meanwhile William de Paci bought the 

* Gilbert Maminot, bishop ot Lisieux, has been often mentioned in the 
preceding history. See in particular, vol. ii. pp. 121, 402, and this vol. 
p. 62, with the note. 

It appears from one of these passages that he was son of a brave knight, 
Robert de Courbepine, near Bernai. We find Ralph de Courbepine 
settled in Kent soon after the Conquest, and having a lawsuit with 
Archbishop Lanfranc before Hugh de Montford, respecting lands in the 
Isle of Thanet. 

Besides persons of the name of Courbepine, there were some of the name 
of Maminot in England after the Conquest. Walkelin Maminot, in parti- 
cular, restored to the monks of Shrewsbury a farm which had been 
unjustly taken from them by Hamon Peverel, his uncle. 

2 According to the obituary of Lisieux, Fulcher died the 29th of Janu- 
ary, no2. 

' Presses. When Ranulf got possession of the bishopric of Lisieux in 
the name of his son Thomas, he stipulated that in case of that son's death 
he should be replaced by one of his other children. This scandal only 
lasted three years, at the end of which the duke, on the remonstrances of 
the archbishop of Jlouen and the neighbouring bishops, resolved at last to 
put an end to it. Still the see of Lisieux did not yet find the end of its 
misfortunes, nor escape from the toils of Ranulf. William, archdeacon of 
Lisieux, was at first elected bishop; a good choice, but the archbishop was 
suspended from his functions, and none of the suffragans would undertake 
to perform them. Upon this, Ranulf presented one of his clerks named 
William de Paci, who was rejected for simony. After the battle of Tin- 
chebrai, Hervey, bishop of Bangor, v/ished to exchange his see for that of 



288 OKDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.XIX. 

bisliopric for a large sum of money paid to the count, but 
being condemned for his simony, first at Eouen and afterwards 
at Rome, he paid dearly for his presumption. Thus Lisieux 
was without a guide for nearly five years, and the Lord's flock, 
having no worthy pastor, became a prey to ravening wolves, 
till God's mercy sent John to be its bishop for the consola- 
tion of the faithful. 

Ch. XIX. The second Crusade — Nohles wTio joined it — Ste- 
'pJien, count de JBlois, ivlio Tiad deserted from the first 
— Arrival at Constantinople — Duplicity of the emperor 
Alexius — Failure of the expedition. 

Payotjrable intelligence having been received respecting 
the illustrious champions who had undertaken the pilgrim- 
age and gloriously triumphed in the east, fighting against 
the Gentiles in Christ's name, the nobles of the west were 
envious of their invincible valour and unexpected success. 
In consequence numbers were inspired with zeal to become 
pilgrims, and visiting the tomb of our Lord and the holy 
places, exercise their valour and skill in arms y gainst the 
Turks. Many were compelled to the crusade by the terrors 
of the apostolical censure, for Pope Paschal had excommuni- 
cated and cut off" from the Christian privileges all those who, 
having voluntarily taken the cross, had returned witliout 
accomplishing their enterprise, unless they engaged a second 
time in the journey they had relinquished, and making satis- 
faction to God religiously performed their vows. 

In the year, therefore, of our Lord 1101, William, duke or 
Poitiers,^ collected a large army from Aquitaine and Gascouy, 
and commenced with spirit his journey to Jerusalem. lie 
was bold and brave and so facetious that even comic players 
could not equal the variety of his numerous jokes. It is 
reported that three hundred thousand armed men marched 
under his standard when he crossed the borders of Aquitaine. 

Lisieux. In short, this church, as our author states, was not restored to a 
state of repose till the election of John, archdeacon of Seez, in 1107. 

*• William, the seventh of that name, as count of Poitiers, and the ninth 
as duke of Aquitaine, born the 22nd of September, 1071, was a nobleman 
of the most depraved habits, both before and Sifter his pilgrimage to the 
Holy Land. We are told that he bore on his shield the portrait of the wife 
of one of his viscounts with whom he was in love, and that he had the impu- 
dence to found an abbey of loose women. 



A.D. 1101.] THE SECOND CRUSADE. 289 

Stepben count palatine of Elois, received reproaches with- 
out end, and was scouted by all the world, for having igno- 
miniously withdawn from the siege of Antioch, and deserted 
his gallant companions in arms, when they were suffering mar- 
tyrdom for the cause of Christ.^ Being frequently reproved 
by a variety of persons for this conduct, Stephen was com- 
pelled both by fear and shame to undertake a fresh crusade. 
Among others his wife Adele often urged him to it, remind- 
ing him of it even amidst the endearments of conjugal 
caresses. " Far be it from you, my lord," she said, "to submit 
any longer to the jibes you receive from all quarters. Pluck 
up the courage for which you were renowned in your youth, 
and take arms in a noble cause for the salvation of thousands, 
so that Christians may have good reason to exult in all parts 
of the world, to the terror of the pagans and the public 
humiliation of their detestable religion." 

This was the sort of language that clever and spirited 
woman often addressed to her husband. He certainly had 
already sufficiently experienced the perils and difficulties of 
the enterprise to make him shrink from undergoing such 
toils again. At length however he took courage, and putting 
himself on his march at the head of many thousand French, 
persevered, against most formidable obstacles, until he 
reached the tomb of our Lord. At that time Hirpin ^ sold 
the city of Bourges to Philip king of France, and joined 
the crusade with Joscelin de Courtenai,' and Milo de Brai.* 

Meanwhile, Duke Stephen,^ Stephen count of the Saone,^ 

* As to the ignominious desertion of the count de Blois during the siege 
of Antioch, see before p. 133. 

* Eudes Hirpin, son of Humbaud, lord of Dun, was viscount of Boiir^'cs 
in right of his wife Mahaud, daughter of Gillon de Sulli, mentioned betbre 
p. 230. Having been taken prisoner at Ramla, he owed his deliverance to 
the intervention of the emperor Alexius, as related in cc. xxii. and xxiii. 
of the present book. He finished his days at Cluni, where he had made 
his profession of a monk, in 1 109. 

' Joscelin de Courtenai, second of that name, and the second son of 
Joscelin I., remained in the Holy Land, where he became count of Edessa. 

*■ Milo de Brai joined the first crusade, and died in it, so that he could 
not have been engaged in the second; and Milo, his second son, was too 
yoimg at this time to be the person of whom our author meant to speak. 

^ The duke of Burgundy, who went to the Holy Land in 1101, was not 
named Stephen, but Eudes. 

^ It is supposed that the person described by our author under the title 

TOL. III. V 



290 OEDEEICTJS VITALIS. [b.X.CH.XIX. 

and anotlier Stephen who was son of E-iehelde,^ hastened to 
assume the cross in company with a great body of the war- 
riors of Burgundy. Likewise, the archbishop of Milan and 
Albert de Blandrai, the most powerful of the Italian 
nobles,'' put themselves en route for Jerusalem with Ligu- 
rian troops. All these crusaders, having undertaken the 
pilgrimage for the love of God, on reaching Macedonia sent 
envoys to the emperor Alexius demanding a free passage 
through his dominions and the liberty of marketing for 
supplies. 

The crafty emperor was greatly alarmed when he heard of 
the approach of so powerful a Western army, and prudently 
flattered their pride by readily granting all that they re- 
quired. Having had frequent experience of the daring valour 
of the Cisalpine troops under Gruiscard and Bohemond, 
he took every precaution against giving the crusaders 
umbrage and provoking hostilities. For this reason he 
granted them a free passage through his territories and 
liberally acquiesced in all the demands they made. After 
loading the chiefs with munificent presents, he caused the 
whole army to be conducted in safety as far as Cappadocia, 
which is beyond Constantinople. There they mustered all 
the "Western people, and found that the force amounted to 
fifty thousand fighting men. 

Having consulted well-informed persons on the route they 
were to take, they took precautions for avoiding the dangers 
it presented. These imminent perils were the subject of their 

of Comes super- Saonensis, was Stephen, uncle and guardian of William II., 
who assumed the title of count of Burgundy during the minority of his 
ward. 

* This vague designation has not led to the discovery of any information 
respecting the Burgundian noble. 

2 Ordericus makes use of too strong an expression when he calls this 
crusader the most powerful of the Italian nobles. He was the first count 
on record of Biandrati, a small town three leagues and a half west of Ver- 
celli, and two and a half west of Novarra. All that is known concerning 
him is that he was one of the negociators between the emperor and Pope 
Paschal II., and went as our author states to the Holy Land, from 
which he soon returned. He was dead before 1 120, a time when his wife 
Poma or Roma, and his son Guy, who was yet in the cradle, figure in an 
historical poem entitled, Mediolanensium in Comenses Bellum. Guy 
married a daughter of William IV., marquis of Montserrat. See Mura- 
tori, Scriptores rcnim lialicarum, t. v. 



A.D. IIOJ, 1102.] DIFFICULTIES OF THE CEUSADERS. 291 

consultations, and they talked of them among each other in 
such language as the following : " Thus far we have been in 
security, having had to do with our brethren with whose 
habits and language we are familiar. From the hour we 
left our own homes till the present we have travelled through 
Christian countries where we have been well received for 
the love of the Eather Almighty. Now a different lot 
awaits us. The storm of war is fiercely raging between the 
emperor and Bohemond who commands at Antioch. The 
regions which we have to traverse are a waste, through 
which the Turks make frequent irruptions towards the sea- 
coast, breathing slaughter on all who bear the Christian name 
as naturally as wolves thirst for the blood of the flocks. Let us 
humbly implore Almighty God to protect us in the great dan- 
gers which surround us on every side. We leave in our rear 
this faithless emperor and his people, with great reason to 
suspect them of treachery. On our right is the sea in which 
lie Crete, Cyprus, the far-famed Ehodes, and many other 
islands, all which owe allegiance to the emperor, and detest 
us for the misconduct of those of oiu" countrymen who have 
preceeded us. To the east and north, the country is occu- 
pied to the extremity of the globe by barbarous nations who 
are inflamed with insatiable ardour to shed Christian blood. 
The march to Antioch will take more than thirty days, 
through deserts in which we shall find no means of subsist- 
ence as the fertile spots have been left uncultivated in con- 
sequence of the long wars between the emperor and Bohe- 
mond. Environed by so many perils, what are we to do ? 
All is desolation around." 

At length^ the duke of Poitiers, having listened with atten- 
tion to the various opinions which were offered, said to the 
council : " Let us despatch envoys to the emperor with our 
unanimous request that he will send us the count of 
St. Giles with our Saviour's holy spear ; for he will lead us 
in safety through these unknown countries to the tomb of 
our Lord. The count has great wisdom, and his influence is 
powerful ; in the first expedition he was considered on all 
occasions as one of the most distinguished of the crusaders. 

^ Many of our author's details connected with this cnisade are fabulous, 
commencing with this paragraph. 

u2 



292 OEDEEICTJS VITALIS. [b.IX. CH. XV. 

His personal knowledge of tlie difficulties of the march will 
supply our inexperience, and his proved valour has been 
long known both to Christians and Pagans. If we have him 
at our head as our Maro^ and counsellor, we shall obtain 
security with respect to the emperor, and he will take wise 
precautions against the infidels." 

Envoys were accordingly dispatched by common consent, 
who with much eloquence laid before the emperor the object 
of their mission ; and after listening to the message of the 
Italian chiefs, he reported it without delay to Count Ray- 
mond. His reply was as follows : " By Grod's grace, through 
many perils, I devoted all my powers to the recovery of 
Jerusalem ; but now, feeling the burden of years and im- 
paired by my exertions, I wish to spend the rest of my days 
in tranquillity. Eor this purpose, my lord emperor, I 
sought an asylum at the court of your majesty. Excuse 
me then, I pray you, and do not force me to engage in 
another expedition." The emperor then communicated his 
reply to the ambassadors : " I have entreated," he said, " the 
court of St. Giles to join your company, but he alleges that 
his age and infirmities will not allow him to take part in the 
enterprise. Gro forward, relying on peace with us. As to 
the illustrious count who has placed himself under the pro- 
tection of our majesty, I cannot send him away, for I have 
not the right to do so." 

The envoys immediately returned and reported what they 
had heard. As it caused great perturbation, and the chiefs 
vented their thoughts in various murmurs, William of 
Poitiers thus addressed them : " Let us instantly fly to arms 
and, by a counter march, lay siege to Constantinople ; and 
stoutly assaulting the city, we wiU not draw ofl* till we either 
put to death this perfidious emperor, or wring from him, 
however reluctantly, what we demand. He has brought 
destruction on thousands of the faithful by his treacheries, 
and I think therefore that he who by any means shall take 
the life of one whose occupation of the country is the cause 
of so much loss, will ofter a sacrifice acceptable to God." 

Stephen of Blois and some other lords who were for tempe- 

* Virgil. In the middle age this poet was considered as a powerful 
CTiclianter. In this instance his name is used in the sense of guide or 
counsellor. 



A.D. 1101, 1102.] CONSTANTINOPLE ASSAULTED. 293 

rate counsels did not acquiesce in this proposal, wbich they 
joined in opposing, alleging arguments founded on right 
reason. However, the Aquitanians and Gascons, with other 
insubordinate troops, preferring to be led by juvenile 
imprudence, supported the rash proposal of the young duke. 
They therefore returned by a hasty march, and sat down 
before Byzantium for three days. The emperor, when he first 
heard of their design, was disposed to treat it lightly, con- 
sidering the vast population of his capital, and that it was 
fortified by triple lines of circumvallation. But finding that 
they persisted in their enterprise, he commanded three 
most savage lions and seven leopards to be let loose in the 
area between the two exterior walls. He also posted guards 
on the third w all, to which the palaces of the nobles in the 
interior of the place adjoined, and caused the gates to be 
firmly closed, thinking thus, in scorn, to deter the Franks 
from their attack through fear of the wild beasts, and defend 
the imperial city without employing human means. But 
the crafty wiles of man are fruitless when they are not 
aided by Divine Providence. The Franks, after standing to 
arms in their camp, seeing that there was no show of resist- 
ance, entered the outer gate eager for conflict, and searched 
with enquiring eyes on aU sides for the defenders of their 
country. However, no sooner had they entered than the 
fierce lions unexpectedly attacked their foremost ranks with 
great rage, and tearing them with their fangs and claws, 
severely wounded some of the troops, unaccustomed as they 
were to encounter wild beasts.^ 

But such a contest with the skill of man could not last 
long. The soldiers transfixed the lions with spears and 
darts, and having destroyed the lions, drove oft' the leopards, 
pursuing them to the foot of the middle wall, which the 
leopards crossed, creeping up them like cats. The Franks 
passed through the gate in this second wall, and made a 
bold assault on the third. The citizens now raised loud 
cries, and there was horrible confusion, all the people run-' 
ning together and not knowing what they should do in this 

* We find Ordericus occasionally unscrupulous in the use of the mate- 
rials he collected from all quarters for his vast undertaking, particularly in 
his account of the crusades. This story of the lions, has the appearance of 
having been the invention of some ignorant pilgrim or wandering minstrel. 



2d4i OEDEEICTTS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.XIX. 

sudden emergency. The emperor hearing the noise of this 
unexpected attack was struck with terror, lamenting the. 
failure of his false hopes. At last he sent a suppliant 
message to the noble pilgrims, and contriving to soothe their 
wrath by a variety of promises, induced them to draw off from 
the assault of his capital, the defence of which they were on 
the point of carrying by storm. 

"While the victorious Franks returned to their tents, the 
sorrowful emperor summoned the count of Tholouse to his 
presence, and in his grief and utter dismay thus addressed 
him : " Illustrious count, I have recourse to you in great 
tribulation and ask your advice, what is to be done in this 
most unexpected disaster. The insolence of the Franks 
has led them to make an audacious attack on the imperial 
city, the capital of the East. They have violated the dig- 
nity of the holy empire and reduced me to become a 
suppliant to prevent the worst. They have shed the blood 
of my faithful subjects, and provoked the wrath of Divine 
Providence. The imperial majesty, which used to give laws 
both to the natives and foreigners, is now, alas ! compelled 
to submit to conditions imposed by insolent pilgrims." 
Count Baymond replied : " My countrymen are well prac- 
tised in such assaults, and I well know their fierce attacks 
under such circumstances against their own neighbours. 
Your majesty's wisdom does not require the aid of long 
explanations. Ton must lose no time in making terms with 
this daring host. The public interest requires it ; but, if I 
mistake not, it will cost the lives of many of them. These 
audacious Gascons demand that I shall join their expedition, 
they would insolently make me a pilgrim whether I am 
willing or not. 

" They'll rue the day they urged the rash design."* 

I deeply grieve, mighty emperor, the affront offered to the 
holy empire ; but at present I will not give utterance to 
all that is passing in my mind. A time for vengeance will 
come when these miscreants will have to expiate their out- 
rageous offence. Behold, the walls of Constantinople are 
reeking with the blood of her sons ; a spectacle which, shame 
to say, we have now before our eyes." 

' Non xmpune ferent, ausis quod lalibus hcerent. 



A.D. 1102.] DEFEAT OF THE CUTJSADEKS. 295 

Sach was the nature of tlie conference between the 
emperor and the count, and thej contrived measures by 
which they would avenge themselves on the enemy for the 
annoyance they had caused. Alexius made choice of illus- 
trious envoys, and sent them to the Franks to guarantee 
his engagements by their oaths, and convey humble sup- 
plications that the army would peaceably withdraw and wait 
for the arrival of the count in Cappadocia with twenty 
thousand Turcopoles. Having received the promise of 
the emperor ratified on oath, the Franks withdrew, and 
rested for a while, preparing for their march. The count 
followed them a few days afterwards, and the emperor 
despatched, ships loaded with tartarons, and commanded them 
to be distributed among all the troops in the army according 
to their order and rank. The Thracians call tartarons the 
square copper coins which the inhabitants of Thrace and 
Bithynia use in traffic like philips or bezants. The needy 
pilgrims received with eagerness the emperor's bounty, not 
suspecting the perfidy and deep policy of that worst of 
traitors. The crafty spy by this contrivance counted their 
force, reckoning the numbers of the receivers by the sum of 
money he gave to each. He then sent an account of their 
numerical force to Daliman, Soliman, and the rest of the 
Turkish chiefs, exhorting them to assemble the whole 
strength of paganism and attack them in Paphlagonia. 

Our countrymen, not suspecting any fraud, and exulting 
at being joined by the count, commenced their march with 
the Turcopoles in the van, who were acquainted with the 
language and manners of the Gretes, as weU as the roads ; 
but the Franks were led astray, and after wandering about 
and surmounting great difficulties, reached a large city of 
the barbarians called Gandras. In short, they left entirely 
on their right the road leading through Eomania and Syria 
to Jerusalem, and turned aside through Pontus, formerly the 
kingdom of Mithridates, who ruled over twenty kings, until 
at length, marching northward, they entered Paphlagonia. 
I am not sufficiently informed whether the count of St. Griles 
thus deviated from the direct road by mistake, or whether 
he led his allies astray vindictively to satisfy his malice. 
The Christians having crossed a rough country, with dan- 
gerous rivers and imperviable forests, and at last arrived at 



29G OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.X. CH.XIX. 

Gandras after a three weeks' journey, they resolved to rest 
there for a time after their great fatigues. Then, however, 
a multitude of Pagans, innumerable as the sands of the sea, 
fell on them when they little expected it, and weary as they 
were with severe toil. The barbarians, on their side, brought 
with them their wives, their flocks and herds, and dragged 
along great stores of wealth in waggons, in order to guard 
carefully the mass of their substance m person, and display- 
ing their riches to their enemies as well as their friends 
and countrymen, strike terror into all who witnessed their 
abundance ; and, in short, to show that whether at home or at 
war they revelled in all kind of delights. Meanwhile the 
Christians, although exhausted by hunger and thirst and 
other privations, when they began to be pressed by the 
enemy's attack, forgot their past sufferings, and flying to 
arms with renewed strength and courage, formed their 
ranks, and fought manfully in the name of God for five 
days. As pilgrims worthy of credit have informed me, there 
were assembled fifty thousand Christians, and they were 
fiercely attacked, if I mistake not, by a million of pagans. 
The conflict was maintained with the utmost vigour on both 
sides, and many thousands fell. On the fifth day, the Turks 
finding their squdrons weakened, and utterly dismayed at 
the invincible courage of the Christians, received general 
orders to direct their wives, who remained in their tents, 
with the eunuchs and other domestics who had the care of 
the valuables belonging to the chiefs, to privately pack all 
their household effects, and the rest of the wealth, so that they 
might be prepared for a hasty retreat from the presence of 
the enemy the ensuing night. The Christians, however, 
not having discovered that the Turkish troops were giving 
way, shamefully retreated themselves ; for night coming on, 
count Raymond with the imperial Turcopoles and provincial 
troops, fell to the rear, and commenced their flight stealthily 
without communicating with the other chiefs. The count's 
squire, finding this, struck his lord's pavilion, in compas- 
sionate consideration for the Christian army, that the com- 
rades he had betrayed might learn his flight. Albert de 
Blandrai, a very brave knight, was slain in the battle, with 
many thousand of the Franks, but I am not informed of the 
exact number. 



A.D. 1102.] FLIGHT OE THE CRUSADEllS. 297 

The duke of Poitiers and Stephen of Blois, and several 
other chiefs, with their followers, being apprised of the 
treacherous retreat of their comrades, were seized with a 
panic, and losing all command of themselves, thought only 
of escaping by various roads. Meanwhile, the Turks, 
although they had been so nearly overpowered that they were 
meditating flight themselves, finding that the Franks were 
departed, regained their courage, and pursuing the enemy 
fell on their rear and cut down many thousands of the 
fugitives. Some of them who were in the prime of youth 
were carried off" into captivity ; nearly forty thousand Chris- 
tians suffered bodily death. May they live spiritually iu 
eternal rest with Christ, in whose cause they fell ! ^ 

The count of Tholouse, with his own followers, and the 
Turcopoles continued their flight to Constantinople, and 
reported the lamentable disaster of the Christians to the 
emperor's great satisfaction. Moreover, Daliman and Soli- 
man and the other chiefs of the hostile race triumphed in 
the pomp of victory and restored to Alexius the whole 
amount of tartarons which he had perfidiously distributed 
among the Christians under colour of charity, besides send- 
ing him one half of all the booty they had taken from their 
defeated enemies. Such was the agreement which that false 
traitor had made with the Turks, and such the terms on 
which he sold the faithful to the infidels ; and he gloried 
in his cunning as he recovered the vast sum of tartarons, 
the price of his treachery. 

The illustrious dukes of Aquitaine and Burgundy and 
other brave knights made their escape from the slaughter, 
and concealed themselves in dens and caverns and thick 
woods as opportunity ofiered. In those regions Syrians 
and Armenians dwelt among the barbarians, their habi- 
tations being scattered through the country, and were under 
subjection to the Turks, paying an annual tribute to pur- 
chase peace and security ; but although tried by persecutions 
like gold in the furnace, they zealously adhered to the Chris- 
tian faith. In consequence, deeply deploring the defeat 

* The detaik of this narrative of the rout and extermination of the Chris- 
tian army, are imaginary, and merit no attention ; the foundation only is 
true. Count Raymond, who only advanced to Tortosa, had already left 
the crusaders, and thus accidentally escaped sharing their disaster. 



298 OEDEEicus YiTALis. [e.x. cn.xix. 

sustained by tbe crusaders, and sympathizing in their 
sufferings, as brothers, they lent them all the services of 
humanity as far as fear of their infidel tyrants permitted. 
Concealing the fugitives in their secret retreats, and supply- 
ing them with food, they took advantage of the darkness of 
the night to put them on the road to Antioch, conducting 
them in safety to the territories of neighbours and country- 
men in whom they could trust. Many were dragged into 
captivity by the barbarians among unknown countries, and 
retained for some time in servitude or bonds among a people 
whose language they did not understand. There, serving 
the most High God aright, they experienced his mercy, and 
were succoured by him in various ways, like the Israelites 
among the Assyrians or Chaldeans. In consequence, many 
returned from captivity either by making their escape or by 
permission of the princes in Persia and other nations. 

AVith the assistance of the merciful Creator, who is near 
to all who love him, about a hundred thousand of the 
Christians accomplished their escape, some of whom retraced 
their steps through Illyrium and others pursued their journey 
surrounded by alarms and difiGiCulties. The duke of Poitiers 
who left the Limousin at the head of three hundred thousand 
armed men, and had struck terror into the emperor by his 
too daring assault of Constantinople, with great difficulty 
reached Antioch, with only six companions, and reduced to 
poverty and want. Other chiefs of the crusaders, and gallant 
counts and officers lost all their troops, and, separated from 
their attached followers and stripped of their wealth, were 
exposed to utter desolation in the midst of barbarism. 
Beanimated, however, by their consistancy in the true faith 
and their love of the merciful Jesus, they hastened to his 
tomb, and although, in the mysterious providence of God 
they were retarded by many obstacles, yet, with hearts 
cheered by the spiritual nectar, they shrunk from no toils on 
their pilgrimage to the holy places, to become partakers in 
blood with the blessed martyrs, who having shed it for Christ 
are crowned with the laurels of triumph in the heavens. 



GODFREY AND BALDWIN KINGS OF JERUSALEM. 299 

Ch. XX. Death of Godfrei/, king of Jerusalem — He is suc- 
ceeded hjj Baldwin — Stephen of Blois arrives at Jerusalem 
— The duke of Poitiers returns to France. 

Godfrey, king of Jerusalem, reigned only two years,^ 
during which he was ahnost always in arms against the 
Philistines, and sustained by his great courage enlarged the 
boundaries of his kingdom. The native Grentiles observed 
a doubtful peace in their towns and villages, and did not 
even dare to whisper in public a word against the Christians. 
But, filled with sorrow, they secretly plotted the ruin of 
their new lords, watching cunningly for an opportunity of 
effecting their purpose. At last the citizens of Joppa con- 
trived to poison King Godfrey^ during his abode there, and 
thus cut off that glorious prince to the great sorrow of the 
Christians. He was the first Christian prince, from the 
time of our Saviour's suffering on our behalf at Jerusalem, 
who wore a diadem there, to the praise of him who, for the 
salvation of men, condescended to wear a crown of thorns ; 
being compelled by ecclesiastical election to accept the title 
of King of Jerusalem,^ that he might be a terror to the 
Gentiles. Having perished in the manner I described, 
measures were immediately taken for appointing a successor. 
The king's death was announced to his brother Baldwin, 
and he was invited to accept the crown of Jerusalem in the 
place of Godfrey. Entrusting without loss of time the 
government of his principality to his cousin Baldwin de 
Burg,^ he himself traversed hostile countries and barbarous 
tribes with the speed of lightning. At Sarepta, a city of 
tbe Sidonians, he encountered a host of nearly forty thou- 
sand pagans, and charging them manfully at the head of a 
small number of troops, they were miraculously struck with 

» That is from the 25th of June, 1099, to the 17th of July, 1100. 

* This charge is quite gratuitous. Godfrey was labouring under severe 
illness when he arrived at Joppa, insomuch that he could not any longer 
ride on horseback. 

- Our author makes here another grave mistake. It is well known that 
Godfrey expressly refused to assume the title of king, or to wear a crown 
or any of her ensigns of royal dignity in the city where our Saviour wore a 
crown of thornr.. It is difficult to say what Ordericus means by '* ecclesi- 
astical election." Godfrey owed his elevation to the choice of the brave 
chiefs of the crusaders. 

* Baldwin de Burg, second son of Hugh, count de Retel. 



800 OEDEBICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.XX. 

panic, and Baldwin, by God's help, put them all to flight, 
and continued his journey to Jerusalem in triumph. The 
Turks, apprized of his approach, had posted their troops 
under arms in an ambuscade on his road, promising them- 
selves signal success; but their ill-founded hopes were 
foiled, and those who were able to escape returned to their 
homes in confusion, with loss and disgrace. 

The prince of whom I am speaking, being well received 
by the people of Jerusalem, ascended the throne of David, 
and maintained himself on it with vigour for nearly twelve 
years.^ Baldwin was personally handsome, of lofty stature, 
distinguished for daring courage, indefatigable in the most 
toilsome enterprises, well imbued with learning, an accom- 
plished speaker, and endowed with many virtues. During 
his reign, Stephen of Blois and the other chiefs of whom I 
have spoken, arrived at Jerusalem after many disasters, and 
were honourably received by King Baldwin and Ebremar 
the patriarch.^ The duke of Poitiers, having performed his 
devotions at the holy places, returned to his own states with 
some of his company, and being of a cheerful and witty 
turn, when afterwards he was restored to a state of pros- 
perity he made the sufferings he had undergone during his 
captivity a subject for amusement among kings, and nobles, 
and Christian assemblies, descanting on them in rhyming 
verses to merry tunes. On the contrary, Stephen of Blois 
and several other crusaders remained in Judea for the love 
of Christ, resolved to consecrate their strength and valour 
to his service, waiting for the attack of the king of Babylon, 
who, they learnt, was on his march at the head of an innu- 
merable army. 

* Baldwin was crowned on Christfeas-day, 1100. He died the 7th of 
April, 1118, and consequently not in the twelfth but the eighteenth year 
of his reign. Our author's accounts of affairs in the Holy Land are not 
very exact. It is probable that in the preceding paragraph he alludes 
to the victory gained by Baldwin over the Egyptians between Ascalon and 
Ram la. 

* Ebremar, an ecclesiastic of worthy conduct, but extremely ignorant, 
was elected patriarch in 1103, after Daimbert, who was always engaged in 
quarrels with Baldwin, had retired to Antioch. When Stephen of Blois, 
who died at the battle of Ramla, May 27, 1102, came to Jerusalem, 
Daimbert, not Ebremar, must have been patriarch. 



A.D. 1102.] SIEGE OF EAMLA. 301 

Ch. XXI. — Wars of King Baldwin — The crusaders lesieged 
in Ramla — Baldwin escapes to Jerusalem. 

Intelligence being received that there was no doubt the 
emir^ of Babylon had reached Ascalon, and was resolved to 
attack the Christians the next day with a large force, King 
Baldwin, and Stephen, and the rest of the faithful encou- 
raged each other in the Lord Jesus, and devoutly armed 
themselves in his name either for a glorious victory or fatal 
end. Part of the army was detached to Joppa, while the 
king and most of the nobles marched to Ramla, being averse 
to be shut up in Jerusalem, and not knowing what place the 
Turks would first attack. At last the emir, by a sudden 
movement, invested Eamla with an immense force, assault- 
ing the walls with missile weapons and various engines of 
war, and endeavouring to sap them by trenching and 
mining. There were some brave knights in the place, but 
their numbers were small, and their strength was not suffi- 
cient to resist such vast numbers. In consequence, Stephen 
and Harpin, and William Sans-Avoir,^ with some others, 
persuaded the king to depart for Jerusalem with the utmost 
despatch. " Hasten," they said, "brave king, to return to 
the holy city, lest it should be beset by this immense army 
while it has no protector, and the mother and her children 
perish by a sudden assault. "We are here blockaded in a 
similar manner, and expect assuredly that our end is at 
hand in the confession of Christ, imploring our Creator 
from the depth of our hearts that we may become his true 
martyrs, and being cleansed from all our sins by shedding 
our iDlood in his name, be admitted in company with the 
saints to behold his face beaming with mercy on ourselves. 
Farewell, good king; sally forth without delay, although 
the passage through such hosts of fierce enemies is perilous, 
unless you are attended by God's mercy." 

The anxious barons, addressing the king in these words 
and others of the same kind, compelled him to escape from 
one danger by incurring another still greater. Godfrey 

^ Admirabilis ; a curious perversion of the oriental title. 

' Mentioned before, p. 75, with his uncle Walter de Poisji, anl his 
three brothers, Walter, Simon, an^ Matthew. William and Simon fell in 
the battle of Ramla. 



302 OEDEEICFS TITALIS. [b.X. CH.XXI. 

with great reluctance submitted to tlie advice of tliese 
renowned warriors, and mounting a swift and powerful 
mare, called Farise,^ he left Ramla in the night, and attended 
bj a single trooper, by the protection of God passed through 
the enemy's troops unmolested. He had got beyond the 
camp while it was still dark, and was making his way 
towards Jerusalem by by-patlis when the sentinels who were 
on the watch, finding that some strange soldiers had passed, 
gave the alarm, and rousing the troops, pursued the fugi- 
tives for two miles with cries and yells. The king, however, 
being well acquainted with the by-roads, by God's help, 
made his escape unhurt, although with the utmost diffi- 
culty ; for he was obliged to leave in his alarm the 
mountain track to Jerusalem on which he had entered, and 
by crossing some precipitous heights with great toil, reached 
a town called Arsur,^ where he found the guards watching 
in great trepidation. He immediately addressed them, and 
begged them to admit him, but met with a repulse ; for the 
warders, although he repeated, " I am Baldwin — you have 
nothing to fear; admit me among you," were so terrified 
at the various stratagems practised by the enemy that they 
would not believe him until they had kindled a fire on the 
walls, and on his taking off" his helmet his features were recog- 
nized. They then opened the gate with joy, and entering 
the place, he encouraged the garrison, and telling them the 
state of afiairs, exhorted them to defend the place. 

The king then mounted his gazelle,^ and with his fellow 
soldiers rode with all speed to Joppa. Being well known 
there, the townsmen admitted him without hesitation, and 
he communicated to them the disastrous state of affairs. 
" Countless hordes of pagans," he said, " are besieging 
E-amla, and the garrison are in danger of their lives from 
the desperate assaults. That illustrious warrior Stephen, 
count palatine of Blois, Milo de Brai, Harpin de Bourges, 
William Sans-Avoir, and Simon his brother, with other 
brave knights, are devoting themselves to martyrdom at 

' An Arab mare, celebrated for its speed, to which Baldwin owed liis 
safety on several occasions. He called her his gazelle. 

^ A town on the coast, between Cesarea and Joppa, which was one of 
Godfrey's first conquests. ^ 

* See preceding note. 



A.D. 1102.] THE INFIDELS DEFEATED AT JOPPA. 303 

Kamla, having compelled me to leave them that I may 
encourage you and the rest of our brethren to follow their 
example. The enemy has pursued me boldly, and I think 
will determine on following me here. Now, if you please, 
we will despatch a messenger to Jerusalem, with my com- 
mands to the patriarch and all our brothers to succour us 
in this extremity in such fitting manner as I shall instruct 
them." This proposal meeting with general approbation, 
the king summoned a squire of distinguished intrepidity and 
said to him : " Dear brother, go to Jerusalem, and bring us 
a strong party of our brothers in arms, and if you escape 
with your life I wiU dub you a knight on your return." 
The squire executed his commission with perfect success, 
and well earned the honour of knighthood which was pro- 
mised him. 

The accursed army of pagans laid Eamla in ruins, putting 
to the sword, or making captives, all whom they found in the 
place. Then, elated with victory, they marched the same 
day to Joppa, covering the face of the earth like locusts, 
having sent Count Stephen and others they reckoned the 
noblest of the prisoners to Ascalon. The infidels silently 
beset Joppa for two days, but the third they retired with 
loss and disgrace. Por the sentinels on the watch-tower at 
Joppa descried the standards of the army of Jerusalem 
crossing the mountains, and announced it with congratula- 
tions to the king, who was near at hand in the castle of 
the Burgundians. Then the king assembled the band of 
the faithful and cheered them by this encouraging address : 
" Now is the wished-for opportunity of brave aspirants to 
honour, and renowned knights ready to avenge those who 
are dear to them, but it fills with dismay the cowards and 
sluggards, and those who are crafty as foxes. You see 
before your gates that accursed race which is hateful to God 
and all Christian men. Arm yourselves, then, ye brave, and 
go forth gloriously to attack the enemies of all goodness. 
Let us put on our armour that we may take vengeance in 
the name of G-od, and sally out to meet our friends who are 
marching to our aid, and strong in the faith give* the enemy 
battle under God's protection. Eeflect in your inmost 
souls on the wrongs and losses you have sustained, and let 
the aliens feel the weight of your arms in full vigour. They 



30 i OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.XXI. 

have put to the sword Count Stephen, Harpin, and other 
noble barons, and have carried off our gallant knights and 
officers ; barons, I say with sorrow, than whom braver are 
not to be found in the world. Let your fresh grief at the 
loss ot your friends inflame your rage and sharpen your 
swords for the destruction of the enemy. Think of David, 
that most valiant of kings, and his soldiers, of Joab and 
Abishai, of Banaiah and tlriah the Ethite, of Jonathan and 
Judas Maccabseus, and other famous warriors of your own 
nation. Marching out of the town, we will commence the 
action, and the Jerusalem troops who are hastening to our 
support, will fall on the aliens^ in another quarter. May 
the mighty Emanuel, the blessed virgin's son, your king 
and leader, the invincible defender of his church, be with 
you."^^ 

Meanwhile, as the Jerusalemites drew near the castle of 
Ernald, their standards became visible to the Turkish army. 
Then King Baldwin and the troops of Joppa adored the holy 
crucifix, and carrying it in their ranks, sallied forth in full 
armour, and began to deal terrible blows on the unarmed 
Turks. The aliens, who were taken by surprise and in dis- 
array, seeing themselves attacked on all sides, and inspired 
with terror by God himself, betook themselves to flight, as 
did also the troops of Holofernes in the like extremity. King 
Baldwin, with the Christians, pursued the gentiles as far as 
Ascalon, and falling on their rear with great slaughter, reco- 
vered all the captives who were threatened with bondage. 
But the most eminent, having been sent forward to xlscalon, 
disappeared, nor could any certain intelligence be obtained 
respecting any of them, except Harpin. Thus the Christians 
triumphed in Christ's name, after their deep tribulations, 
and returned, with the vast spoils of the infidels to Jerusa- 
lem, giving glad thanks to their triumphant Grod. They 
now restored Ramla to a better state than before, and re- 
established there an episcopal see with fitting revenues. I 
cannot commit to writing the number of the slain, as I was 
not present. Those who were in the battle thought more of 
slaying than counting their enemies, and were afterwards 
intent on stripping the dead." 

* AUdphilos. See the note in p. 178 of the present volume. 

' This narrative contains several inexact statements and anachronisms. 



A.D. 1102.] HARriTf OF BOUllGES LIBERATED. 305 

Ch. XXIT. TJie emperor Alexius delivers Harpin ofBourges 
from captimtif at Babylon — Harpin returris to France and 
becomes a monk of Cluni. 

Haepi:n" of Bourges was carried captive to Babylon, and 
imprisoned for a long time in the emir's dungeons. Mind- 
ful of the martvrs who had endured all kinds of tortures, 
even to death, for the cause of Christ, he frequently called 
on his name, and receiving consolation, regained his liberty 
and returned hearty thanks to his Saviour. He obtained 
his release in the following manner. Some Byzantine mer- 
chants had come to Babylon with commodities of various 
kinds, and according to the law of nations, having paid to 
the government officers the accustomed duties, abode there 
for some time. They being Christians, and very affluent, 
frequented the Christian churches, went among the poor in 
their own dwellings, and visited the Christians in prison. 
Harpin conversed with them, and charging them with his 
commission, sent the following message to the emperor 
Alexius : " Harpin of Bourges, your servant, who has long 
groaned in the depth of misery in a Babylonian dungeon, 
humbly supplicates the magnificence of your imperial 
majesty to pity and relieve him, by interfering with the emir 
for his release from prison." 

On receiving this message, the emperor felt compassion 
for the noble Frenchman, and immediately insisted on the 
emir's sending Hirpin to him, threatening in case of refusal 
to arrest all the Babylonian merchants and tributaries 
through the empire of Constantinople. The emir, terrified 
at this indignant command, immediately freed Harpin from 
his chains, and, entertaining him for several days in his 
palace, showed him some rare objects, and then sent him to 
the emperor, honoured by valuable ornaments and other 
gifts. Having thus obtained his freedom, he went to the 

For instance, it was not in Ramla that Harpin was made prisoner, but in 
the battle fought in that neighbourhood. Stephen of Blois was killed in 
the same battle, not carried into captivity. The infidels did not undertake 
the siege of Joppa the same day they took Ramla. They were only pre- 
paring for it when Baldwin gained a signal victory in the beginning of 
July. Our author's hibtory of these events is well founded, but the details 
require correction. 

TOL. III. X 



306 ORDEKICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH.XXII. 

emperor's court to thank him for his effectual aid; and, 
having been loaded with presents, returned to Trance. 

On the way he presented himself to Pope Paschal, and 
after relating to him his misfortunes and sufferings, consulted 
him in deep anxiety as to his future course of life. The 
bkilful pontiff, having listened to the knight's account of all 
he had endured, said : " Especial care should be taken lest 
any one who has been washed and purified in the bath, and 
then clothed in garments white as snow or delicate as silk, 
should walk in the darkness of night through foul roads, lest 
he stumble in the mire, and, being soiled with filth, should 
have to blush before all observers. In this mirror, my son, 
behold yourself, and apply this example for your own correc- 
tion. You have been cleansed by penance and confession ; 
your laborious pilgrimage and the suflerings of martyrdom 
have crowned you with the distinctions of virtue ; you have 
made satisfaction to Grod for your sins by the torments of 
your prison ; and, during your passion, you learned patience, 
chastity, and other Christian graces. The foul road is a 
worldly life, which you should resolutely endeavour to avoid, 
lest you become polluted, and lose the crown of the 
sufferings in which you glory. Take care, then, not to be 
as the dog returning to his vomit, and the sow that wallows 
in the mire. Never again bear arms against Christians, but 
despise worldly pride like one of the true poor in Christ. 
Thus, following the steps of Christ in works of righteous- 
ness, and relinquishing your own will for the hope of an 
eternal reward, you will obtain the blessed prize of your 
heavenly calling with the faithful in Abraham's bosom." 

Harpin, having received the pope's benediction, with his 
leave proceeded to Prance, where he was received by his 
friends with great honour ; but he did not long remain with 
them ; for, following the counsels of the pope, or rather the 
precepts of Christ himself, he gave up the world, and, 
retiring to Cluni, became a monk in that abbey, where he 
persevered in the service of Grod until his death." ^ 



• Our author's account of the deliverance of Harpin and his retirement to 
Chini, perfectly agrees with the existing facts of the history of that 
individual. We have already stated that he made his profession at Cluni 
in 1 109. 



A.D. 1100 — 1104.] liOHEMOND's CAPTITITT. 307 

Ch. XXIII. Boliemond and other crusaders carried into 
capiiinty at Babylon — Romantic account of their deliver- 
ance. 

About this period, other serious disasters befell the crusaders 
in Syria. The illustrious duke, Mark Bohemond, having 
undertaken an expedition against the Turks, Daliman^ 
attacked him by surprise with a vast multitude, and, putting 
great numbers of the Christians to the sword, made 
prisoners of Bohemond and Eobert de Principatu,^ with 
some other noble and gallant knights, whom he threw into a 
dungeon, and kept in chains for a long time.^ Tancred, the 
commander of Bohemond's troops, was much distressed 
when he learned the calamity of his lord and kinsman ; but 
he did not give way to a woman's weakness and content 
himself with vain regrets and lamentations. Assembling 
the whole force of the faithful from all the surrounding 
district, and placing vigilant garrisons in the villages and 
towns in the neighbourhood, he defended his borders against 
all the enemy's attacks while Bohemond was in captivity, 
and even nobly enlarged them. 

The emperor Alexius was fiUed with joy when he heard 
that Bohemond had fallen into the hands of the Turks, and 
sent envoys with rich presents to Daliman, entreating him 
to accept an enormous ransom for Bohemond, and to send 
him to Constantinople on payment of a hundred thousand 
philips.^ This he did, not with the intention of giving the 
duke his liberty, and allowing him the freedom to become 
again the defender of Christianity, but to subject him to 
perpetual imprisonment in his own dungeons ; for he was 
deeply vexed that he had taken Antioch from him. It is 

* The name should be written Danismand. 

^ A province in the kingdom of Naples, now divided into two, of which 
Salerno and Avellino are the chief towns. 

^ Bohemond and his cousin, Richard de Principatu, were on their way 
to relieve the Christian city of Melitene, now called Malathia, when they 
fell into the hands of the Turcoman emir, Danismand. They were kept 
in captivity four years, and there is no authentic account of the manner of 
their escaping from it, fnr the romantic legend preserved by our author 
cannot be considered as history. 

* This term is used before in p. 295. The philip was a gold coin 
bearing originally the effigy of Philip, king of Macedonia. There were 
albo silver and even copper coins bearing the same name. 

X 2 



308 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [e.X. CH. XXIII. 

certain that Antioch is the metropolis ^ of tlie Constantino- 
politan empire, but the Turks had wrested it from the 
emperor by force of arms fourteen years before the Cis- 
alpines reduced the city when Cassian was slain. That 
prince never abandoned his claims on it, but, in consequence 
of the resistance offered by the obstinate valour of the 
Normans, he w^as never able to accomplish his wishes. He 
made the attempt at different times and in various ways, 
using both entreaties and money, with the pagans as well as 
the Christians, but in vain ; for, foiled in all his endeavours, 
the city remained in the hands of the victors, those, I mean, 
who acquired it by their eminent valour in conquering the 
Agarenes, and having obtained it, defended it admirably by 
the help of Grod. However, Daliman rejected the emperor's 
overtures, and resolved to inflict perpetual captivity on 
Bohemond, who was called by the Turks, " The little God 
of the Christians." That which conferred so much honour 
on his own faith he counted as beyond all price. 

In the time of the Turks, a certain Grreek was patriarch 
of Antioch. The IS'orman conquerors found him intractable. ^ 
Having become masters, they resolved that the clergy and 
people should conform to the Latin rites, but the Greeks, 
adhering to their ancient usages, presumed to think this 
unreasonable. When Bohemond was made prisoner, a 
rumour was spread among the people that the bishop was 
contriving means for betraying the city of Antioch to the 
emperor. But when he learned that such reports were 
current against him, he was highly incensed, and, whether 
indignant from a clear conscience, or instigated by appre- 
hensions of being charged with so foul a transaction, I know 
not, he left his bishopric, and retired into the wilderness, 
determined never to return among a people whose usages he 
detested. The Normans, being then masters of the city, 

^ Our author probably means to say, one of the metropolitan cities. — 
Le Prevost. Might not however Antioch have been considered by the 
autlior the ecclesiastical metropolis of the east, as having been the seat 
of St. Peter ? 

^ This paragraph is inexact. John IV., the Greek patriarch of Con- 
stantinople, was naturally unwilling to conform to the usages of the Latin 
church, and, consequently, not being able to maintain a good understanding 
with the Franks when they became masters of Antioch, he retired to 
Constantinople two months afterwards. 



A.D. 1100 — 1101.] LATIN PATRIARCH OF ANTIOCH. 309 

rejoiced at the Grreek's abdication, and communicated to 
Boheniond in his prison the whole circumstances, asking his 
advice about the appointment of a successor to the patriarch. 
His commands were that Bernard of Provence/ who liad 
been chaplain to Adhemar, bishop of Puy, and was recom- 
mended by him as his intimate friend to Bohemond, another 
particular friend, should be translated from the see of Mas- 
chenia and raised to the patriarchate of Antioch. By the 
duke's order, therefore, the clergy and people elected Ber- 
nard, and seated their bishop in the chair of St. Peter the 
apostle. He was a man of learning, but when he became 
known to his flock, was much disliked, for he was both 
covetous, and, according to the character of the Goths from 
whom he descended," very austere. He ruled the church of 
God for a long period, retaining the government of his see 
to the age of decrepitude. In his time, as already stated 
and will be more fully related hereafter, the Christians in 
the East sufiered violent disasters. 

It was published throughout the world that Bohemond 
was in captivity among the pagans. All Christendom 
mourned for him, and even the pagans themselves paid him 
honours in his prison. The whole church offered prayers to 
God on his behalf, that he would deliver the captive from 
the hands of his enemies. But the merciful God, who 
created all things, while he knows how to chastise his 
servants with afflictions on account of their sins, is ready 
also to afford marvellous succour to those who humbly 
implore him. Abraham and Joseph experieuced this under 
Pharaoh, among the Egyptians ; Tobias and Eaguel under 
Salmonassar, Sennacherib, and Esarhaddon, among the 
Assyrians ; Daniel and the three children, with the other 
sons of the transmigration, under Nebuchadnosor and Evil- 
merodach, among the Chaldeans ; Esdras, and Nehemiah, and 
Mordecai, with his niece Esther, under Cyrus, Darius, and 

^ Bernard, chaplain of the bishop of Puy, was not a Provenf al, but a 
native of Valence in Dauphiny. It was two years after the retiiement of 
John IV. that he was summoned from his bishopric of Arthasium to 
succeed him as Latin patriarch of Antioch. He held that dignity until his 
death in 1 135: 

2 Our author makes Bernard a Goth, from having confounded Valence 
in Daupiiiny with Valence in Spain, and forgets that he has just described 
him as a Provenfal. 



310 OrvDERICUS YITALTS. [b.X. CH.XXITI. 

Artaxerxes, among the Persians and Medes. This also was 
happily felt by the apostles and other holy preachers, who 
frequently, on their first arrival in barbarous countries, were 
despised as aliens and mendicants, but soon afterwrads the 
splendour of their miracles and their words of thunder 
struck the natives with awe, and brought under the yoke of 
the divine law those who before were opposed to ail that is 
good. Thus He who said, " My Pather works hitherto, and 
I work," ^ recently visited in their prison his champions, of 
whom I speak in my writings for the information of pos- 
terity, and from admiration of the divine operations ; cheering 
them plenteously with the mellifluous nectar of his loving- 
kindness. Mortals have the scourge of sufferings inflicted 
on them for the sins of human infirmity, and are compelled, 
when punished by the divine rod, to implore in sorrow the 
mercy of their Maker. God, our King, who saves those 
who trust in him, listened with power to the prayers of his 
church, and succoured the captive duke and his companions 
by the address and assistance of his enemy's daughter ; as 
formerly he aided his suffering people by means of Judith, 
the courageous widow, when she cut off the head of the 
proud Holophernes at Bethulia. 

Melaz,- the daughter of Daliman, was a beautiful and 
accomplished princess, and possessed great power in all her 
father's house, having the command of abundant wealth and 
a number of slaves to do her will. Hearing of the bravery 
of the Franks, she conceived a high regard for them, and 
sought their intimacy so ardently, that, bribing the gaolers 
liberally, she frequently descended into their dungeons, and 
held acute discussions with the prisoners concerning the 

» John V. 17. 

2 It has been observed in a former note that we have no historical record 
of the mode in which Bohemond and his companions in captivity obtained 
their release, or effected their escape, after four years' imprisonment. Our 
author undertakes to give an account of it in the concluding pages of the 
present book. No one can for a moment attach the character of authen- 
ticity to the details of his narrative. As M. Guizot remarks in his intro- 
duction to the present work, Ordericus made collections from all quarters 
of traditions and adventures as well as facts, and we are not disposed to 
complain that among the stores of information gathered by his industry, 
lie has left us a very interesting specimen of the romance of the middle 
ages. 



A.D. 1100 — 1101.] LEGEND OF BOIIEMONd's llELEASE. 311 

Cliristiaa faith and the true religion, sometimes mingling 
deep sighs with the investigations she made. Their gentle 
and kind deportment placed them liigher in her affections 
than even her parents, and she took care to supply them 
with all that was needful for food and clothing. Meanwhile, 
her fiither, occupied by a multiplicity of other affairs, was 
either unconscious of what was going on, or, placing implicit 
confidence in the conduct of his beloved daughter, did not 
trouble himself about it. 

At the end of two years, a worse than civil war commenced 
between Daliman and his brother. Soliman, instigated by 
his fierce and ambitious temper, took arms against Daliman, 
and, assembling large bodies of troops, made an irruption 
into his brother's territories, and had the insolence to pro- 
voke him to battle. Daliman's indignation was roused by 
so unnatural an hostility; and, having obtained succour 
from all quarters, and being proud of his former victories, he 
was eager for the bloody conflict, and, as the day of battle 
drew near, pitched his camp ready for action. 

Meanwhile Melaz sought a private conference with the 
Christians, in which she thus addressed them : " I have long 
heard the chivalry of the Pranks celebrated, and now I wish 
to prove it in the hour of my father's deepest need, that 
experience may prove to the eyes what the ears have heard 
by report." Bohemond replied : " Sweet and honourable 
lady, if it be your highness' s pleasure that we should have 
permission to appear on the field of battle with our knightly 
arms, no doubt we shall show with sword and lance the 
force of such blows as Pranks deal, and make trial of them 
on your enemies before your eyes." The young princess 
then said : " Promise me, on your faith as Christians, that 
in the affair of which we treat, you will act in all things by 
my advice, and not venture to take any step contrary to my 
orders. Satisfy me of this by pledging your faith, and 
then I will not hesitate to open to you the secrets of my 
heart." 

Bohemond first gave the solemn engagement required, 
and all the others followed his example, promising all the 
princess enjoined. She then said, radiant with joy : " JSTow 
I have full confidence in you, because I believe you are 
true to your word, and will never violate your promise in 



312 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CH. XXIII. 

any manner. Succour mj father, who is now on the field, 
where he is on the point of engaging in battle, and hasten 
to lend him the aid of your valour. If success attend you, 
aa I trust it will, do not delay in pursuit of the fleeing 
enemy, but hasten back here with your arms, and do not 
disarm till I give you orders. Meanwhile, I will cause all 
the guards to descend from the highest floor of the tower 
to the lower gates, and to remain with me in the court as if 
they were waiting for you. When you return, and you hear 
me command them to bind you in in the fetters you wear, 
lay hands upon them stoutly, and without a moment's loss, 
seize them all and thrust them into the dungeon in 
your place. Eor myself, at this sight, I shall flee from you 
as if you were savage wolves. As to you, take posses- 
sion of the strongest tower, and hold it vigilantly until you 
have made suitable terms with my father. There are doors 
high up in the tower, through which you can come down 
into the palace by stone steps, and get possession of the whole 
wealth and all the apartments of my father. To make an 
end, should my parent be incensed against me for these my 
oflences, I beseech you, O friends, whom I love as my own 
soul, hasten, without loss of time, to my aid." 

Having said this, she armed the knights, and immediately 
led them forth. She had already corrupted and deceived the 
guards, and on giving them their instructions, spoke to them 
in the following manner : " I am overwhelmed with fears for 
my father, seeing that he is about to engage in battle with 
a host from many nations. He is so intrepid a warrior that 
he will not condescend to demand assistance from his cap- 
tives. But I would have you know that he has left it to my 
care and in my power to supply the Christians with arms 
and send them to the fight in aid of our troops. If, by 
their means the enemy is overcome, the honour and profit 
will belong to us, but if they fall pierced by hostile weapons 
we shall have nothing to lament in the loss of aliens, whose 
usages and ceremonies all the race of the Agarenes abhor." 

On hearing this, the guards cheerfully acquiesced in the 
proposal, and praised to the skies the forethought of their 
prudent lady. Thereupon she released the captives from 
their fetters, conducted them from their house of bondage, 
and having armed them, dismissed them to the combat. 



A.D. 1100 — 1101-.] LEGEND OF BOHEMONd's EELEASE. 313 

Finding the armies already sharply engaged, they shouted 
the war-cry of the Normans, Dieux aide^ with confidence, 
and the squadrons of Soliman, hearing their cries and deal- 
ing fearful blows, recoiled. There were some Christian 
'soldiers in his army, who, to their great joy, recognized 
Bohemond, the renowned chief, and deserting Soliman, 
attached themselves to the Catholics. 

Soliman had a son named Marciban, a presumptuous 
youth, who, hearing that Bohemond was on the field, chal- 
lenged him to battle by name, being ambitious of meeting 
him in single combat. At length they met in the presence 
of Daliman, and attacked each other fiercely ; but the Nor- 
man warrior brought the Turk to the ground, and drawing 
his sword, struck ofi" his head. Daliman shouting : " Hold, 
spare him, he is my nephew," the Christian hero, when 
he heard that, concealed his inward triumph under a sorrow- 
ful countenance, and said ironically : " Pardon me, my lord ; 
I did it in ignorance ; I took him for an enemy, instead of 
your nephew, and sacrificed his life to do your pleasure." 

After great slaughter on both sides, the army of Soliman 
was defeated, and a body of the enemy pursued them the 
whole of the day. The Christians immediately returned, as 
it was agreed, and found the princess with the guards wait- 
ing for them at the entrance of the tower. On seeing them 
coming, she said to the gaolers : " It is plain that the Franks 
are true to their word, and keep the faith they pledge 
unbroken: go to them as they enter, receive their arms, 
and take them back to their former prison, until my father, 
on his arrival, shall confer on them the rewards they merit 
for their service in the battle." The Turks left their lady 
to do her bidding, but the Franks closed on them, and 
making them prisoners, thrust them into the dungeon, and 
closely barring the doors, seized possession of the whole 
interior of the tower without making any public disturb- 
ance, becoming masters of the place without efi*usion of 
blood. Indeed, the city was left defenceless, as all the men 
had gone out to the battle ; and only the women and chil- 
dren remained trembling to keep the houses. There was a 
vaulted chamber in the principal tower in which a large 

^ DiEX AYE, "God be our help," the war-cry of the Normans, which 
Bohemond preserved as well as the red ensign of his Scandinavian auceaors. 



314 OIIDETIICUS YITALIS. [e.X. CH.XXIH. 

treasure, with valuable effects and mucli wealth, was pre- 
served, and the palace of the king was connected with the 
tower. 

The night following, Melaz introduced the Christians into 
the palace bj the entrance from the tower, showing them 
all the chambers and secret recesses, and instructing them 
what they w^ere to do on Daliman's arrival. lieturning the 
next day, with his satraps, and captains, and great men, his 
daughter met him, accompanied by her young companions, 
with lively joy : " Welcome," she said, " O glorious con- 
queror." But the king replied: "Hold your peace, aban- 
doned girl ; I care not for your perfidious congratulations. 
I despise your deceitful flatteries. By the sacred turban of 
JMahomet, who has given me the victory, you and your 
champions shall die to-morrow ; you, who have put arms 
into the hands of my adversaries to my utter confusion 
shall be burnt in the flames with them as a most abominable 
traitress." The king had not yet learnt that the guards of 
his citadel were fettered in its dark dungeon, nor that the 
Franks, exultiug in freedom, had possession of the upper 
floor, and with Christ's aid were preparing to attack him. 
The young princess fled, trembling and pale, from his fury, 
and sought the concealment of her chamber in grief and 
alarm. 

Some hours afterwards the incensed prince seated himself 
on his tribunal, having no one with him but his principal 
nobles, the rest of his people, with his squires and guards 
being dispersed at their several lodgings and occupied about 
their horses, arms, and other equipments. Having com- 
manded some of the attendants to go to the private apart- 
ments, and bring before him the presumptuous traitress, 
in obedience to the summons she stood alone before the exas- 
perated tyrant, and heard his terrible threats and reproaches 
without any to help her. Meanwhile, Bohemond, looking 
through a window in the tower which commanded the inte- 
rior of the palace, and observing his deliverer standing in 
her desolation before the seat of judgment, exclaimed in 
deep distress: " Lo, our protrectress is in extreme peril; it 
is tim^e that we should issue forth and aid her with our 
utmost efiJ'orts." No time was lost in descending by the 
btaircase, step by step, into the palace, and Pahman with 



A.D. 1100 1101.] LEGEND OF BOHEMOKD's RELEASE. 315 

his officers and courtiers found themselves suddenly sur- 
rounded by the armed Franks, who securely closed the 
doors of the building, and took possession of all the defences 
round it. All parties were in a state of extreme anxiety, not 
knowing what it was best to do. As for the Turks, they 
had no means of escape, as the doors were securely closed*; 
they could not hide themselves as they were surrounded by 
men with drawn swords ; unarmed and few, they were unable 
to resist a number of valiant men well supplied with arms. 
It was in the power of the Christians at that moment to 
massacre all the Gentiles, but they did not dare to lift a 
hand against any one or do him any injury without the 
young princess's orders, in consequence of the oath they 
had given her. They, therefore, all looked to her, waiting 
her commands as they avoided forfeiting their pledge. 

At last Melaz, begining to find herself in security, said 
to her father, laughing : "My dear father, your anger against 
me is unjust; you frighten me with terrible threats, and 
overwhelm me with reproaches for the timely succour which, 
in my great regard, I adroitly provided for you in your hour 
of need; for the Franks having taking arms, joined you in 
the battle, your side was strengthened and your enemies 
were sooner routed. Consider how honourably these Chris- 
tians have acted. They loyally supported you in the battle, 
and the enemy gave way before their attacks. They had 
abundant opportunities of making their escape, as even the 
purblind can see, but, being unwilling to depart without 
taking leave they voluntarily returned here, and confidently 
expect from your liberality the rewards they have earned by 
their courage in the field. At this instant their hands are 
on their sword-hilts, and if they chose they would massacre 
all of us in a moment. They are masters of the citadel and the 
palace, and all your treasures contained in them are at their 
mercy ; your guards are in fetters and dare not mutter a 
w-ord against them. In these circumstances, my father, con- 
sider what yon have to do, and consult the councillors I see 
about you." 

Having said this, the princess placed herself at the head 
of the Christians. Meanwhile, Daliman drew aside and took 
the opinion of his friends. He then resumed his seat and said, 
"We wish first, daughter, to hear what you propose." Her 



316 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.X. CH. XXIII. 

reply was this: "I shall not hesitate to suggest what I think 
is the best course; make peace with the Christians, and pre- 
serve it inviolably as long as you live. Release all the 
captives of that religion throughout your dominions, and let 
them in turn liberate all your subjects who are in their 
power. Confer on Boliemond and his comrades, by whose 
aid you have gained a glorious victory, the rewards they 
merit for their distinguished service. For myself, know that 
I am become a Christian, and desire to receive the sacrament 
of regeneration according to the Christian rites, nor shall I 
longer abide with you. The faith of the Christians is holy 
and pure, while yours is full of vanity, and polluted with all 
uncleanness." 

This language greatly irritated the Turks, who exhibited 
their anger by stern glances and menacing gestures, but were 
divinely withheld from giving vent to the malice of their im- 
pious minds by acts of violence. AVhile they Avere consulting 
together on what was to be done, Melaz calling the Chris- 
tians apart, thus addressed them : "Courage, brave knights, 
proved in many difficulties and trials ! You who have come 
voluntarily from distant countries, and by your persevering 
valour have escaped such perils, act firmly in the name of 
your God whom you call Almighty. Xow is the time to 
shew your courage and use your arms, that what you have 
begun boldly you may carry into eft'ect in a manner worthy 
of yourselves. My father is greatly incensed against us, 
and is contriving with his friends, to the utmost of his power, 
the means for our destruction. Thus far you have strictly 
observed the conditions I required. I now release you from 
the promise to which you solemnly pledged your faith. 
It is time for you to man the citadel and the palace with 
the wall round it, and all the chambers, both great and 
small, and to keep a careful watch and guard the avenues 
that no one shall go out or in without your knowledge. If 
my father finds means of escaping from the palace, he will 
raise en masse all the people round, and will compel you by a 
cruel siege to a base surrender or take your lives. Shut him 
up then, with all his adherents, in one apartment, and use 
all necessary force to compel them, when there, to come to 
terms, but as far as possible avoid the effusion of blood. I 
commit the superintendence and command in this affair to 



A.D. 1100 — 1101.] LEGEND OF EOnEMOXD's RELEASE. 317 

you, my lord Boliemond, who have so much experience, and 
whose wisdom and mature judgment are renowned through- 
out the world. From this time, I shall be inseparably your 
sister, and will share cheerfully your success or misfortunes, 
in the faith of the Lord Jesus Christ." 

In consequence Bohemond, with great pleasure, forcibly 
thrust Daliman and all his party into one of the chambers 
and placed armed guards over it. He then posted the other 
knights at various points, giving orders to each how they 
were to act, and thus he held possession of the prince's palace, 
with all he found in it, for nearly fifteen days. He permit- 
ted the wives of the emir and his nobles, with their attendants 
and unarmed eunuchs, to have access to them and to supply 
them with food and all other necessaries. Meanwhile Dali- 
man bitterly lamented that his own house was made his 
prison, and his daughter the gaoler, at whose instance he was 
strictly confined. He did not spare curses on his god 
Mahomet, and on all his friends, subjects, and neighbours who 
suff'ered him to submit to such rough treatment in the seat 
of his power from a small band of captives and aliens. The 
nobles who were incarcerated with him persuaded him to 
come to terms with the Christians, that at least they might 
escape with their lives. At last his fears got the better of 
his obstinacy. Having conferred with Bohemond, he im- 
plored his amity, and consented that he and all his compan- 
ions should go free, and thus all the captives who groaned 
n his dungeons should have their liberty ; he also promised 
to give him his daughter in marriage. 

Bohemond having informed Melaz of what had passed, 
the able princess replied ; " Words are easily uttered, but 
must not always be taken on trust. Listen civilly to my 
father's smooth speeches, but receive them with caution. 
Keep watchful guard over what is in your hands until you 
can ensure your success in complete security. Let trusty 
messengers be despatched by difi^erent roads to Antioch to 
summon an armed force of your countrymen, who will form 
an honourable escort, and conducting you without hazard 
of treachery into your own states, place you out of the 
reach of the perfidious wiles of all the malevolent." This 
advice was approved by all the Christians, and in conse- 
quence E-ichard de Principatu and Sarcis were sent from 



318 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.X. CII.XXIII. 

Mesopotamia to Antioch, and made known the state of 
affairs to the people there, who received the intelligence with 
delight. Then Tancred, Bohemond's governor, sent commis- 
sioners to collect all the knights and other Grentiles who were 
in captivity, and as soon as they were assembled, delivered 
them to Bichard and Sarcis to be conducted to Babylon. 
Amongst others liberated at this time was the daughter of 
Cassian, the [former] emir of Antioch, who made great 
lamentations when she was released from her confinement 
among the Christians. Being asked the cause of her sorrow, 
the lady replied, that she grieved because she would no longer 
partake of that excellent food, pork-meat, which the Chris- 
tians ate. For the Turks and many other Saracen nations 
abhor the flesh of swine, while they eagerly devour that of 
dogs and wolves. Thus it is proved that they submit neither 
to the law of Moses, or that of Christ, and belong neither to 
Jews, or Christians.^" 

Meanvv^hile Bohemond had frequent conferences w^ith 
Daliman, and by his ability and moderation established terms 
of familiar intimacy with him, taking opportunities of favour- 
ably disposing him towards numbers who were placed under 
his tyrannical power. His respectful and courteous lan- 
guage soothed the resentment of the emir and his companions 
in captivity, and he even gained their regards by the care with 
which he paid them deferential attention. By degrees the 
provincial governors and other chiefs became acquainted 
with their new ruler, and feeling extreme anxiety to scruti- 
nize the man who had become the master of their lawful 
sovereign, and having, by his permission, access to their 
prince, highly celebrated Bohemond's merits. They urged 
Daliman, as their legitimate sovereign, to act for the good 

* This amusing episode concerning the princess Baghi-Sian, and her 
predilection for pork, is of a piece with the rest of the narrative, adding 
a touch of the cnrnic to its character as a romance. Wherever our author 
found the story, he seems to have copied it without examination, for it is 
extraordinary that, with his great display of biblical knowledge, it should 
have escaped his recollection that the law of Moses is as stringent as he 
represents the practice of the Mahometans with regard to eating the flesh 
of swine. (See Levit. xi. 7 ; Deut. ix. 8.) It is possible, however, that 
Ordericus may liave been but imperfectly acqtuilnted with this portion of 
the t^acred wiitings, to which much importance was not at that time 
attached. 



A.D. 1100 — 1104.] LEGEND OF BOHEMONd's EELEASE. 319 

of the state, and recommended him to seek the friendship of 
the "illustrious duke by all tlie means in his power, often 
quoting the words of the comic poet: — 

" If you can't do what you will, 
Then wish rather what you can."* 

Adding this, " In the victory we recently gained, we were 
signally deceived, for we had the enemies of our own faith 
as our efficient allies in the defeat of our countrymen, and 
we stupidly and wickedly gloried in our common loss ; our 
own Grod, the execrable Mahomet, utterly deserted us, and 
bowed powerless before the God of the Christians. Behold 
how wonderfully that crucified Christ, whom they call The 
Almighty, and justly, as all their enemies find and prove to 
their loss, inspires your daughter, in a most unlooked-for 
manner, to break the chains of those you believed to be 
strictly confined in your dungeons, and had condemned to 
perpetual prison in the fortress. He had given them a 
brilliant triumph when they appeared in arms on the field 
of battle, and their swords are red with the blood of our 
brothers and nephews. Still more, he has given them pos- 
session of your principal stronghold containing all your 
wealth, and has put you and the great men of your kingdom 
into their hands, imprisoned in your own palace, as in a 
sorrowful dungeon, having, as if you were helpless women, 
made no resistance. We have no means of access to you 
but by leave of these foreigners, and it is out of our power 
to render you any help. We cannot unite to attack them, 
because they would immediately vent their resentment on 
you. If even the great king, the Soldan of Persia, should 
march here with the whole of his forces and attempt to 
assault the citadel, such is the valour of the Franks, and so 
strong are the fortifications, that they would dare to resist 
him in the fortress, and would inflict severe chastisement 
on us before they were reduced. It is better, therefore, 

1 Qucndo non potest id fieri quod vis, 
Id velis quid possit. 

Ter. Andr. Act ii. sc. 1. 

It is edifying to find these brave Turks, fit subjects for a comic opera, 
better acquainted with the classics than Ordericus seeoas to have been wit;i 
Leviticus. 



S20 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.X. CH. XXIII. 

amicably to make terms with the enemj, than rashly to rouse 
his fatal rage." 

Daliman yielded to this advice. Accepting the proffered 
friendship of the illustrious duke, he gave liberal orders in 
his palace for the common good, and made freely from hia 
treasures large donations to the Christians, He also com- 
manded all the captives throughout his dominions to be set 
at liberty. They were diligently inquired after, and when 
found conducted to Daliman, who cJothed them well and 
delivered them to Bohemond. The duke forthwith enlisted 
these captives in his service among their countrymen, assign- 
ing them various duties, that, augmenting his force and his 
guard, they and their comrades might not be molested through 
any insidious schemes of the Pagans. 

Eichard and Sarcis returned in fifteen days, having exe- 
cuted their commission and accompanied by a powerful body 
of Christians. Daliman ordered them to be received with 
distinguished honours, and abundantly supplied with pro- 
visions, according to the customs of the country, and to be 
liberally furnished with all that they required. Then Bohe- 
mond and Daliman ratified the treaty for a perpetual peace 
between them, and three days were employed in preparing 
a suitable equipment of every sort. At length, Bohemond 
and Eichard, with their companions in captivity departed 
from it exulting, and, like Zorobabel and Nehemiah, blessed 
the Lord God of Israel. Daliman and his nobles, also joy- 
ful because they were released from imprisonment, conducted 
them for some distance on their journey, but with perfidious 
intentions, meaning to take some opportunity of doing them 
mischief; but God protecting his servants, they could not 
accomplish it. Eor the faithful were apprehensive of this, 
and in consequence marched with arms in their hands, and 
prepared for battle. They also strictly guarded the hostages 
which had been given for their security, until they reached 
the appointed place of safety. At last Daliman demanded 
from his allies in a friendly manner permission to return, 
and having obtained it, turned his back on them, sorrowful 
because he had failed of finding means, by any stratagem, 
of injuring them on the road. 

The prudent Melaz, with her attendants and eunuchs and 
splendid household, quitting her father's house, and volunta- 



A.D. 1100 — llOli.] LEGEND OF BOnEMONO's RELEASE. 321 

rily leaving all her family, piously, attached herself to the 
Christians at Bithia, as Pharaoh's daughter^ happily accom- 
panied Moses and the Hebrews when they went out of 
Egypt. The citizens of Antioch came in triumphant 
procession to meet their chiefs whose loss they had long 
deplored, and the clergy with all the people offered devout 
praises to the Lord God of Sabaoth, who saves all that trust 
in him. Bohemond despatched Eichard [de Principatu], the 
companion of his captivity, to Erance, sending by him silver 
fetters to the shrine of St. Leonard, with devoutthanksgivingc 
for his liberation.^ 

The illustrious Melaz having been regenerated anr 
admitted into the Christian church by the holy sacrament 
of baptism, Bohemond took an opportunity of thus address- 
ing her in the assembly of the chiefs: " Noble virgin, who 
while you were yet a pagan unexpectedly succoured us in 
a wonderful way, and have wisely left your kindred for the 
sake of the Lord Jesus, whom you kindly entreated in us 
who are his members and servants, for which you incurred 
your father's anger to the peril of your life, select from 
amongst us a husband to your choice, in the name of Christ; 
for it is not right that we should in the slightest degree 
oppose your reasonable wishes, debtors as we deeply are to 
your past deservings. Eirst, however listen to my advice, 
which I trust, my sweet friend, will be serviceable to you: I 
admit that your father betrothed you to myself, but I hopo 
to provide better for you, and I will tell you plainly for 
what reason. Erom my youth upwards I have never enjoyed 
rest, and spending my life in toil, have suffered grievously, 
and I fear that worse evils are still in store for me, for I 
have to contend against the emperor, as well as the pagans 
by whom I am surrounded. Besides, while I was in prison, 
I made a vow to undertake a pilgrimage to St. Leonard's in 
Aquitaine. I offer you these apologies from sincere affec- 
tion, because I should regret, more than if you were my 

^ We know not where Ordericus got the name of this supposititious 
daughter of Pharaoh, but we may at least affirm that it is not to be found 
in the bible. 

2 We shall presently find Bohemond himself, in 1106, going to return 
thanks to St. Leonard at his chm-ch in the Limousin, again with more 
detail. 

YOL. III. X 



322 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.X. CII. XXIII. 

daughter or sister, to see you suiFer any affliction, or form 
a connection of which you might soon repent. What joy or 
delight could our union afford you, when immediately after 
our marriage I must undertake a long journey by sea and 
land, and go into a far distant country near the ends of the 
earth? Considering all this, lady, choose for youTself a 
better lot from among many who would be your suitors. 
Here is Eoger, son of prince Eichard, my cousin, he is young 
and handsome, far different from me, and he is my equal 
in birth, wealth, and power ; I commend him, that you may 
be induced to accept him for your husband, and I trust that 
you will live many years together." 

All present seconded the duke's prudent counsel, and the 
wise princess readily yielded to the unanimous opinion of 
so many eminent men. In consequence, Eoger's happy 
nuptials with Melaz were celebrated with great honours, and 
to the universal joy of the people of Antioch. Bohemond 
himself served as steward of the feast, with the principal 
lords of the country. Six years afterwards, on the death of 
Bohemond and Tancred, Eoger succeeded to the principality 
of Antioch, but in the course of two years from his acces- 
sion he was slain on the field of Sarmatan, with seven thou- 
sand Christians by Amirgazis the Persian.^ 

I have now given a long account of the revolutions in 
human affairs and the fortunes of mankind ; but, if lite be 
spared me, there is still much to be related in succeeding 
pages. I close here the . . . .^ book of this Ecclesiastical 
History, and, fatigued with my labour, now require some 
short respite from it.^ 

* Roger, son of Richard de Principatu, succeeded Tancred in his 
government of Laodicea and Apamia, and the guardianship of the young 
prince of Antioch, in the month of December, 1112. He fell in a battle 
in which he had imprudently engaged with the Moslems in 1119. Their 
chief's name, here metamorphosed into Amir-Gazis, was Ylgazy, or Al- 
Gazf, son of Ortok, sultan of Maridin and Aleppo. The return of 
Bohemond to Antioch from his captivity, by whatever means it was 
effected, took place in 1104. 

' There is a blank in the manuscript, which was evidently intended to 
be filled up with the number of the present book, compatibly, perhaps, 
v/ith the new arrangement contemplated on the addition of additional 
books to the earlier portion of the history. 

^ The original text of the last paragraph is an hexameter verse: 
Et mihi jam fesso requics aliquantula detur. 



323 

BOOK XL 

PEEFACE. 

MEECiruL God of Sabaoth, mighty King, who governest 
all things, and reignest through all ages, vouchsafe to be the 
Saviour of the work of thy hands ! Eestrain the violence 
of Satan, who continually vents his rage against thee by 
seeking everywhere to vex thy servants. Listen, I beseech 
thee, to my prayers, gracious Creator of the world ! I 
adore thee, I seek thee, I labour, as I ought, to do thy will. 
I, an old man, now record the acts of popes and kings ; and, 
a sexagenarian, make them clear to the young. But I do it 
gratuitously, careful only for the approbation of my breth- 
ren. If new miracles were openly wrought in these days, I 
would endeavour to give a faithful report of them in my 
annals. I think that a summary of them would be more 
acceptable both to the present generation and posterity, 
would more profit myself, and please others, than to examine 
and describe at large worldly wants and transitory honours. 

1 aim at glorious things, and would write of miracles, filling 
my pages with prodigies in Christ's name. My delight is to 
offer praise to Him who governs the whole world, and who 
can easily cure us of all our ills. But I am compelled to 
speak of the evil we see or suffer, and to record the unstable 
acts of mortals ; for love of the world drags crowds of men 
to the bottomless pit, nor can the file of justice polish off 
the rust of crime. Inclined to evil, they dwell on the earthly 
and despise the heavenly, being so bent on the earth that 
they cannot behold the other. Sinners carry their fatal bur- 
dens, and the splendid miracles of the saints naturally cease. 
Transgressors of the law merit the punishment of the 
divine wrath, instead of miracles. "We might enlarge on the 
suits and hostilities which the fierce desire of gain occasions 
in the world. If learned men could condescend to dwell on 
infamous subjects, they might descant on murder, incest, 
and a thousand crimes. The fool perplexes himself to no 
purpose and wastes his time, while no wise man permits his 
to be ill-spent. Be, indeed, wastes his time who v/rites 

Y 2 



324; OEDEETCUS YITALIS. [b. XI. 

useless verses, and that labour is lost from wliicli no profit 
is gaiued. The elect devote themselves to goodness with 
ardent zeal, and apply diligently to laudable studies. There 
is no need of using compulsion to those who voluntarily 
take up their burdens, collecting the sheaves of corn and 
carrying them to the garner. There is no need of the spur 
for a horse that goes freely ; a gentle rein only is wanting 
to prevent him from stumbling ; but the rider uses sharp 
spurs to a dull horse, and applies frequent strokes of the 
whip to quicken his pace. Such is the law of the chui'ch 
with gentle teachers ; they urge the indolent to action by 
admonitions, while they restrain the froward. 

The evil beast with ten horns already triumphs ; and the 
fierce populations are everywhere polluted with the leprosy 
of sin. The Lord showed the Behemoth in an allegory to 
his friend Job ; and this insidious demon rages in a per- 
verse world. Erynnis pursues her furious course over the 
earth, and daily plunges her victims into the depths of hell. 
Amphisilena makes sport of and deludes mankind, and by 
her wiles deprives them of the joys of paradise. Alas ! the 
foul serpent infects them with his deadly poison, so that 
they lose their reason and engage in mutual slaughter. The 
foolish bring on themselves diseases and pestilences, and the 
perverse add sin to sin. We observe the misfortunes of 
men, and the miserable disasters with which a skilful vrriter 
can fill his sheets of parchment ; if he wants to use empty 
words on various subjects, he will find abundant materials in 
the calamities of the world. 

The malicious enemy of the hitman race is described by 
various names in the Scriptures inspired by Heaven. He 
is called a lion, wolf, dragon, partridge,^ basilisk, a kite, a 
boar, a fox, a dog, a bear, a leach, a satyr ; and he becomes 
a deadly serpent when he deludes us with his wiles, and 
compasses by force or fraud the destruction of fools. A 
thousand other names will occur to the intelligent reader, 
derived from the various artifices to which the enemy of 
mankind resorts. He corrupts countless numbers with sin, 

^ One wonders to see the timid partridge figure in his list of savage 
animals. Perhaps some magical virtues may have been attributed to it. 
Otherwise we might venture to propose pardus, or pardalis, the pantlier, 
for jierdrur, the reading of the text. 



A.D. 1102.] HElfET PUNISHES THE EEBEL BARONS. 325 

and often brings them to destruction. Alas! they often 
perish in vast bodies. 

Merciful Jesus, our holy King and great High Priest, 
save us from being infected like the reprobate with the 
poison of the old serpent ; and raise us purified from our 
sins above the storms of the world, and graciously admit us 
into the company of the saints in thy courts above ! Amen. 



Ch. I. King Senry punisTies the harotis who had revolted. 

In the year of our Lord 1102, the ninth indiction, Henry, 
king of England, having concluded a peace with his brother, 
and being firmly established on the throne, began gradually 
to reek his vengeance on the traitors who had infamously 
deserted him in the time of need. Eobert Malet,^ Ivo de 
Grrantmesnil, Eobert of Pontefract, son of Ilbert de 
Laci, and Eobert de Belesme, the most powerful of these 
barons, with many others, were brought to trial, not all at 
once, but separately and at different times, charged with 
various treasonable acts. Some of them, not being able to 
clear themselves of the crimes alleged against them, were 
heavily fined, while others, who were greater objects of sus- 
picion to the king, were utterly disinherited by him and 
driven into exile. 

Ch. II. King henry's harsh conduct to his 'brother Robert 
and the nobles who had joined the duhe in the league against 
him — Senry''s prosperity and character. 

The year following William de Warrenne presented him- 
self in great distress to Eobert, duke of Normandy, and 
represented to him the severe loss he had sustained in his 
service, having forfeited his earldom of Surrey, which pro- 
duced him the yearly revenue of a thousand pounds of silver ; 
claiming in consequence Eobert 's good offices to reconcile 
him with the king, his brother, and procure his restoration 
to his former honours. The duke readily asssented to his 

* Robert de Malet is mentioned in the succeeding chapter. For the 
rest of these persona, see the notes to b. x. 



S26 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XI. CH.II. 

request, and crossed over to England. The king was in 
great wrath when he heard of his coming, and said to his 
courtiers and counsellors : " "What should I do to my 
enemies who presume to intrude upon me, and trespass on 
the borders of my kingdom without my licence ? " Various 
replies were made, but the king sent some of his own guard 
to meet the duke and plainly tell him his mind. The ill- 
advised duke then discovered by private communications 
that he had rashly ventured within the bounds of England, 
and, unless he followed prudent counsels, he would never 
escape from the island in which he was, as it were, enclosed, 
and return when he pleased to his own dominions. How- 
ever, the politic king gave orders that the duke should be 
honourably conducted to court with his retinue ; and their 
deep counsels were kept private, lest strangers should detect 
any appearance of ill-will betwen the brothers. The " duke, 
though much terrified, concealed his alarm under an 
assumed gaiety, and the king, on his part, dissembled the 
fury that raged in his bosom under a smiling countenance. 
Among other things ^ the king accused the duke of having 
violated the treaty, by not punishing public traitors, nor 
proceeding with princely rigour against rebels, and that he 
had given a gracious reception in Normandy that same year 
to Robert de Belesme, restoring to him his patrimonial 
domains, the castle of Argentan, the bishopric of Seez, and 
the forest of Gouffern. That butcher having sailed over 
to Normandy had obtained the county of Ponthieu in 
right of William Talvas, in consequence of the death of 
Guy, count of Abbeville, his father-in-law.^ The duke, 
alarmed at these reproaches, promised submissively to 
remedy all the grievances. He was also induced by the 
queen's influence to forego the annual pension of three 
thousand pounds, which had been agreed on. In conse- 
quence, the king restored him to favour, renewed the late 
treaty, and reinstated William de Warrenne in the earldom 
of Surrey. The earl, having thus recovered his father's 
inheritance, which he had foolishly forfeited, learned wisdom 

' It was probably in this conversation that the king told his brother, ut 
cnmitem, non monachum ageret, to coiiduct himself like an earl, instead of 
behaving like a monk. 

3 Guy I., count of Ponthieu, father-in-law of William Talvas. 



ClTAEACTEll OF HENRY I. 327 

from his misfortunes, and afterwards adhered faithfully to 
the king during thirty-three years they lived together, 
ranking among the chief of his intimate friends. 

Duke E-obert now returned to Normandy, an object of 
greater contempt to his subjects than he was before, having 
gained nothing by his expedition but fear, trouble, and 
disgrace. The king, prospering in all his aifairs, found 
his power greatly augmented, and report spreading his fame 
far and wide, he was considered one of the greatest princes 
in the four quarters of the globe. No king of England had 
been more powerful, nor possessed wider territories within 
the island, nor was more favoured by fortune in the acquisi- 
tion of all that mortals need in the fullest abundance.^ If 
life be spared me, the sequel of my history will, by Grod's aid, 
clearly exhibit this. He reduced all his enemies to subjec- 

* " Our author prides himself in regarding Henry I. as one of the most 
powerful, rich, and successful kings who ever wore the crown of Enj^land. 
As to the happiness resulting from a quiet conscience and peace of mind, 
things still more desirable, it is our duty to remark, that the case was very 
different, and that this Lewis of the twelfth century painfully^ expiated, if 
not by his remorse, by his violent passions and the terrors of his life, all 
the apparent prosperity which, so to speak, dazzled the eyes of his cotem- 
poraries. We cannot too strongly recommend readers who would desire to 
form a precise idea of the contrast afforded by Henry's history to consult 
a little treatise by Henry of Huntingdon, which is very curious and distin- 
guished for its high philosophical views. It is inserted in the second 
volume of the Anglia Sacra, under the title, De episcopis sui temporis. In 
this treatise the prosperities of the English monarch are appreciated at their 
real worth with great impartiality, but at the same time with lofty views 
which would do honour to a modern historian of the first rank. We 
exceedingly regret that the limits to which we are compelled to confine 
ourselves, will not permit the insertion of this review, the interest of which 
is increased by its having been published during the life of a prince who 
was implacable in his resentments against every one who ventured to scru- 
tinize the secrets of his conscience. We must be content with quoting the 
concluding words which form a striking contrast to the language of Orderi- 
cus: ' You will soon witness the wretched end of a miserable life.' The 
historian's prediction received its accomplishment in the course of the same 
year " Note to Ordericus by M. Le Prevost. 

We have been induced to insert a literal translation of our fellow labour- 
er's note, as presenting just views of the character of Henry I., as well as, 
we are ready to confess, from being flattered at finding our own view of 
the value of the treatise referred to confirmed from so high a quarter, having 
been instrumental in rescuing it from obscurity by adding it to Mr. Bohn'a 
Edition of Henry of Huntingdon's History, to which it forms a suitable 
appendix. See that work, pp. 301 — 319. 



328 OEDESTCUS YITALIS. [b.XI. CH.II. 

tion either by policy or force, and rewarded those who 
served him with riches and honours. Many there were of 
high condition whom he hurled from the summit of power 
for their presumption, and sentenced to the perpetual for- 
feiture of their patrimonial estates. On the contrary, there 
were others of low origin, whom, for their obsequious ser- 
vices, he raised to the rank of nobles, taking them, so to 
speak, from the dust, surrounding them with wealth, and, 
exalting them above earls, and distinguished lords of castles. 
Such men as Greoffrey de Clinton,^ Ealph Basset,'^ Hugh de 
Bocheland,^ Gruillegrip, Eainier de Bada,^ William Trousse- 
bot,^ Haimon de Ealaise,^ Gruigan Algaso,' Eobert de Bostare, 

^ Geoffrey de Clinton is called chamberlain of Henry I. in the charter 
of foundation of the priory of Kenilworth. 

'^ The family of Basset appears in all the lists of distinguished persons 
at the time of the Conquest. It was probably settled originally at Ouillie- 
la-Basset, near Falaise. Ralph Basset and his son Richard, both succes- 
sively great-justiciaries of England, merited, notwithstanding what our 
author says, the character given them of clarissimi viri by Henry of Hun- 
tingdon in the work of which we have just spoken, in which he passes so 
severe a judgment on most of the celebrated persons who were his cotem- 
poraries. Ralph Basset was in 1106, one of the five commissioners 
employed to decide the controversy between Gerard, archbishop of York, 
and the abbey of Ripon. He died in 1120. His son, Geoffrey Basset, 
was, like his father, justiciary of England. The first person known of this 
family appears to be Osmond Basset, a cotemporary with William the 
Conqueror, mentioned in the great charter of Montevilliers. 

3 The Monasticon Anglicanum shows several charters addressed by 
Henry I. to Hugh de Bocheland, attesting that this person was one of his 
principal officers. Of Guillegrip we have no information. 

* De Bada, probably Bath. Of this family Richard de Bada, perhaps 
the son of Regnier, appears as witness to a charter of King Stephen. 

^ William Troussebot, son of Geoffrey, son of Paganus, married Aubrey 
de Harcourt. They had estates in Yorkshire ; see Monast. Anglic, t. ii. 
p. 43. He was governor of Bonneville-sur-Touque in 1138, an office here- 
ditary in that family, one branch of which possessed domains in the neigh- 
bourhood of Bonneville, which was a royal residence. The original seat 
of the family of Troussebot is supposed to have been in the north-western 
part of the district of Neuborg, near that of Robert I. de Harcourt, father 
of Aubrey, who was married to William Troussebot. 

^ We have no information respecting Haimon de Falaise ; but Geoffrey 
and William de Falaise were witnesses to a charter by William de Briose, 
and its confirmation by William the Conqueror. The latter especially 
seems to have been a person of importance, being mentioned before Roger 
Bi<;ot and Humphrey de Bohun. Monast. Anglic, t. i. p. 541, 

' Guigan Algaso had been viscount d'Exmes, and appears with that title 
in several charters of St. Evroult. Robert de Bostare is unknown. 



CHARACTER OF HENET I. 329 

and many others, are examples of what I have stated. 
Having acquired wealth and built themselves mansions, they 
established a position far beyond that of their fathers, and 
often revenged themselves on those who had lorded over 
them, by false and unjust accusations. These and many 
others of humble birth, whom it would be tedious to men- 
tion individually, were ennobled by the king; his royal 
authority raising them from a low estate to the summit of 
power, so that they became formidable even to the greatest 
nobles. • 

While however, King Henry, heaped such munificent re- 
wards on his faithful adherents, he was an implacable 
enemy to the disloyal, sparing none who where convicted 
from punishment, either in their person, or by fines, or for- 
feiture of their honours. Many criminals had miserable 
experience of this, having ended their days in the king's 
prisons, from which neither their high connections, or noble 
descent, or the offer of an enormous ransom could procure 
their release. Eobert de Pontefract^ and Eobert Malet^ 
having been prosecuted in the king's court, were condemned 
to forfeit their honours, and depart the realm. Ivo'^ 
had set the example of engaging in war on his own account, 
and given to the flames the territories of his neighbours, 
such private wars being hitherto unknown in England,* and 
being therefore severely punished. Upon this charge 
from which he could not clear himself, he was mulct by the 
king's stern justice in a heavy fine, and involved in the 
deepest trouble and distress. In consequence, the knight 

^ Robert de Laci, lord of Pontefract. See before p. 277. 

' Robert Malet, son of William Malet one of the companions of the 
Conqueror, was made sheriff of Yorkshire. Robert was also a favourite 
with that king, who granted him vast estates in Suffolk, as well as with 
Henry I., to whom he was chamberlain before his disgrace. He had a 
sister named Beatrice, and a brother, named Gilbert Malet. See in the 
Monast. Anglic, t. i. p. 356, the charter of foundation for an abbey of 
Benedictine monks, which he founded at his residence at Eye, in Suffolk, 
during the Conqueror's lifetime. 

^ Ivo de Grantmesnil, fourth son of Hugh de Grantmesnil. 

* The private wars wliich devastated Normandy during the minority of 
William the Conqueror, arid under the weak government of his son Robert, 
were for the most part unknown in England till the turbulence of the 
Anglo-Norman barons became unrestrained during the distracted reign of 
King Stephen. 



^30 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XT. CH.II. 

implored the assistance of Eobert Earl of Mellent, one of 
Henry's principal counsellors, and was driven by many un- 
happy circumstances to place himself under the earl's pro- 
tection. In the first place, he was galled by the derision 
with which he was assailed as one of the rope-dancers, who 
had been let down from the walls of Antioch ;^ and besides, 
on deep reflection, he was afraid that he should never, or 
without great diflSculty, reinstate himself in the king's favour 
which he had lost.^ He therefore resolved to join the cru- 
sade again, and made an agreement with the earl of Mellent 
to the following effect. The earl was to procure his recon- 
ciliation with the king, and to advance him five hundred silver 
marks for the expenses of his expedition, having the whole 
of Ivo's domains pledged to him as a security for fifteen years. 
In consideration of this, the earl was to give the daughter of 
his brother Henry, earl of Warwick, in marriage to Ivo's son, 
who was yet in his infancy, and to restore him his father's 
inheritance. This contract was confirmed by, oath, and 
ratified by the king's consent. Ivo then set out on his pil- 
grimage, accompanied by his wife ; but he died on the road, 
and his inheritance passed into the hands of strangers.^ 

The town of Leicester had four masters, the king, the 
bishop of Lincoln, Earl Simon,^ and Ivo, son of Hugh. The 
earl of Mellent contrived to get a footing in it by the poses- 
sion of Hugh's share, who was chief of the municipality 
and viscount, and also farmed the king's fourth of the 
borough. By the royal favour and his own address he got 
the whole place into his own hands, and being, in conse- 
quence, created an English earl, his wealth and power 
surpassed those of any other peer of the realm, and he was 
exalted above almost all his family. He married the beau- 



* Fnnambuli. See before pp. 128, 194. 

' Ivo de Grantmesnil's predilection for the duke Robert, one of whose evil 
counsellors he was from the first, and his aversion to the two brothers of 
that prince, began early. See vol ii. pp. 108, 109. 

^ in spite of the claime of Ivo the Younger, his English patrimony- 
remained in the hands of the earl of Mellent, whose grandson Robert, earl 
of Leicester, reunited the rest of the vast estates of the family of Grantmes- 
nil, by his marriage with Petronilla de Grantmcsnil, this Ivo's daughter. 

* Simon de Senlis, earl of Huntingdon in right of his wife Matilda, 
daughter of the unfortunate Earl Waltheof. See vol. ii. p. 49. 



A.D. 1102.] EOBEUT DE BELESME'S REVOLT. 331 

tiful Isabel, niece of the king of France/ by whom he had 
twin-sons, AValeran, ^ and Eobert,^ and another son called 
Hugh the Poor,* with five daughters. His conscience 
blinded by such prosperity, he forfeited his oath in 
favour of Ivo's son, so that at the time appointed the 
young man did not obtain the wife he had been promised, 
nor recover his hereditary estates according to the contract 
to which the earl of Mellent had sworn. 

Ch. III. 'Robert de Belesme in open rehelUon against King 
Henrij — The king's campaign against him — Takes his 
castles of Arundel, Bridgnorth, and Shrewsbury, and drives 
Mm out of England — He raises disturbances in Normandy 
Tlie duke's campaign against him. 

lis the year of our Lord 1102, the tenth indiction, King 
Henry summoned the powerful earl, Bobert de Belesme, to 
plead in his court to an indictment containing forty-five 
counts of offences, in word or act, against himself or his 
brother, the duke of Normandy ; and the earl was required 
to make a distinct answer to each charge. The king had 
employed a whole year in having him closely watched, 
causing his evil deeds to be carefully inquired into by 
secret spies, and reduced to writing with great precision. 
Eobert demanded licence, as the custom is, for himself and 
his friends to attend the trial, and, it being granted, finding 
that it was out of his power to clear himself of the charges 
alleged, he departed at once, and with his retainers mount- 
ing swift horses, fled with alarm in breathless haste to 
his own castles. Meanwhile, the king and his barons were 
waiting for Robert's answer, until one of the royal attend- 
ants brought the news of his sudden flight. Henry was 
vexed at having been thus duped, but rested sure that the 
day of vengeance would soon arrive. 

In consequence, the king publicly branded Eobert for 
not having legally cleared himself of the crimes with which 

' Elizabeth de Vermandois, niece of Philip I. 

' Waleran was count de Meulan, or earl of Mellent, after his father. 

^ Robert L, earl of Leicester, surnamed the Hunchback. 

* Hugh the Poor, earl of Bedford. See the '' Acts of King Stephen," 
printed with Henry of Huntingdon's History in Anl^q. Lib,, pp. 346 and 
380. 



832 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.XI. CH.III. 

he had been charged in open court, and proclaimed him a 
traitor unless he returned, and submitting to judgment, was 
ready to do right. The rebel, being once more summoned 
to appear in court, gave a flat refusal, and, what is 
more, lost no time in adding to the fortifications of his 
castles in every quarter by trenches and walls, and in de- 
manding aid from his Norman kinsmen, and the alien 
Welsh, and all his allies. The king called out the whole 
military array of England, and laying siege to Arundel 
castle, which stands near the sea-coast,^ he erected forts, 
and stationed his ofiicers in them with bodies of troops for 
three months. Meanwhile the garrison of the fortress 
humbly requested the king to grant them a truce, that they 
might either obtain succour from their lord, or his licence to 
give up the place. The king acceding to their proposal, 
messengers were despatched to Eobert, who was then in 
the province of Mercia, and having found him, laid before 
him in great distress the severe chastisement with which 
the king's attack threatened them. The earl was then 
building the very strong castle of Bridgnorth, on the river 
Severn, in that country, and trying, in vain, to levy an 
auxiliary force, for the purpose of making a resolute de- 
fence. He was deeply grieved at learning the defection of 
his vassals at Arundel, but as he could not afford them any 
aid, he released them from the fealty they owed him, and 
with great reluctance gave them permission to come to 
terms with the king. On the return of the messengers, the 
garrison of Arundel gladly siu-rendered the castle into the 
king's hands, and were honourably and kindly treated, 
receiving large presents. The king then marched his army 
to Blithe, a castle formerly belonging to Eoger de Buthli,^ 
where the garrison came out to meet him with joy, and 
acknowledging him as their liege lord, submitted to him 
with great readiness. After these events King Henry 
allowed his people to enjoy a short interval of repose, and 
the great bulk of the nobility found reason to dread his 
prudence and valour. 

* Arundel castle, now belonging to the Howards, dukes of Norfolk, 
stands on the bank of the river Arun at some distance from the sea. 

^ Blythe in Nottinghamshire. Respecting this castle and its former 
possessor, Roger de Bulli, see before, p. 220. 



A.D. 1102.] BELESME's NOEMAI^ ADHEflEIfTS. 333 

Meanwhile, the king sent envoys to JSTormandy, bearing 
authentic despatches to the duke, informing him that Eobert 
de Belesme was an outlaw in both countries, having fled 
clandestinely from the royal court. He then reminded him 
that, according to the treaty they had concluded in England, 
they were to unite in punishing traitors with extreme venge- 
ance. The duke therefore summoned to his standard the 
military force of Normandy, and laid siege to the castle of 
Yignats,^ which was in the keeping of Girard de St. Hilary.^ 
The garrison hoped for an assault, being prepared to sur- 
render the place, if the attack was vigorous. They could 
not honourably capitulate without fighting, lest they should 
justly merit to be branded as disloyal deserters. But the 
duke being lost in sloth and indolence, and wanting the 
firmness becoming a prince, Eobert de Montfort,^ and other 
conspirators, who were not in agreement between themselves, 
set fire to their encampment, and, throwing the whole army 
into confusion, fled of their own accord, though no one pur- 
sued them, compelling others also, who, detesting Eobert, 
wished his humiliation, to join in their shameful flight. 
The garrison of Vignats, witnessing the disgrace of the 
Norman army, raised shouts of derision after them as they 
ran away, and afterwards, having little to fear, began to 
make cruel irruptions into the territory of Oxmes. Eobert 
de Grantmesnil, Hugh de Montpin9on, and Eobert de 
Courci,^ with their vassals, made all the resistance in their 
power to the savage freebooters, and endeavoured to pro- 
tect their domains. But the outlaws, flushed with their 
success in pillaging, became bolder in their attacks, and 
proudly boasting of their castles at Gunter, Tourches, and 
Argentan,^ were greatly incensed that any of their neigh- 

1 Vignats, two leagues and a half from Falaise. 

'^ There are six communes of the name of St. Hilaire in Normandy, 
four of which are in the department of the Orne. Gerard must necessarily 
have belonged to that which forms part of the canton of Seez, and which 
has preserved the name of St. Hilaire-le-Girard in memory of its ancient 
lords. 

^ Robert de Montfort who, as we have seen before, commanded the 
army of William Rufus in his expedition to Maine. 

* Robert, eldest son of Hugh de Grantmesnil; Hugh de Montpinfon and 
Robert de Courci were his brothers-in-law. 

^ Chateau Gontier-au-Houlme, a fortress now ruined, in the commune 



334 OEDEEICUS YITALI3. [b.XI. CH.III. 

bours, without the diike at their head, should even venture 
to snarP at them. Thej therefore plundered the peasants 
through the whole province, and carrying off their booty, set 
fire to the houses. 

Meanwhile, the king of England did not, like his brother, 
abandon himself to sloth, but in the autumn arrayed the 
military force of the whole of England, and leading them 
into Mercia, besieged Bridgnorth for three months. Eobert 
de Belesme had retired to Shrewsbury, entrusting the de- 
fence of Bridgnorth to B-oger, son of Corbet,^ Bobert de 
Neuville, and Ulger the hunter,^ with eighty stipendiary 
men-at-arms. He had now entered into an alliance with the 
"Welsh, and attached to his cause, Cadogan and Grervase,* 
sons of Bees, frequently employing the troops to beat up 
the quarters of the royal army. He had disinherited 
"William Pantoul, a brave and experienced knight, and had 
even given him a sharp repulse when he proffered his valu- 
able services at the time they were urgently needed. Being 
thus rejected with disdain, William Pantulf^ went over to 
the king, who, having already proved his vigour of mind, 
received him graciously. He gave him the command of two 
hundred men, and entrusted to him the custody of Stafford 
castle, in the same neighbourhood. This knight proved 
Bobert de Belesme' s worst enemy, never ceasing from per- 
secuting him both by his counsels and his arms till his ruin 
was completed. 

The earls ^ and barons of the realm now met and con- 
of La Courbe, near Argentan Econch^ ; so called because it stands on a 
peninsula formed by the river Orne; not Chateau- Gontier in the department 
of La Sarthe; Fourches, in the canton of Couliboeuf. 

' Vcl latrare. 

^ Roger, son of Corbet, and Robert his eldest brother, are mentioned in 
the charters relating to the foundation of the abbey of Shrewsbury to 
which they were benefactors. See also vol. ii. pp. 48, 49. 

^ We do not find the names of Robert de Neuville (probably of Neu- 
viile near Seez), nor the hunter Welger in the above charter, but that of 
another hunter attached to the family of Belesme, Normannus Venator. 
See Monast. Anglic, t. i. p. 375, &c. 

* It is not always easy to discover the real names of the Welsh princes 
in our author's version of them, Cadogan and his brother were probably 
Bons of Khjs-ap-Owen, who was slain in 1076. See vol. ii. p. 449. 

^ For William Pantulf, or Pantoul, see vol. ii. b. v. c. xvi. pp. 207, and 
following. 

"Our author now returns from his digression to the siege of Bridgnorth. 



A.D. 1102.] SIEGE OF BRIDGENORTH. 835 

suited together as to the means of reconciling the rebellious 
earl to his sovereign. They said among themselves : 
" Should the king succeed in crushing this mighty earl and 
carry his resentment so far as to disinherit him, as he is 
endeavouring to do, he will then trample us all under foot 
like feeble women. Let us therefore use our utmost efforts 
to plant the seeds of concord between them, that we may 
serve in a lawful way both our sovereign and our brother 
peer, and thus make both of them our debtors by putting an 
end to their quarrels. In consequence, one day they all 
went to the king in a body, and earnestly addressing him in 
the middle of the camp, used a variety of arguments calcu- 
lated to soften the royal asperity. At that moment there 
happened to be some provincial troops, to the number of 
three thousand, drawn up on a hill close by, who becoming 
aware of the intentions of the nobles, shouted aloud to the 
king : " Henry, lord king, trust not these traitors. They are 
endeavouring to deceive you, and prevent the vigorous 
exercise of your royal justice. "Why do you listen to those 
who persuade you to pardon a traitor, and let the conspiracy 
against your life go unpunished ? For ourselves, we are all 
ready to stand by you faithfully and second all your under- 
takings. Press the siege vigorously; close in upon the 
traitor on all sides ; and make no peace till you take him, 
alive or dead." 

The king's resolution was strengthened by the voice of the 
people, and returning shortly after listening to them, he 
negatived the proposals of the factious nobles. He then 
made overtures to the Welsh princes through William Pan- 
tulf, and allured them by presents and promises subtilly used, 
to desert the cause of his enemy and join his own with all 
their forces. He also sent for three of the principal towns- 
men, and swore to them publicly that unless the place was 
surrendered to him within three days he would hang all of 
them he could lay his hands on. They were terrified at the 
king's violence, and thinking it time to look to their own 
safety, sought a conference with William Pantulf, who was 
a neighbour of theirs, that they might hear what he advised. 
The knight undertook to negotiate between the garrison and 
the king, and in persuasive language recommended them to 
surrender the fortress to their lawful king, on whose part he 



83G OEDEEICTJS VITALIS. [b.XI. CH.III. 

engaged to augment their funds by granting tliem lands of 
the value of three hundred pounds in annual rent. The 
townsmen, having taken into consideration what was for the 
common good, agreed to this, and submitted to the royal 
pleasure rather than risk their lives by further resistance. 
At last, with the king's leave, they sent envoys to Eobert de 
Belesme their lord, informing him that they could not hold 
out any longer against the attack of the powerful king. The 
stipendiary troops were kept in ignorance of the capitulation, 
the regular garrison and the burgesses having concluded it, 
to save their lives, without consulting the others. When 
however they discovered what was thus unexpectedly arranged, 
they flew to arms in great dudgeon and tried to render the 
negotiation abortive. The garrison soldiers however block- 
aded them in one part of the fortress, and let in the king's 
troops, with a royal ensign, amidst the cheers of the towns- 
men. The king, taking into consideration that the stipend- 
iaries had faithfully performed their service to their lord, as 
was their duty, gave them free liberty to depart with their 
horses and arms. Marching out of the castle in great tribu- 
lation they made public complaints of having been shamefully 
outwitted by the garrison and chiefs of the municipality, 
protesting before the whole army against their disaster 
being considered a slur on the character of stipendiary 
troops, and throwing the whole blame on the treachery of 
their comrades. 

When Eobert de Belesme received intelligence that the 
king had reduced his castle of Bridgnorth, on which he 
greatly relied, he was in the greatest distress, and, driven 
almost frantic, was at a loss what course to take. The king 
now issued orders for his army to march by the Huvel 
Hegen,^ and lay siege to Shrewsbury, which stands on a 
rising ground washed on three sides by the river Severn. 
The road through a wood on this route is called by the 
English Huvel Hegen, which in Latin means malum callem 
vel vicum (bad road or street.) This road was for a thousand 
paces full of holes, and the surface rough with large stones, 
and so narrow that two men on horseback could scarcely pass 

* The literal translation of these words in modern English would be 
Evil-Hedge ; the intrepretation given by our author a few lines before is 
therefore not quite exact. 



A.D. 1102.] ROBERT DE BELESME BANISHED. 337 

each other. It was overshadowed on both sides by a thick 
wood in which bowmen were placed in ambush ready to 
inflict sudden wounds with hissing bolts and arrows on tho 
troops on their march. There were more than sixty thousand 
infantry in the expedition, and the king gave orders that they 
should clear a broad track by cutting down the wood with 
axes, so that a road might be formed for his own passage 
and a public highway for ever afterwards. The royal com- 
mand was promptly performed, and vast numbers of men 
beiug employed, the wood was felled, and a very broad road 
levelled through it. 

Robert de Belesme was extremely terrified when he 
heard of Henry's movements, and finding himself surrounded 
by perils, was compelled to submit to the humiliation of 
imploring pardon from the invincible monarch. The stern 
king, however, could not forget the injuries he had received, 
and determined to follow up the attack with his powerful 
army until he had forced his enemy to surrender at discre- 
tion. At last, E-obert was driven to despair by his unhappy 
fate, and, after consulting his friends, went to meet the 
king as he approached the town, and confessing his treason- 
able ofiences laid the keys of the place at his feet. Thus 
King Henry became master of all the estates of E-obert and 
his vassals who had joined him in the rebellion, but he 
permitted him to retire unmolested, with his horses and 
arms, and gave him a safe conduct through England to the 
coast. When the banishment of the cruel tyrant was known 
all England was in a tumult of joy, and numbers congratu- 
lated the king with flattering words, to this effect: " E-ejoice, 
King Henry, and return thanks to the Lord your Grod, for 
you began to reign independently from the moment you 
reduced Eobert de Belesme to subjection, and drove him out 
of your kingdom." 

Eobert de Belesme having been thus expelled, the realm 
of Albion enjoyed peace and tranquillity, and during the 
thirty-three years of Henry's subsequent reign no one after- 
wards dared to revolt in England, nor held any fortress 
against him. Eobert crossed over to Normandy boiling 
with rage and overwhelmed with grief; and making fierce 
attacks on those of his countrymen who had joined the 
standard of their weak prince, "he chastised them severely 

VOL. III. Z 



388 OEDERICUS VITALIS. [b.xi. cn.iii. 

witli fire and sword. For like the dragon mysteriously 
described by St. John in the Apocalypse, who, cast forth 
from heaven, cruelly vented his wrath on the dwellers upon 
the earth, so this bloody butcher when driven from England 
spent his fury on the ]N'ormans. Sweeping their farms of 
all that could be carried off, he devoted them to the flames, and 
inflicted the torments of death or mutilation on the soldiers 
and others who fell into his hands. Indeed, so great was 
his cruelty that he preferred torturing his prisoners to 
enriching himself by the large ransoms he might have 
obtained. 

Eoger of Poitiers and Arnulph, Robert's brother,^ were 
wealthy English earls, and through the care of their father, 
the earl, Roger de Montgomery, obtained great honours and 
domains. Arnulph married the daughter of an Irish king 
called Lafracoth in right of whom he aspired to get posses- 
sion of her father's kingdom.^ Insatiable ambition in attempt- 
ing to gain more than is right often forfeits suddenly what 
has been justly acquired. The powerful king of England 
was so incensed against Robert's whole kindred and race, that 
be resolved to root them all out of his dominions. In con- 
sequence he sought favourable opportunities of dealing 
harshly with the two brothers, and making vigilant inquiries 
into such as occurred, he declared their estates forfeited and 
banished them from England. So implacable was his resent- 
ment that the nuns of Almeneches^ were cruelly stripped of 
the lands with which Earl Roger the elder had endowed 
them, because their abbess, Emma, was sister of the young 
earls, and the king granted them to Savaric, son of Chama,^ 
in knight-service. 

^ See what has been said before of these two brothers of Roger de 
Belesme, vol. ii. p. 203, and in the present vol. p. 277. 

''' Some further account of Arnulph's Irish affairs will be found in a sub- 
sequent chapter (xviii.) of the present book. 

3 The abbey of Almeneches at Mortr^e between Argentan and Seez. It 
was a mojiastery of nuns as early as the eighth century, under the direction 
of St. Lanthilde, and is supposed to have been one of the twelve religious 
houses founded by St. Evroult. After the Normans established themselves 
in that country, it was given to the monks of Fecamp by Richard II., and 
subsequently ceded by them to Roger de Montgomery who re-established 
it as an abbey of nuns in IO7O. The first abbess was named Adelasie. 
Emma, Roger's daughter, replaced her in 1074, and lived till March 4, 1113. 

was a brother of Hubert de Suzanne, 



A. D. 1102 llOo.] FRESH DISTUEBANCES IN NOEMANDT. 339 

The expulsion of these nobles from England aggravated 
the state of bitter evil in Normandy, and during three years 
endless crimes were perpetrated there. Many villages were 
burnt, and the churches, with the inhabitants who fled to 
them for refuge as to a mother's bosom, were set on fire. 
Almost all Normandy rose in arms against Eobert, and there 
was a general league to resist his tyranny ; but these attempts 
proved fruitless, because there was no one of capacity to 
take the lead against the powerful freebooter. He had vast 
resources and great talents, and the immense wealth he had 
been long gathering was laid up in thirty-four strong castles, 
which he had formerly erected to support his rebellion. 
Having sole possession of nearly the whole of his father's 
inheritance, he relinquished no part of it to his brothers, who 
had forfeited their English estates through him. In con- 
sequence Eoger retired to the castle of Charroux, which he 
possessed in right of his wife, and living there till he became 
old, left at his death brave sons, who became his heirs.^ 
Arnulph, after many thankless enterprises in his brother's 
cause, became so indignant, that he went over to the duke, 
to whom he ceded the castle of Almeneches which he had 
taken by surprise, and collected about him many of his 
brother's partisans.'^ In consequence, there were great dis- 
turbances in the district of Seez, many of the provincials 
leaving Eobert to join Aruulph, and giving up their castles to 
the duke's adherents. Eobert, thus deserted by his own 
brother, sufiered such alarms from all quarters that he 
scarcely trusted any one, and as he was an object of terror 
to all the world, he even doubted the sincerity of those who 
still adhered to him. 

as we have seen before, vol. ii. p. 505. Cane, or Cham, was his mother's 
name; she was the second wife of Ralph, viscount of Maine. 

^ lloger-le-Poitevin retired to the castle of Charroux, near Civrai, where 
he passed the rest of his life, as our author states. He was engaged in 
constant hostilities with Hugh II., lord of Lusignan, surnamed the Devil, 
who disputed with him the county of La Marche. He bequeathed the 
war to his son, Albert III., and his grandson, Albert IV. 

* We shall find a further account of Arnulph in 11 1 8. He gave to the 
abbey of St. Martin de Sdez the church of St. Nicholas, within the walls 
of the castle at Pembroke, in 1098. It was afterwards erected into a 
priory, endowed as a cell of the same abbey by William Marshall. Some 
picturesque ruins of the church of this priory (afterwards called Monkton) 
are still standing. 

z 2 



310 OEDEEICrS TITALIS. [b.xi. cn.iii. 

In the montli of June the duke's army assembled at the 
convent of nuns (at Almeneches), prepared to ravage the 
country, and made stables of the sacred buildings. Eobert, 
hearing this, flew to the spot, and setting the abbey on 
fire, took prisoners Oliver de Frenai^ and several others, 
some of whom he subjected to the miseries of a long and 
severe imprisonment, and sentenced the others to death, or 
mutilation of their limbs. Duke Eobert and his army 
marched to Exmes for the purpose of protecting his adherents. 
Eobert de Laci,^ who had then command of his troops, had 
given the custody of that castle to Malger, surnamed Mala- 
herbe.^ Numbers were filled with delight at the disasters 
which now threatened their odious tyrant, and joined the ex- 
pedition against him full of zeal. William, count of Evreux, 
Eotro, count ofMortain, Grilbert de Laigle,* and all the people 
of Exmes leagued together to oppose him, but they were un- 
able to fulfil their desire to the full extent of exacting from 
him a fitting recompence for the many wrongs they had suf- 
fered at his hands. However, Eobert de St. Ceneri,^ and 
Burcard his steward, with Hugh de JSTonant,^ made a long 

' There are a dozen communes in Normandy of this name, and it is not 
known to which of them Oliver belonged. He was probably a son or 
relation of Odo-the-Red of Frenai, mentioned in a charter of William de 
Briose in favour of St. Florent de Saumur, confirmed by William the 
Conqueror. See Monastic Anglic, v. i. p. 584. 

^ Robert de Laci, son of Walter who was present at the Conquest, and 
probably nephew of Ilbert, held more than a hundred and twenty 
manors in England; but he forfeited them in 1092, and was compelled to 
retire to Normandy in consequence of the par^ he took in Robert de 
Mowbray's conspiracy. See before, p. 277. 

^ There have been, and still are, several noble families in Normandy of 
the name of Malherbe. Mauger de Malherbe probably belonged to that 
of Adam de Malaherba mentioned in the great charter of the Trinity of 
Neubourg by William, count de Mortain, in 1105, as a benefactor to that 
liouse. In England John de Malherbe appears to have been the founder 
i)f the priory of Thornyholm, in Yorkshire, about the time of King 
Stephen. 

* Rotrou and Gilbert were the immediate neighbours of Robert de 
Belesme, and by inevitable consequence always at war with him. 

^ For Robert de St. Ceneri, second of the name, see before, vol. ii. 
p. 459. 

'' Hugh de Nonant-sur-Quenge, one of the favourites of Robert Curthose. 
See vol. ii. p. 453. He must not be confounded with another person of 
the same name, who was cotemporary with Henry II., and ne])hew of 



A.D. 1103.] EOBEUT DE BELESME's SUCCESSES. 811 

resistance against him, and inflicted on him more loss and 
disgrace than any other Normans had done. 

On the approach of the duke's army, Eobert drew out his 
forces, and after making several false attacks on his inactive 
prince, fell upon him with great impetuosity at Challoux,* 
taking "William de Conversana,^ brother of the countess 
Sibylla, and several other prisoners. The brave Normans 
were filled with shame, that after their brilliant victories over 
foreign nations, in barbarous regions, they should be now 
vanquished and put to flight in the bosom of their own 
country by one of her sons; while Eobert, encouraged 
beyond measure by his success, engaged in the boldest en- 
terprises, and thenceforth held the duke so cheap, that he 
contemplated the conquest of the whole of Normandy. 
Meanwhile, the inhabitants of the country, having no leader, 
and not being able to support the cruel tyranny of the 
warlike count, bowed their necks under his yoke, though 
with great reluctance, becoming his adherents from fear 
instead of love ; and under his protection carried on fierce 
hostilities against their neighbours, with whom they were at 
variance. The duke's influence being thus on the wane, 
Eobert still became more formidable, and the lords of the ad- 
jacent fiefs going over to his side, he got possession of the 
fortress at Exmes. He also reduced the castle of Gunter,^ 
and some others in his neighbourhood. 

The abbey of nuns at Almeneches having been burnt as 
already stated, the feeble society of virgins was miserably 
dispersed. Each, as hazard furnished the means, returned 

Arnulph, bishop of Lisieux. This other Hugh de Nonant was probably the 
bishop of Chester in 1194, of whom Matthew Paris speaks. 

Our author has already mentioned twice in his eighth book Hugh de 
Nonant as one of the lords most exposed to the violence and treachery of 
Kobert de Belesme; he describes him as of moderate means, pauper 
oppidanus, but, notwithstanding, as so resolute that he resisted his 
powerful neighbour for a number of years, and was successful in making 
reprisals on him. 

' M. Du Bois places the field of this battle at Chaillou6, a short 
distance from Sdez, on the road to Nonant. M. Le Prevost considers it to 
have been fought between Le Viel-Urou and Briquetiere (Ste. Anastasie ). 

^ He was also one of the principal counsellors of his brother the duke. 

^ We find (p. 333) this castle in the hands of some of the brigands of 
the country, nho w*»re in arms against the duke ; probably the count 
retook it from them. 



S42 OTLDEETCUS YITALTS. [b.XI. CH. IV 

to the houses of their relations or friends. Emma, the 
abbess, with three of the sisterhood, took refuge at Ouche, 
and abode for six months in the chapel where the holy father 
St. Evroult, intent on heavenly contemplations, had dwelt 
in solitude. The year foUowinis: she returned to her own 
monastery, and by the aid of Grod and his faithful servants 
endeavoured to restore it from its ruins. She lived nearly ten 
years afterwards, in the course of which by great exertions 
she erected the church of the Virgin Mother, with the build- 
ings required for regular order, and took great pains to collect 
the scattered nuns, and bring them back to the cloister. On 
her death she was succeeded by Matilda, her brother Philip's 
daughter, who, when the abbey was again injured by an acci- 
dental fire,^ carefully repaired the church and buildings. 

Ch. IY. Deaths of Walter Giffard and tlie Duchess Sibylla 
— Their epitaphs — Continued hostilities in Normandy. 

At the same time, several distinguished barons in Normandy, 
namely, Walter G-iffard, William de Breteuil, and Ealph de 
Conches, departed this life, and were succeeded by young 
men. Walter Griffard, earl of Buckingham, died in England, 
and his body was brought over to Normandy, as he had 
ordered, and buried at the entrance of the church of the 
blessed Virgin Mary, at Longueville.^ His epitaph was 
inscribed on the wall, which was ornamented with pictures: 

Among his sires, the lords of Longueville, 
His bones to rest was Walter Gikfarp's will; 
Borne hither from fair England's shores to lie 
In his own work, St. Mary's priory. 
The generous knight, his country's faithful son, 
Gave to religion what his valour won; 
And Cluni's grateful monks rejoice to raise 
This pictured tablet to their founder's praise. 

The monks of Cluni paid great honours to this baron's 
memory, and commended his soul to the Lord Grod by 

* It has been already stated that Emma died March 4, 1113 ; all that 
we know of her niece Matilda is that she died on the fith July. 

* Longueville-la-Giffard, near Dieppe. Walter Giffard, the second of 
that name, died July 15, 1102. He founded in 1084 the priory of Sainte- 
Foi at Longueville. it was this lord who was with the army of William 
Ilufus when he invaded the Vexin in 1097, and not his father, Walter I., 
as we stated in mistake. The latter died before 1084. 



A.D. 1103.] DEATH OF THE DUCHESS SIBYLLA. 343 

incessant prayers, mindful of the benefits they richly enjoyed 
on his foundation at Longueville. His wife Agnes was 
sister of Anselm de Hibemont, and fifteen years after their 
marriage gave birth to a son, who was named Walter/ After 
his father's death, she carefully educated him until he arrived 
at manhood, and managed his hereditary domains for him 
many years with great prudence. This lady, giving way to 
the feelings of her sex, formed an affection for Duke Robert, 
and entangled him in an illicit connection, by the blandish- 
ments of love. Promising him succour against his enemies, 
both from her own resources and those of her powerful 
relations, she induced the silly duke to engage that on the 
death of his present wife, he would not only marry her, but 
entrust to her the government of the whole of Normandy. 

Not long afterwards the duchess Sibylla took to her bed, 
infected by poison, and died in the season of Lent, to the 
general sorrow.^ William, archbishop of Eouen, celebrated 
her obsequies with the clergy and people, respectfully inter- 
ring her in the church of St. Mary, mother of God. Her 
grave in the nave of the church is covered with a polished 
slab of white marble, on which the following epitaph may 
be distinctly seen. 

Not birth, nor beauty, rank, or power, 

Can lengthen this life's fleeting hour; 

Ev'n the illustrious Sibylle must, 

Laid in this tomb, return to dust. 

Apulia mourns her daughter's fate, 

And Normandy is desolate; 

The duchess gone, whose conduct pure. 

And all that could her hopes secure 

The wisdom to promote her weal 

And liberal hand her wounds to heal 

She lost, when in the Golden Fleece 

The bright sun shone : God give her peace . 

^ Walter GifFard, third of that name, died in 1164, according to Robert 
du Mont {Hist, de France, t. xiii. p. 309), without leaving any issue by 
his wife Ermengarde. 

2 This duchess had, according to the continuator of Jumieges, more 
intelligence and capacity for business than her husband, who often entrusted 
her with the admin'^tration of affairs during his absence. Sibylla 
paid dearly during her short residence in Normandy for the mistake 
she made in quitting the delicious climate and advanced civilization of 
Italy to attach herself to a prince who possessed neither talent nor morals. 



3M OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.XI. CH.IV. 

After these occurrences, the tumults of war which had 
already commenced, spread, from circumstances which 
suddenly happened, through almost the whole of Normandy. 
They raged so furiously that the duke was unable to marry- 
again, and Agnes, remaining a widow, aspired in vain to share 
the bed of her sovereign. 

At that time violent hostilities broke out between the 
people of Breteuil, Evreux, and others in that neighbourhood. 
William de Breteuil had married Adeline, the daughter of 
Hugh de Montfort, but he had no son born in wedlock. 
He died at Bee on the second of the ides [the 12th] of 
January, but was buried at Lire, in the abbey which his 
father had founded on his own fief. His nephews William 
de Gruader^ and Eeynold de Grancei^ disputed the succession ; 
but the Normans chose Eustace, his son by a concubine, 
preferring a countryman of their own, although he was a 
bastard, to a Burgundian or Breton of legitimate birth. In 
consequence, the parties flew to arms with great violence, 
and the country was still further desolated. "William de 
Gruader dying soon afterwards E-eynold became stronger, 
and AVilliam earl of Evreux joined with many others in 
affording him aid. E-alph de Conches,^ son of Isabel, 
Ascelin Goel,^ and Amauri de Montfort^ collected their forces 
on the side of Reynold, and did much mischief to their neigh- 
bours, devastating their country by hostile inroads, but they 
rendered but little service to the cause they espoused. For 
Eustace, supported by William Alis, Ealph-the- Eed,^ 

^ William de Guader, son of Ralph de Guader (see vol. ii. p. 78), and 
eldest brother of Ralph II. de Guader, who will appear hereafter. There 
was a third brother, Alan de Guader, who accompanied his father to the 
crusade, and probably never returned. See before, p. 97. 

^ Reynold de Grancei, of the noble house of Grancei in Burgundy. 
We shall have an opportunity in the sequel of speaking of this person 
and his family. 

* Ralph de Conches, third of that name, son of Isabel, of MontJbrt 
TAmauri. 

* Ascelin Gouel, lord of Ivri, son of Robert Gouel, lord of Br^val. 

* Amauri de Montfort, third of that name, brother of Isabel. 

* William Alis was one of the principal vassals of the lords of Breteuil. 
This family gave its name to two mills, one at Breteuil, the other at 
Carentonne near Bernai, an estate which it had held for a long period. 
The father of this person was witness of the confirmation by William Fits- 
Usborne of the grant of GuernanviUe to St. Evroult. The name of the 



A.D. 1107.] POPE PASCHAL TISITS A.DELA DE r,LOIS. 345 

Theobald, and other barons, made a brave resistance, and by 
their advice he implored help from the king of England 
against his numerous adversaries. The king gave him his 
daughter Juliana in marriage, promising him effectual 
succour against Groel and all his other enemies. At the 
same time he married another daughter to Rotro count of 
Mortain, who bore her husband a daughter named Philippa.^ 

Ch. V. Paschal II. visits France — Goes to Chart res — 
Character and history of Adela, countess de Blois — Her 
children and death. 

In the year of our Lord 1103,^ Pope Paschal paid a visit 
to Prance, and being received with great honours faithfully 
performed his sacred ofiice. The venerable Ivo, bishop of 
Chartres, was then distinguished among the doctors of 
Prance for his learning, both sacred and profane, and, on his 
invitation, the pope celebrated the feast of Easter at Chartres. 
Jhe Countess Adela contributed large sums for the pope's 
expenses, and received the benediction of the apostolical see 
for herself and her house for ever. That honourable lady, 
on her husband's pilgrimage, took upon herself the govern- 
ment of his county, and carefully educated their children to 
become protectors of holy church.^ 

William, the eldest, married the daughter of Grilo de Sulli, 
and succeeding to the domains of his father-in-law had a 

one or other of them appears in Domesday-book as tenant in capite in 
Hampshire. The one mentioned by our author was probably the donor of 
lands to the canons of the priory of St. Denys, near Southampton, con- 
firmed a long time afterwards by Geoffrey Laci, bishop of Winchester. 
See the Monastic Anglic, v. xi. p. 110. 

Ralph-the-Red, lord of Pont-Echanfr^, now Notre-Dame-du-Hamel. 
The third person mentioned is unknown. He was probably, like Ralph-the- 
Red, from the neighbourhood of St. Evroult, so that our author did not 
think it necessary to point him out more distinctly. 

* The name of this natural daughter of Henry I. was Matilda. 

' Our author is mistaken in his date of this visit of the pope, which did 
not take place till 1107. He left Cluni in the month of February, and 
arrived at St. Denys in April. 

' The countess Adela, a woman of great spirit and a warm heart, 
possessed a more cultivated understanding than either of her brothers. 
It is supposed that the history of Normandy which has the singular title 
of Draco Normanicus, was composed for her. La Porte du Theil has 
given the contents of the chapters in his Notices et Extraits des MSS. de la 
Bibliothtque du Roi, 



MQ ohdeeictjs vitalts. [b.xi. ch.t. 

long and peaceable life, and left a worthy offspring, Odo, 
Eahier. ***** *i 

Theobald,^ count Palatine, distinguished himself in the 
wars, but he loved peace and ruled with equity, and was the 
most eminent of the princes of France for wealth and valour. 
He married Matilda, daughter of Duke Ingelbert, and 
after the death of King Henry, his uncle, obtained the duchy 
of Normandy and checked the savage feuds of his subjects 
by using freely the rod of lawful discipline. 

As for Stephen, the third son of Stephen de Blois, having 
been knighted by his uncle Henry, and taken prisoner 
"William count of Mortain at the battle of Tinchebrai, the 
king granted him that county. He married Matilda, daughter 
of Eustace count of Boulogne, by his wife Mary ; and in her 
right inherited all his states. At last, when King Henry 
died at the castle of Lions on the fourth of the nones 
[the 2nd] of December, Stephen crossed the sea and was 
crowned king of England in the beginning of the ye^ 
1136. 

In the last place, Henry, the youngest son [of Stephen de 
Blois] became a monk of Cluni while he was yet a boy ; 
he was made abbot of Glastonbury when a young man, and 
afterwards promoted to the see of "Winchester on the death 
of William Giffard.^ 

^ The MS. of St. Evroult has a blank in this place which is only 
noticed in one of the printed editions. As William de Blois had, as it will 
shortly appear, three children besides the two here named, it was proba- 
bly intended to be filled up with their names. This William de Blois, the 
eldest brother of this illustrious family, was deformed and stammered; he 
was also narrow-minded and subject to violent bursts of passion. He 
married the daughter of Gilo de SuUi of whom we have had occasion to 
speak on several occasions. From disgust to the memory of parents who 
had disinherited him, he took the name and arms of his wife, who bore 
liim five children, three sons and two daughters. His third son, Henry, 
had the abbey of Fecamp given him by his uncle, King Stephen, and lived 
till 1189. Margaret, his eldest daughter, married Henry, count d'Eu, and 
Elizabeth, the second, was abbess of Caen, as appears before, vol. ii. p. 377. 

^ Theobald IV., surnamed the Great, married Matilda, daughter of 
Engelbert, duke of Carinthia and Frioul. He will appear on the stage in 
the course of this history as a supporter of his uncle and brother. 

^ The two last of these sons of Stephen and Adela will become prominent 
actors in the sequel of our author's history, and afi^"'ird many opportunities 
of referring to them. It is only necessary to remark at present that our 
author fixes the coronation of King Stephen in the year 1136, because he 



A.D. 1107.] ADELA TAKES THE YEIL. 347 

At length the mother of this illustrious progeny, began 
to reflect on the dark hour of the shades of death, after 
enjoying great wealth and those delights, the abundance of 
which corrupts and ruins the souls of sinners ; she there- 
fore voluntarily resigned the fleeting pleasures and vain 
pomps of the world, and becoming a nun at Marcigni^ under 
the severe rule of the Cluniac order, devoted herself to the 
service of the King of Sabaoth. I have anticipated the 
current events in giving this account of an illustrious mother 
and her prosperous offspring, the end of whose uncertain 
fortunes I cannot yet know. I must now recur to the 
regular course of my narrative, from which I have somewhat 
digressed. - 

Ch. YI. King Henry interferes to settle the disputes resiwct- 
ing the succession to William de BreteuiVs jiefs — I)uring 
the hostilities, a rich hurgess canned off by surprise. 

The king of England commissioned Eobert, earl of Mel- 
lent, to put an end to the intestine divisions of JSTormandv, 
enjoining Duke Eobert and the other lords to support his 
son-in-law, and oppose his enemies, or- they would otherwise 
incur the consequences of his royal indignation. In conse- 
quence many of them, on understanding that Eustace enjoyed 
the king's favour, remained quiet, and those who had most 
opposed him were the first to render him aid. Eeynold, 
however, and Goel,^ with other bold men, persisted in their 
iniquitous enterprises, and instead of paying any respect to 
the royal injunction, refused to desist from their attacks on 
the king's son-in-law; and with wicked daring still carried fire 
and sword through the country. Among Eeynold' s other 
cruel deeds, having taken by assault one of the enemy's 
castles, he intercepted the whole garrison as they were 

begins the year at Christmas, but the ceremony was performed on the 26th 
December, the feast of the patron saint of the new king. 

1 At the priory of Marcigni-sur-Loire, founded in 1056 by St. Hugh, 
abbot of Cluni. She took the veil before 1117, and died there in 1 137, 
according to the continuator of William de Jumi^ges. 

^ Our author now returns to the competitors for the inheritance of 
William de Breteuil, having broken the thread of his narrative very 
unfortunately, for the purpose of introducing the visit of the pope to 
Chartres four years before it took place. 

' Ascelin de Goel, lord of Breval and Ivri. 



318 OHDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.XI. CH.YI. 

inarcliing out, and plunging his own sword into the bosom 
of each individual, butchered them all without mercy, as if 
they had been brute beasts. Becoming universally odious, 
principally on account of this barbarity, and Eustace obtaining 
signal successes and recovering the whole of his father's fief, 
Beynold was driven out of Normandy. On his return to 
his native country, he began to plot against "William [de 
Gruader], his elder brother, but, by a just judgment of Grod, 
while he was fomenting disturbances, he fell into his brother's 
hands, who threw him into prison, where he suffered the 
just punishment of his criminal enterprises.^ 

About the same time Goel placed a watch on John,' son of 
Stephen, who lived at Meulan, and seizing him as he was 
returning from a conference with the count his lord, who 
was then at Beaumont, in Normandy, he kept the avaricious 
usurer nearly four months in close prison. The count made 
earnest efforts for the liberation of his burgess, who was 
extremely rich, but he could not draw him out of the fox's 
mouth without the good offices of several lords. The politic 
count Eobert, therefore concluded a peace with William, 
count of Evreux, betrothing his daughter Emma, then only 
.1 year old,^ to William's nephew Amauri. Ralph de Cou- 
ches, Eustace, and Groel, and other belligerent lord marchers 
were included in this pacification. In consequence John 
was set at liberty, and peace and security were restored to 
many others. 

They ear following* Isabel, the wife of the earl of Mellent, 
gave birth to twins, who were named Walter and E-obert, 
and from some impediments which occurred, Amauri was 
prevented from espousing the child he h;id been promised. 

' As we have already remarked, this nobleman belonged to the illustrious 
house of Grancei, which derived its name from Grancei-le-Chatel, C6te- 
d'Or, in Burgundy. His wife's name was Agnes. 

' A rich burgess of Meulan. 

^ Adeline de Meulan, who married Hugh, lord of Montfort-sur-Risle. 

* In 1104. 



A.D. 1103.] EGBERT DE BELESME's TYRANNY. 349 

Ch. VII. Duke Mdhert mahes peace tcifJi Hohert de Belesme 
— The hisliop and abbot of ISeez take refuge in England 
from Bclcsme's tyranny — The abbot becomes bishop of 
Rochester, and afterwards archbishop of Canterbury. 

TnE duke, abandoned to sloth, and perceiving the country 
laid waste, and that he was unable to defend the territories 
of his duchy against Robert de Belesme, broke the engage- 
ment he had made with the king, and without his consent 
concluded peace with Eobert, restoring to him his patri- 
monial estates, namely the bishopric of Seez, and other 
domains before mentioned. In consequence the venerable 
Serlo, bishop of Seez,^ rather than submit to Robert's tyranny 
and live under his yoke, chose to retire from his bishopric. 
Abandoning his see, he became a wanderer in foreign coun- 
tries, and excommunicated Eobert and his adherents. 

Eobert de Belesme also persecuted in various ways Ealph 
the abbot of Seez, a cheerful, facetious, and amiable person, and 
oppressing the vassals of St. Martin.* The Bishop, with ini- 
quitous exactions, forced the abbot to secede by these unjust 
inflictions on his subjects. Thus both bishop and abbot, 
weary of the tyrant's yoke, took refuge in England, where 
they met a kind reception and comfort from King Henry. 

About this time, the venerable Grundulf, bishop of 
Eochester, died, and abbot Ealph was appointed his suc- 
cessor by canonical election. He was consecrated bishop 
of Eochester, by Anselm, the reverend archbishop of Can- 
terbury, and became some years afterwards his successor in 
that see. 

Ch. VIII. Magnus Barfod^s expedition to Ireland, in ivhich 
he ivas slain — King Henry seizes his treasure at Lincoln — 
Believed by his death from alarm,s in that quarter — 
Arnulph de Montgomery in Ireland. 

At that time, Magnus, the powerful king of Norway, 
sailed round the British isles,^ and landing on the islands as 

^ Serlo d'Orgeres, near Gace, tne ex-abbot of St. Evroult. See vol. ii. 
p. 521, and the present vol. p. 30. 

' Ralph d'Escures, abbot of St. Martin at Seez. Respecting tliis 
bishop, see vol. ii. p. 464. 

^ See the notes on Magnus Barfod's naval expeditions before, pp. 213, 
216, 217. The opening of this chapter m;iy apply to several of thetn, but 



350 OEDEEICUS yiTALlS. [b.xi. ch.tiii. 

far as Ireland, prudently founded colonies in them, and com- 
manded towns and villages to be constructed as in other 
countries. In consequence the Irish were extremely hostile 
to him, and did all in their power to oppose him, using 
every device to crush their enemy, either by force or fraud. 
Thereupon, the valiant king undertook an expedition against 
them, appearing with his fleet on the coast of Ireland. The 
Irish, struck with terror at the king's power, called on the 
Normans, and Arnulph,^ and his auxiliaries hastened to bring 
them succour. But the united forces were awed by the 
presence of the formidable Magnus, and not daring to give 
him battle consulted how they might best manage to lead 
him into a snare by base treachery. 

At last, some smooth-speaking men came to him with 
apparent amity, and enticed him on frivolous pretences to 
land from his ships and see the country, which they 
persuaded him he would be able to subdue with a small 
force. Magnus, too easily trusting the traitors, left his armed 
troops on the shore, and being conducted two miles by the 
traitors fell into the trap which cost him his life. For he 
found a large band of his enemies lying in ambush, who 
rushed on him from their place of concealment, and the daring 
Norwegian, disdaining to fly, encountered them bravely. 
But a handful of men could not withstand the attack of 
innumerable assailants. Magnus, setting his back against a 
tree, and covered by his shield, hurled his darts against the 
enemy, and wounded several of them, but, alas! he fell 
overwhelmed by numbers.^ 

A rich citizen of Lincoln kept the treasure of king Magnus, 
and supplied him with ornaments, plate, arms, furniture, and 
whatever else the royal service required. This man, having 

Ordericus goes on to give some further details of the last in which the 
Norwegian king was slain in 1103. 

* Arnulph de Montgomery being at this time governor or keeper of 
Pembroke castle, on Milford Haven, from which there has been easy com- 
munication with Ireland from the earliest times, the calling in of the 
Normans from that strong fortress was very natural. Strongbov/'s expe- 
dition afterwards embarked there for the conquest of Ireland. 

2 Magnus Barfod was slain in a sudden attack of the Irish in Ulster on 
St. Bartholomew's day, August 24, 1103, when he was on the point of 
re-embarking for Norway. His Saga in Snorro Sturleson's Heimskringla 
gives all the details in the vivid style of the Icelandic scalds. 



A.D. 1103.] MAG2^US OF NORWAY SLAIN, 351 

learnt the king's death, hastened home, and trafficking with 
the king's treasure, speedily amassed vast wealth.^ 

Meanwhile, the king of England received the intelligence 
that Magnus was slain, with great satisfaction, feeling him- 
self relieved from a great burden, and some time afterwards 
required the citizen of Lincoln to give up the late king's 
treasure. The merchant at first denied that he had any such 
deposit, but the king, having convicted him of the falshood, 
suddenly arrested him, and extorted from him, as it is said, 
more than twenty thousand pounds of silver. 

The Irish, having tasted the blood of king Magnus and 
his followers, became still more savage, and made a sudden at- 
tempt to massacre the Normans. Their king also carried 
off his daughter, who was married to Arnulph, and con- 
tracted an illicit union for the wanton with one of his 
cousins, resolved to kill Arnulph himself, as the reward of his 
alliance; but the knight, discovering the execrable frauds of 
this barbarous people, made his escape to his countrymen, and 
lived for nearly twenty years afterwards without having any 
settled abode. At last, in his old age, having been reconciled 
with the king, to outward appearance at least, he married, 
and on the morrow of his nuptials fell asleep after a banquet, 
and shortly expiring, left the guests to listen to funeral 
dirges instead of an epithalamium. 

King Henry grew stronger,'-^ as his enemies on every side 

^ Our author supplies us in this paragraph with a short but curious 
notice of the mercantile connection which subsisted at tliat period between 
England and Norway. The Northmen had long been the greatest mari- 
time power in Europe, and besides their trade by sea, had commercial 
relations with the east. Their merchants were settled in many of the 
great towns in England, and particularly in the " Five-Burghs," of which 
Lincoln, where this agent of Magnus Barfod is stated to have lived, waa 
one. He was doubtless of Anglo-Norwegian origin, as almost all the free 
people of the north and east of England were. See Warsae's " Danes in 
England," pp. 104 and 152, and an Essay in the Jubilee edition of the Works 
of King Alfred. 

' " 1 do not understand how the death of the king of Norway could so 
powerfully consolidate the throne of Henry I., but usurpers are surrounded 
by terrors ; and, besides, there still existed great sympathy for the Norwe- 
gians in the north of England.". — Le Prevost. The facts are that the free 
population of that part of the island was essentially composed of the 
descendants of the Northmen, the Anglo-Saxons having been exterminated 
qj- reduced to slavery; and their colonies and influence were also extended 
throughout the eastern and iientral districts in fifteen out of the thirty -two 



352 ORDEEICUS VITALIS. [e.XI. CH.IX. 

yielded to the adverse issues of their variable fortunes, but 
his security was especially increased by the fall of King 
Magnus, and his resources were aggrandised, to his great satis- 
faction, by the royal treasure on which he had laid hands. 

Ch. IX. Lewis of France at the court of King Henry — 
Intrigues of Queen Bertrade — Lewis escapes being poisoned 
— Succeeds Philip I. 

At the same time, the young Lewis crossed over to England,^ 
by his father's leave, with a retinue which though small was 
composed of men of ability. The illustrious youth came to 
the court of Henry as an aspirant in arms, and was received 
by him with the honours due to his royal birth, and treated 
with perfect good will under all circumstances. However, he 
was speedily followed by a messenger from his step-mother 
Bertrade, who was the bearer of despatches to King Henry 
under the seal of Philip, king of Erance. The king, who was 
a scholar,^ read the letter, and after persuing it, hastily 

counties of England. This hardy and independent race bowed reluctantly 
to the Norman yoke, and neither the Conqueror nor his sons were able 
fully to establish their power north of the Humber. Besides which, the 
kings of Norway had not forgotten that their ancestors once wore the 
English crown. The malcontents in England maintained intimate rela- 
tions with their kinsmen in Scandinavia, and the kings were ready to take 
advantage of any opportunity of re-establishing their power, so that even so 
late as 1138 King Eric-Lam contemplated an invasion. Scarcely was 
Henry I. seated on the throne, when it was shaken by the northern rebel- 
lion, which it required all his talent and force of character to quell. Aware 
of this element in the political state of his kingdom, that sagacious prince 
might well exult at the death of so powerful and enterprising a king as 
Magnus Barfod, and we are indebted to our author for conveying to us the 
impression which it must have generally made at that period. 

As to Henry's seizure of the Norwegian king's treasure at Lincoln, Mag- 
nus Barfod being at that time (as he has told us himself, before, p. 259,) 
at peace with England, the act was contrary to all principles of interna- 
tional law, but our Norman kings were not scrupulous in their confiscations 
and exactions, and Henry was as avaricious as most of his family. 

^ It was not at this time as our author states, but as early as Christmas 
in the year 1100, that the visit of the heir of the crown of France to the 
English court took place. The young prince was then twenty- three years 
of age. 

' Literatus rex. We have not ventured to put a gloss on the phrase 
adopted by our author, as there seems to be some doubt respecting Henry's 
claims to be considered a man of letters in the modern sense of the words, 
notwithstanding his surname of Beauclerc. It is singular that neither 
Henry of Huntingdon nor William of Malmesbury, cuteniporary writers, 



A.T). 1101.] BEIiTEAUE ATTEMPTS TO POISON LEWIS. 353 

Bummoned his council and had a long consultation on the 
affair. The purport of the letter, he had just read, was, that 
Philip, king of France, requested him to arrest his son, who 
had come over to the English court, and keep him in close 
confinement for the rest of his life. Henry, with his usual 
sagacity, ably discussed with his faithful barons the follv 
and indecency of the demand which the king of Trance had 
addressed to him through his queen's intrigues, and gave a 
flat refusal to a proposal altogether so abominable and un- 
worthy of a king, and so repugnant to himself and his nobles. 
AVilliam de Buschelai,^ a knight of intelligence, who was in 
attendance on Lewis, discovered the affair while it was still 
a secret, and, in consequence, although he had not been 
summoned to the councij, entered the apartment as if for 
amusement. The king immediately gave him a gracious 
message to Lewis, requesting him to retire quietly from his 
court ; and sent him back to France, having loaded both the 
prince and his companions with munificent presents. Lewis, 
discovering his step-mother's perfidy, went to his father in 
great wrath, and informed him of the terrible calamity to 
which his letter had exposed him in a foreign country. 
The king, who knew nothing of the infamous treachery, 
denied the whole, and the young prince, boiling with rage, 
sought his step-mother's death; she however tried every 
means to be before him in the work of destruction, and, 
having sent for three wizards, who were of the number of the 
clergy, promised them a large sum of money to procure Lewis's 
death.^ These miscreants performed their cursed sorceries 
for three days, and promised the cruel adulteress that Lewis 
would be a corpse in nine days more, if they continued their 
incantations* In the interval one of them revealed the 

who have taken extended views of his character, the latter even de- 
scribing his person, should be altogether silent on the subject of hia lite- 
rary attainments. Malmesbur}', indeed, says incidentally that " he could 
not much read aloud," quamvis ipse nee multum palam legeretj which 
gives occasion to M. Le Prevcst to remark that it must have given him 
some trouble to peruse the French king's letter. 

^ William de Buchelai, near Mantes, one of the most devoted servants 
of Lewis-le-Gros. 

^ Bertrade's infamous attempts on the liberty, and then on the life of 
her step-son, are quite in character with her previous history. See before, 
pp. 3, 4. 

YOL. III. A A 



35J: OllDEllICUS VITAL18. [i3.XI. CH.IX 

jugglery of his fellows, and they were both arrested, so that, 
by God's mercy, their machinations were incomplete. Then 
the audacious step-mother had recource to dealers in poison, 
and induced them, by promises of great rewards, to administer 
it to the king's son. In consequence, the illustrious youth 
took to his bed, and for many days could neither eat nor sleep. 
Almost all the French were in despair at the danger to which 
the lawful heir to the crown was exposed. At last, all 
remedies adminstered by the French physicians having failed, 
a man from Barbary,^ with a long beard," presented himself, 
and applied the experience of his medical skill to the des- 
perate case of the young prince, and by Grod's help suc- 
ceeded, in spite of the jealous interference of the native 
physicians. This person had long resided among the infidels, 
where he had studied under masters deeply versed in the 
secrets of physical science, who had become eminent 
among the wisest of the barbarians for their knowledge 
acquired by the patient investigation of philosophical truth. 
The royal youth recovered at last, but he was pale to the 
day of his death. ^ 

Bertrade was in despair at her step-son's being I'estored 
to health. Fear of the consequences of the injury she had 
tried to do him produced hatred, which became daily on the 
increase. Sparing no efforts to accomplish her anxiety for 
his destruction, she engaged many partners in her iniquity, 
that, released from all fear of the young priuce she had so 
much offended, the government might fall into her own 
hands, and on his death she might be better able to placcj 
her own sons, Philip* and Florus^ on the throne. How- 
ever, the king humbly implored his son's forgiveness of his 

^ Barbaric. Probably not Barbary in Africa, but the country occupied 
by the African Moors in Spain, wliere there were at this period very Nou- 
rishing schools of medicine, the Arab races furnishiiiii;, as is well knuwu, 
physicians and writers en that science, far in advance of the Chiistian.s. 

^ Hirsutus. Our author loses no opportunity of marking the horror fcit 
by the clergy of that age for long hair and long beards. 

^ Notwithstanding his corpulence, Lewis continued pale all his life in 
consequence of the poisons administered to him by Bertrade's means. 

* Philip, count of Mantes and lord of Mehun-sur-I^vre, married in 
1104 Eli/abeth, dau-hter of Gui Troussel, lord of Montlhdri, one of the 
F Ilium- hides of Antioch. See before p. I'Ji). 

' Flenri married the heiress of Is'angij, by wham he had Elizabeth de 
Nangirij wile of Ansel de Venisi. 



A.D. 1103.] LEWIS LE GllUS SUCCEEDS PUILIP I. 355 

criminal step-mother, promising amendment on her behalf, 
and ceding to him Pontoise and all the Vexin, as the price 
of his reconciliation. Lewis, after consulting the bishops 
and barons, who he knew were devoted to him, and out 
of respect for his father's dignity, pardoned the offence. 
Bertrade trembled at his frown, now that she found 
her wickedness was discovered, and, covered with shame, 
humbled herself to become his handmaid, and thenceforth, 
though reluctantly, abstained from further attempts on the 
life against which she had so much practised. 

Lewis succeeded to the throne of France five years after- 
wards, on his father's death, and reigned twenty-seven years. ^ 
He always esteemed Henry, the king of England, wJho had 
been so true to him as before related, and never had any 
disputes with him, but against his own inclination, and 
through the intrigues of mischievous traitors. 

Ch. X. King Henry crosses over to Normandy with a powers 
ful armament — Norynan harons, his adherents — Conference 
with Duke Robert — The country of Lisieux ceded to the 



E-ALPH DE Conches crosed over the sea after his father's 
death, and received a gracious reception from the king, who 
confirmed him in his father's English honours and estates. 
He married Adeliza, the daughter of Earl Waltheof and 
Judith, the king's cousin,^ who bore him Eoger and Hugh, 
besides several daughters. Many other lords, who were men 
of spirit, thus deserted the spiritless duke, and prudently 
attached themselves to the sagacious king, imploring him 

^ " From the 3rd of August, 1 108, the day of his coronation, to the Ist of 
August, 1137 (0 which makes twenty-nine years instead of twenty -seven." 
— Le Prevost. This prince has the same character for gormandizing given 
him by Her.ry of Huntingdon as his father. " Whose god," he says " was 
their lielly, and indeed a fatal enemy it was; for such was their gluttony 
that they became so fat as not to be able to support themselves. Philip 
died long ago of plethora ; Lewis has now shared the same fate, though a 
young man." — Letter to Walter, in Henry of Huntingdon's works, AiUiq. 
Lib. p. 313, and see preface p. xii., where it is shown that the letter to 
Walter was written in 1135, which, connected with the assertion that Lewis 
was then deed, confirms the computation of Ordericus. 

* Adeliza, daughter of Earl Waltheof and Judith, daughter of the coun- 
tess of Aumale, sister of William the Conqueror. We shall find iu the 
year 1134, Roger de Toeni, the eldesi of their children. 
A A 2 



356. ORDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.XI. CH.X. 

with tears in their eyes to succour the suffering church of 
God, and their wretched country. Henry was therefore 
gently entreated, or rather earnestly petitioned, by many 
honourable persons, both of the clergy and laity, to visit the 
heritage of his ancestors, which was miserably desolated, 
and, cheering by his presence a country which had no 
governor, take posession of it, and defend it against aban- 
doned robbers by bringing them to justice. 

In the year of our Lord 1104, Henry, king of England, 
sailed over to Normandy with a powerful fleet, arid visited 
Domfront, and the other castles which were under his 
dominion,^ in great state. He was received honourably 
by his principal vassals who made him large presents, fitting 
a king. Robert earl of Mellent, and Eichard of Chester, 
Stephen earl of Aumale, and Henry count d'Eu, Eotrou 
count de Mortain, Eustace of Boulogne, Balph de Conches, 
Eobert Eitz-Hamon, Kobert de Montfort, and Ealph de 
Mortemer, with several others, held many lordships under 
him in England, and having espoused his cause in Normandy 
with their vassals, were ready to have recourse to arms and 
support it zealously against all the world. In a few days he 
summoned his brother to a conference and accused him, in 
the presence of his parasites, with having broken the treaty 
they had concluded in England, by making peace without his 
consent with Eobert de Belesme, who was a traitor to them 
both, restoring to him, contrary to law and justice, the fiefs 
lield by his father. Henry further reproached the duke with 
having by his indolence abetted ^ thieves, robbers, and other 
malefactors ; and having hopelessly abandoned Normandy to 
the shameless bullies hj whom he was enslaved, and mth 
filling the office of shepherd and prince to no purpose, 
while he did not exercise the powers of government for the 
benefit of the church of God and the defenceless people, 
instead of leaving them to the tender mercies of their perse- 
cutors, like sheep in the jaws of wolves. The king stated 
his case with great reason and ability, asserting that the 

' Thia passa2;e shows with what regard to the faith of treaties Henry had 
observed the stipulation in that of 1101, by which Domfront was the only 
castle he reserved in Normandy. See before p. 285. 

'-' JJescrvirel. Duchesne's reading is deseruerii, which mast be a mis- 
tivke. 



A.D. 1105.] DUKE EOBEET HUMBLED BT KING HENBY. 357 

duke had broken the treaty made between the two brothers 
in many important particulars which he could not deny, but 
excused himself by throwing the blame on his contemptible 
associates. In fact he was equally destitute of judgment and 
friends, making light of the society and counsels of good 
and wise men, and miserably following an opposite course, 
to the detriment of his people as well as himself. In the 
present embarrased state of his affairs, having advised with 
those about him, he implored, as was natural, for the weaker 
of the two brothers, the favour of the stronger, and gave 
up to him "William count of Evreux,^ with his county and 
all his vassals ; for both Robert and his adherents were 
alarmed lest they should be brought to public trial, and the 
duke be justly deprived of the duchy which he nominally, 
not really, governed, or should have to sustain a formidable 
war against his royal brother, to his utter destruction. 

The illustrious count [of Evreux], hearing that he was to 
be transferred like a horse or an ox, and wishing to preserve 
his integrity and fealty, said publicly to the princes : " I 
have served your father faithfully all my days, never having 
stained my sworn fealty in any matter hitherto; I have also 
observed it to his heir, and determined to use every effort to 
continue in the same. But it being impossible, as I have 
often heard learned doctors quote from the scripture, and 
God himself has declared in the gospel, for any one to 
serve in peace two masters who disagree with each other, 
it is my earnest desire to be subject to only one lord, lest 
being liable to a double service, I shall satisfy neither of 
them. I love both the king and the duke ; both are the 
sons of the king my lord, and I wish to respect both ; but I 
will only do homage to one of them, and him I will loyally 
serve as my lord." This candid declaration pleased every 
one. 

The duke Eobert himself placed the count's hand in the 

• king's ; and peace being restored between the brothers, 

Henry returned to England before winter. Soon however, 

^ William, who was at the battle of Hastings, became count of Evreux 
on the death of his father, which happened on the 13th of October, 1067, 
and died himself the 18th of April, 1118. He was grandson of ArchbiBhop 
Robert, and consequently cousin, one degree removed, from William the 
Conqueror. 



S58" ORDEEICUS TITALTS. [e.XI. CH.XI. 

the fierce freebooters renewed their hostile excursions, and 
quickly overturned all that the king and great men had 
ordered for the good of the country. Eor Bobert de Belesme 
was greatly disturbed at the advantages the king, whom he 
cordially hated, had obtained by his journey, and in concert 
with his nephew, William, earl of Morton,^ and such others 
as he was able to seduce, commenced hostilities against the 
king's adherents. In consequence, the evil disposed subjects 
in that district were guilty of greater excesses than I can 
describe. They presently stained the whole province with 
murder and robljery, and, carrying off their booty and putting 
the, inhabitants to death, set fire to the houses. The coun- 
try people with their wives and children fled into France, 
where they sufiered greatly in their exile. Thus the 
Normans, who boasted of being the conquerors of the 
English and Apulians on their native soil, were now reduced 
to labour in misery and sorrow on the fields of Trance. 
Meanwhile, their own gardens, left deserted, were overrun 
with thistles and nettles, which covered the ground, for want 
of cultivation. 

Ch. XI. The his J} op of Seez officiates in presence of King 
Henry at Carentan — The hishofs discourse on the miseries 
of the country and the evil fashions of the age — Me 
crops the long hair of Henry and his courtiers. 

Amidst these calamities, holy church was grievously perse- 
cuted ; and while she frequently witnessed the deaths of her 

' William, earl of Morton, cousin-german of Robert Curthose and 
I^enry I. 

Our author has omitted to mention the grounds of the animosity which 
subsisted between the king and the earl of Morton. It appears that their 
mutual hatred was of old date, but it broke out in consequence of the 
demand made by William to the investiture of the earldom of Kent, to 
which he founded his pretensions on a devise by his uncle Bishop Odo. 
lie was a young nobleman of a most active disposition, and as much distin- 
guished for ability as his father was for want of talent, from whom he inhe- 
rited the earldom of Cornwall. Indignant at the refusal he received from 
King Henry, and the forfeiture of his earldom of Cornwall in 1 ] 04, he 
retired to Normandy, where, guided by the counsels of Robert de Belesme, 
his uncle, he became one of the king's most dangerous enemies. He also 
en'ertained great antipathy towards the young Richard, earl of Chester, his 
neighbour in Normandy, who, being a minor, was placed by the king under 
his guardianship, nonnnUa partibus ejus appendilia invasitf carpoit, 



^.T>. 1105.] KT\0 TIENIIY INVADES NORMANDY. 350 

innocent children, nnd the irreparable loss of lives, pun* 
hands were lifted to heaven with heart-felt prayers to her 
•Spouse, who rules above, to afford her relief. Cries of 
distress from suffering Normandy were wafted across the 
<'hannel, and the complaints of the desolate people of Nor- 
inandy were addressed to the king of England. Gunhier 
d'Aunai,' who had the custody of Bayeux, and Eeynold de 
Warrenne,^ who espoused the cause of the duke, with his 
other partizans, broke the treaty of peace, and, making 
prisoners Eobert Fitz-Hamon ^ and some other of the king's 
adherents, detained them long in prison, both to extort heavv 
ransoms and to show their contempt and hatred of the 
king.* In consequence, the vigilant monarch no sooner heard 

abrasii. He was exposed fo horrible arid long-continued cruelties, after 
failing into Henry's hands at the battle of Tinchebrai. 

' Gontier de Launai, or d'Aunai, nephew of Hug;h de Nonant. There 
are two places of the name of Launai, and seven with that of Aunai in Nor- 
mandy. Probably this was Aunai-le-Bois, in the canton of Mesle-sur- 
^'a^the, or Notre Dame-d'Aunai, near Sap, both not far from Nonant. 

^ Reynold de VVarrenne, brother of the earl of Surrey. 

^ Grandson of Hamon-aux-Dents, lord of Torigni, Creuilli, and other 
vast domains, who was killed at the battle of Valesdunes. It has already 
appeared, vol. ii. p. 473, that he married Sibylla de Montgomery. 

* This happened in the commencement of the ye.ar 1105. Robert Fitz- 
Hamon was surprised by troops from Bayeux and Caen^ placed in ambush 
at Sicqueville in Bessin, while he was overrunning the country to reduce 
it to submission to the king of England. He took refuge in the church 
tower, but his assailants set it on fire, and he was obliged to come down 
and surrender. While they were conducting him to Bayeux, his guard 
kept shouting in his ear (as Wace tells us, who supplies these details, t. ii. 
p. 392)— 

La hart, la hart al traitor, 
Ki a guerpi son dreit seignor! 

However justly merited these imprecations, they were probably lost 
upon him, as he received a contusion on the brain, while defending 
himself in the church tower, which deprived him of his reason for the 
rest of his life, prolonged till March, 1107. This circumstance was 
regarded as a sign of the divine Wrath, not at Robert Fitzhamon's rebel- 
lion against his lawful sovereign, but for the disasters occasioned by his 
captivity, such as the pillage of Bayeux and the burning of the cathedral. 
It might be remarked that they happened after the accident which deprived 
Robert of his reason ; but the historian himself adds that the impression 
is erroneous, as the king repaired the injuries received by the cathedra! 
of Bayeux with great magnificence, and Robert Fitz-Hamon founded an 
abbey at Tewkesbury, distinguished both for its noble architecture, and the 
worth of its monks. See Monast. Anglic* vol. i. p. 153. 



3G0 OBDEBICtTS VITA LIS. [b.XI. CUXI. 

these occurrences, than he gave orders to fit out a fleet. 
Crossing over to Normandy the spring following, he landed 
at the port called Barbaflot, in the last week of Lent,^ and 
on Easter eve,- found quarters in the village of Carentan, on 
the fords of the Yire, where he rested for a while. 

Serlo, the venerable bishop of Seez, met him there, being 
the first of the Normans who offered their services to King 
Henry ; and undertook the celebration of the Paschal solem- 
nities*^ in honour of the King of kings. Entering the churcli 
in company with Henry, and being robed in his sacred vest- 
ments in readiness to commence the holy office, while wait- 
ing patiently the assembling of the people and the royal 
household, he observed that the church was encumbered 
with the chests of the villagers, and a quantity of implements 
and furniture of various kinds. Drawing a deep sigh, he 
thus poured forth his grief to the king, w^ho had humbly 
seated himself with some of his nobles among the peasants* 
paniers ^ at the lower end of the church : " The hearts of the 
faithful may well be afflicted on observing the humiliation 
of the church and the sufferings of the unhappy people. 
The spectacle exhibited in this cliurch shows the desolation 
to which the Cotentin is subjected. In truth, the whole of 
Normandy is a prey to irreligious freebooters, for want of a 
fitting ruler. The church of God, which was once called 
the house of prayer, is now, as you see, indecently filled 
with this vile lumber ; and the edifice which ought to be set 
apart for the sole purpose of celebrating the divine sacra- 
ments, is, for want of a just protector, become the storehouse 
of the people. It is impossible for the congregation to bend 
their knees with due reverence before the altar, nor even 
stand as they should with ease and devotion in presence of 
the Divine Majesty, on account of the heaps of goods 
which the defenceless peasants have collected in this house of 
God, to save them, in their alarm, from the sons of violence . 
The church is thus made the people's stronghold, but even 
there perfect security is not found. This very year, Bobert 

* Barfleur. Holy- Week. 
■'* Holy Saturday, the 8tli of April. 

' Cisias. M. Le Prevost considers that the large round baskets suspend»'d 
by the peasaiita on the sides of their pacU--l!,ci-:ies, aje meant. 



A.D. 1105.] THE BISnOP OF SEEZ ADDRESSES HENRY. 301 

de Belesrae set fire to the church of Toiirnai in my diocese,* 
destroying in it forty-five persons of both sexes. I relate 
this, overwhehned with sorrow, in the presence of Grod ; I 
tell it in jour ears, my lord king, to inflame your heart with 
holj zeal, that you may strive to imitate Phineas,- Matta- 
thias ^ and his sons. Bouse yourself to action in the name 
of the Lord, and with the sword of justice make yourself 
master of your father's inheritance, and recover the territory 
of your ancestors and the people of Grod from the dominion oi 
abandoned men. Your brother Kobert is not really in pos- 
session of Normandy, and does not govern his subjects as a 
duke who ought to guide them in the path of justice, but, 
abandoned to sloth, is subservient to William de Conversana, 
Hugh de Nonant, the governor of Rouen, Gruiihier, his 
nephew, and other worthless men. Alas ! he dissipates in 
trivial follies the wealth of his noble duchy, while he often 
fasts till nones ^ for want of bread. The greatest part of 
his tim-e he lies in bed, and is prevented from going to 
church, because such is his want of clothes, that he has 
neither trowsers, stockings, or shoes. The buffoons and 
harlots, by whom he is constantly surrounded, carry off his 
clothes during the night, while he is drunk and snoring, and 
boast with derision that they have robbed the duke. Thus, 
the head being sick, the whole body faints, and the prince 
Leing weak, the entire country is in peril, and the wretched 
people are exposed to all sorts of calamities. From the 
time of Eollo, the first of the Normans who ruled in Nor- 
mandy, from whom you derive your descent, till this weak 
prince, Normandy has been governed by powerful dukes. 
In this affliction of your native land, brave king, ' be angry,* 
as David, the king and prophet, says, ' and sin not ; ' ^ inas- 
much as you take arms for the defence of your country, and 
not from ambition to extend your territorial power."' 

This discourse of the bishop so inflamed the king's 
ardour, that, having consulted with the nobles who were 

* Touniai-sur-Dive, in the canton of Trun. 
» Numb. XXV. 7, 8. 

3 Macab. ii. 24. 

* Three o'clock p.m. 

* The two words, noli peccare, may have been borrowed from Ps. it. 
5 ; but it would rather appear that the quotation our author puts into the 
bishop's mouth, is not from the psalmist, but from St. Paul, Ephes. iv. 26. 



3()2 ORDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XI. 

present, he thus spoke : " In God's name, I will not shrink 
from toiling earnestly for the restoration of peace, and with 
your aid will use my best endeavours to give tranquillity to 
the church." 

The earl of Mellent supported this resolution, and none 
of the nobles present dissented from it, but, on the contrary, 
joined in earnestly entreating their common father to com- 
mence hostilities with vigour for the general defence of 
Normandy against those who were ruining the people. 

The eloquent prelate resumed his sacred discourse, and, 
with salutary zeal in his holy office, added : " It is our daily 
duty to persevere in discovering the way of life, and to obey 
in all things the divine law, which is infallible. Although 
we cannot correct all the crimes which are wrought in 
pecret, at least we should strike with the sword of the 
Spirit those which are openly committed against God, and 
the offenders should be cut off from amongst us in every 
way, according to the commandments of God and the 
decrees of the holy fathers. You all wear long hair, in 
female fashion, a thing which is unbecoming in you who are 
made in the image of G^d, and ought to exhibit manly 
strength. The apostle Paul, the elect vessel, and doctor of 
the Gentiles, points out to the Corinthians how indecent 
and odious it is for men to wear long hair, saying : ' A man 
ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image 
and glory of God ; but the woman is the glory of the man.' 
And a little afterwards, he adds : * If a man have long hair it 
is a shame unto him ; but if a woman have long hair, it is a 
glory to her, for her hair is given her for a covering.' ^ 

" It is not for their ornament or pleasure that penitents 
are enjoined not to shave their beards or cut their hair ; but 
that, as their sins make them appear inwardly rough and 
unseemly in the sight of God, so they may in their exterior 
exhibit themselves before men unshaven and unshorn, and 
marl?: the deformity of the inner man by their outward 
ignominy. By their long beards they make themselves like 
goats, whose filthy lasciviousness is shamefully imitated by 
Ibrnicntors and sodomites, while good men justly treat them 
with abhorrence on account of the odious foulness of their 
lusts. As for those who nourish their hair, they are con- 
1 1 Cor. xi. 7, 14, 15. 



A.D. 1105.] THE FASHION OF LONG HATE. 363 

sidered as fit associates of the wornen by whose blandish- 
ments they are seduced from manly virtue to evil courses, 
and very often involved in the wretchedness of a detestable 
apostacy. Alas ! see how the salutary medicine which the 
doctors of the church, who are spiritual physicians, hereto- 
fore provided, by Divine inspiration, for the cure of souls, 
has been used by the sons of perdition, at Satan's instigation, 
to fill up the measure of their condemnation, and who by 
long use have established the custom. The popes of Rome 
and other bishops have prohibited this rash innovation, and 
condemned it in their counsels by divine authority, but the 
hardened sinners persist in their evil follies, and oppose the 
shield of their wickedness to the sword of holy preaching. 
They suffer their beards to grow for fear that if they shaved, 
the short bristles might prick the faces of their m.istresses 
when they were kissing them, and are so hairy that they 
look like Turks rather than Christians. Thus the personal 
neglect which is the mark of penitence is converted into a 
token of wantonness ! In short these froward sons of Beliai 
dress their hair like women, while they wear things like 
scorpions' tails at the extremities of their feet, thus exhibiting 
themselves as women by their effeminacy, and serpents by 
their pointed fangs. This kind of men were foretold a 
thousand years ago by St. John the mystic, under the figure 
of locusts, and he has plainly foreshadowed them in the 
Apocalypse, written in the isle of Pathmoth.^ Many persons 
adopt this perverted practice from ignorance that there can 
be so much mischief in the fashion of wearing the hair in 
which they glory .^ Eor this reason, I beseech you, most 
illustrious king, to set your subjects a laudable example, that 
they may see in your person, above all others, how they 
ought to adjust their own." ^ 

^ Another example of the use of the aspirated t or thy mentioned before 
p. 221. 

2 Our author has already put on record the complaints of the clergy at 
the new fashions of the day, in much the same terms which are employed 
in the bishop's discourse. See vol. ii. pp. 477, 478. 

' Not only fashions, but religious peculiarities, have their cycles. Sucli 
a scene as that so vividly described by Ordericus might very possibly have 
occurred five centuries later; Charles II. and his cavaliers taking the place 
of Henry I. and his barons, and some puritan minister, the prejudices of 
whose party it was desirable to conciliate, filling, both in word and act, the 



36tt OSDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XI. CILXT. 

The king and all his nobles cheerfully assented to these 
observations, upon which the zealous bishop lost no time in 
taking a pair of scissors out of his scrip, with which he first 
cropped the king's hair with his own hands, and then that 
of the count ^ and several of his nobles. All the royal house- 
hold and the rest of the congregation contended with each 
other who should be cropped first, and, anticipating in alarm 
an order from the king, severed the locks which were before 
so precious, trampling under foot, like vile refuse, what once 
they dearly cherished. 

After having celebrated the feast of Easter, the king of 
England sent envoys to Philip, king of Erauce, and summon- 
ing Greoffrey Martel, count of Aujou, proceeded to take 
summary vengeance on the enemies of the church of Grod.^ 

office assigned to the zealous bishop of Sdez. Notwithstanding the docility 
with which the king and his courtiers submitted ther heads to the bishop's 
scissors, the fashion of wearing long hair survived the operation, to the great 
scandal of the clergy. 

In 1129, an English knight, who, like all men of fashion, wore long hair 
like women, had a dream, in which some one appeared to strangle him in 
his own curls. The knight woke in such alarm that he lost no time in get- 
ting rid of the superfluous ornament of his head, and his example was 
followed by almost all the other knights, but in the course of a year, all 
who affected the manners of the court re-adopted the prevailing fashion. 

1 The earl of Mellent. He is supposed to have contrived the first part 
of the somewhat theatrical exhibition in the church of Carentan, in which 
the king and the bishop were assigned their respective parts ; but he can 
hardly be suspected of being in the secret of the denouement. The earl 
was the most accomplished gentleman of the age, and all men of fashion 
took him for their model, not only in dress, but in their phraseology, and 
even in the hour at which their tables were served. In imitation and by 
the advice of the emperor Alexius Comnenus, he took only one repast in 
the course of the da) ; and there seems no doubt that he introduced that 
practice, instead of the four plentiful meals, the boast of our Anglo-Saxon 
forefathers, which Robert du Mont so keenly regrets. Henry of Hunting- 
don says of King Hardecanute, " Such was his liberality that tables were 

laid four times a-day with royal sumptuousness for his whole court 

In our time (1090 — 1154) it is the custom, whether from parsimony, or as 
they themselves say, from fastidiousness, for princes to pro\'ide only one 
meal a-day for their court." — Antiq. Lib. p. 201, 

- Geoffrey Martel, who was killed the year following at the siege of the 
castle of Conde on the 18th of May, was not, in fact, count of Anjou, but 
eldest son and presumptive heir of that nobleman, who, however, outlived 
him. Still it appears that he assumed the title with the administration of 
affairs after he had delivered his uncle Geoffrey-le-Barbu from captivity in 
1096, when the rights of the latter were ceded to Geoffrey Martel, with the 
consent of his father, Fulk-le-Rechin. 



A.D. 1105 — 1107.] bohemond's visit to trance. 3G5 

Cii. XII. Appearance of a comet — Bohemond's visit to 
France — Pilgrimage to St. Leonard's tomb — Marriage 
with Constance, King Philip's daughter. 

In the year of our Lord 1106, the world saw a variety of 
nn^olutions in the fortunes of princes, and there were several 
memorable occurrences in various quarters. In the last 
A\c'ek of February, an extraordinary comet appeared in the 
^vest, which extending its long tail far in the east, struck 
terror into the hearts of the multitude, and its brightness 
in the evenings, during three weeks, caused the revelation 
(if many secrets.^ 

In the month of March, Duke Bohemond came to Trance, 
in fulfilment of the vow he made to God while he was Dali- 
ir.an's captive, and solemnly accomplished his vow at the 
tomb of St. Leonard'the-confessor, in the Limousin.^ 
Previous to his arrival in France, he had despatched messen- 
gers to England to inform the king of the reason of his 
journey to Italy, and of his desire to cross the sea and visit 
his court. The prudent king, however, apprehensive that 
Bohemond might induce some of his best knights to have 
his service, sent him word not to risk the danger of a voyage 
in the winter, more especially as it was his own intention to 
pass over to Normandy before the celebration of Easter, and 

' *' On Friday in the first week of Lent, the sixteenth of the calends of 
March (February 14), a strange star appeared in the evening, and was seen 
at the same hour for fourteen days in the south-western quarter of the 
heavens. The body was small and hazy, but the light which shot from it 
was of extraordinary brilliance, and it reflected a meteoric brightness from 
the east and north. Florence of Worcester, p. 652. As to this meteor, 
see Ij^Histoire des Cometes, t. i. p. 526. 

Ordericus has fallen into an error in fixing its first appearance in the last 
week of February. Although some authors have connected the phenome- 
non with the year 1105, the great bulk of testimony favours the date 
or" 1106, and the circumstantial detail of Friday, 16th of February, fur- 
nished by Florence of Worcester, leaves no doubt that the computation 
generally adopted is the right one, and Ordericus agrees with it. 

^ Our author has already mentioned this journey of Bohemond (vol. ii. 
p. 223) as well as the appearance of the comet which preceded it, and 
which is supposed to have been the same as that seen in 1680. The object 
of Bohemond's pilgrimage was St, Leonard-le-Noblac, five leagues irom 
Limoges. His arrival in France did not take place in the month of March, 
]106, as Ordericus sties', but towards the close of 1105, and he left it in 
the spring of 1107. 



3GG OKDEKICUS VITALIS. [b.xi. cn.xiti 

they would have an opportunity of conferring together while 
he was there ; and so it happened. 

In consequence, Bohemond having performed his devo- 
tions and left Noblac/ where the tomb of the excellent 
confessor stands, spent the season of Lent in visiting several 
cities and castles in Erance, and being received in all 
quarters both by the clergy and people with great respect, 
he related the various events in which he had taken part. 
He reverently offered on the holy altars, relics ; and mantles 
made entirely of silk, and other precious objects, and, de- 
lighting in the attentions paid him in the monasteries and 
bishops' seats, returned thanks to Grod for the welcome 
given him by the people of the West. He was accompanied 
by the son of the Emperor Diogenes,^ and other eminenl", 
men from G-reece and Thrace, whose accusation of the 
emperor Alexius for his treasonable usurpation of their 
hereditary throne roused the fury of the fierce Franks 
against him. Many persons of noble birth came and pre- 
sented their infant children to him, whom he kindly held at 
the holy font in baptism, and gave them his own name. 
His own baptismal name was Mark, but his father, having 
heard the story of the giant Bohemond^ in the merriment of 
a convivial meeting, jocularly called his son by the giant's 
name. It was afterwards spread throughout the world, and 
in the mouths of numbers in the three climates of the globe. 
Erom thenceforth this name, which was seldom adopted 
before among the nations of the West, became popular in 
Erance. 

The hero of whom we are speaking had an interview with 

^ Noblac, a surname added by the saint. He called it Nobiliacus, 
a noble domain, because it was granted to him by royal munificence 
There are a number of places in the Limousin and other ^jarts of France 
which have derived their names from some such circumstance, as Neuilic, 
of which there are two, Neuilli, twenty-five j Noaillac, or Nouilhac, three ; 
Noailles, three, &c. 

^ Ordericus means the impostor patronised by Bohemond and his father 
under the name of Michael Parapinaces to give a colour to their enter- 
prises against Alexius Comnenus. See vol. ii. p. 355. His pretensions 
were generally exploded at the time our author lived. 

' We are not aware of any other record of popular traditions respecting 
this character, who appears to have played the same part as the Gargantua 
of later times. Perhaps the fables of wfiicii he was the hero, v/ere peculiar 
to the south of Italy and never crossed llie mountains. 



A.D. HOG.] BOHEMONJ) MAEEIES CONSTANCE OF TRANCE. 3G7 

King Philip, and demanded the hand of his daughter Con- 
stance in marriage. At last, after Easter, he espoused her 
at Chartres, the countess Adela providing a, sumptuous 
banquet for all who attended the wedding. The king of 
France himself was present with a great retinue, and gave 
Bohemond his daughter, having divorced her from Hugh, 
count of Troyes, for some reason which has escaped my 
observation.^ Then the duke, distinguished among the 
most illustrious, proceeded to the church, and standing on 
the steps before the altar of the Virgin Mother, related to 
the vast assembled multitude his adventures and achieve- 
ments, exhorting all who were brought up to arms to join 
him in his enterprise against the emperor, and promising 
cities and opulent towns to knights of approved courage. 
In consequence, numbers assumed the cross with ardour, and 
lea\dng all they possessed, embraced the pilgrimage to Jeru- 
salem as if they were going to a feast. Among them were 
Ealph de Pont-Echaufre, surnamed the Ii.ed, and Josceline, 
his brother, Simon d'Anet, Eobert de Maule, Hugh JSans- 
Avoir, his cousin,^ with several others whose names I cannot 
individually mention. 

Ch. XIII. A miraculous occurrence to JRohert d^Mstpte" 

ville — lie is killed in battle soon afterwards. *^^/^^^<^^^^ 

The same year t(ie following occurrence happened in Nor- /r^/^ 
mandy. Robert d'Estoteville,^ a brave and powerful baron, 
was a strong partisan of the duke, and superintended his 

^ Our author has mentioned <:his marriage before. The first union of 
Constance was dissolved on account of consanguinity. Ord.ricus is right 
in fixing the marriage of Bohemond and Constance of France in llOt). 

'^ Ralph and Josceline of Pont-Echaufre, near Bernai ; Simon of Anet, 
near Dreux ; Robert de Maule, sou of William, and nephew of Ansold 
de Maule, mentioned before (vol. ii. p. 224), Hugh Sans- Avoir, of a family 
which had already supplied several crusaders. 

Ralph and Josceline were with their eldest brother William, sons of 
Josceline de Pont-Echaufre and Heremburge Giroie. See vol. i. p. 395. 
Ralph will appeair again in book xii., generally with his surname of Ralph- 
the-Red. William seems to have joined early his countrymen in the 
south of Ita^y. It is probable that Josceline never returned from the cru- 
sade. 

^ Robert d'Estoteville, second of that naniCj was son of Robert I. aiui 
brother-in-law of Hugh de Grantmesnil. . ,!^,-: .'....- >. : ' -X.-itr. \^j>-ci/ 



368 0EDEEICU8 VITALIS. [B.Xt. CXI. Xllt. 

troops and fortresses in the district of Caux. It chanced on 
Easter-day,^ as his chaplain was communicating the baron 
and his household, that a certain knight having approached 
the altar for the purpose of reverently receiving the 
eucharist, the priest took the consecrated wafer in his hand 
for the purpose of putting it into the communicant's open 
mouth, but found that he was quite unable to" lift his hand 
from the altar. In this dilemma, both parties were ex- 
tremely terrified ; but at length the priest said to the knight: 
" Take it, if you can ; for myself, it is out of my power to 
move my hand and deliver the Lord's body to you." Upon 
this the knight stretched his neck over the altar, with some 
effort reached the chalice, and received the host in his open 
mouth from the priest's hand. This extraordinary occur- 
rence covered him with confusion, and not knowing what 
would happen, he was apprehensive of some misfortune, and 
in consequence distributed among the clergy and the 
poor the greatest part of his wardrobe and other effects. 
He fell soon after Easter in the first battle fought at Ma* 
romme* near Kouen. The chaplain, whose name was Eobert, 
related to me what happened to him and the unfortunate 
knight, as I have related, during the celebration of the life- 
giving mysteries. 

Ch. XIV. One Rohert, simoniacally appointed ahhot of Dive ^ 
builds a fortress tvithin the abhey precincts. 

TiiEK Eulk, abbot of Dive, died at AVinchester in England, 
on the third of the nones [the 8rd] of April,^ and a miserable 
creature of the name of Eobert procured himself to be 
intruded into the office by paying the duke one hundred 
and forty silver marks. This man, who had made his pro- 
fession as a monk of St. Denys, caused the dispersion of the 
Lord's flock, instead of being its pastor, becoming generally 
odious as a true follower of Simon Magus. The monies 

' The 9th of April, 1105. 

^ Miiromnie, near Rouen. Its original name was Matrona, borrowed 
jirnb;il)ly from the river which waters it. 

' Fuik, abbot of St. Pierre-sur-Dive, the strict disciplinarian, had 
resumed his authority six years before. See vol. ii. p. 207, and the pre- 
sent vol. p. 107. His death ought to be referred to the 3rd of April, 
1105, not 1106. 



A.D. 1105.] A PESTILENCE — DEATH OF GEOrEEEY MAETEL. 309 

therefore fled from him as from the presence of a devouring 
wolf, and anxious for the safety of their souls, dispersed 
themselves among other convents. The abbot built a castle 
on the banks of the Dive within the abbey walls, turning the 
house of Grod into a den of thieves. He also sold the 
ecclesiastical ornaments which the zeal of the faithful had 
furnished, and this simoniacal castellan used the money to 
pay his retainers.^ 

Ch. XV. France visited with a contagious disorder in the 
summer and autumn of the year 1105. 

In the month of May a contagious influenza spread through 
all the West, and the catarrh becoming very severe, every eye 
wept, and in France where I was at that time,'^ all cheeks 
were bedewed with tears. The unusual heat of the summer 
prematurely ripened the corn, and an autumn of the same 
weather succeeded. Burning fever and other febrile diseases 
vith a variety of disorders grievously afflicted mankind, 
and prostrated numbers who took to their beds. 

Gh. XYI. Premature death of Geoffy-ey Martel — The succes- 
sion to the county of Anjou. 

The same month, Greoflrey Martel, count of Anjou, laid 
siege to Normand-de-Montreuil in the castle of Cande, and 
\'igorously assaulted it.^ This prince executed justice with 
firmness and courage, wielding the rod of discipline over the 
backs of thieves and robbers with great severity, although 
his father had been in the habit of sparing them, and often 
enjoying the fruits of their pillage, portions of which were 
appropriated to him. When Greoffrey first arrived at man- 
hood and witnessed the great iniquity which was wrought, 
with his father's infamous connivance, in the province of 

' We shall find presently that this miserable Bimonist possessed the 
abbey only fifteen months. 

2 Probably at Orleans, his father's native place, or at Maule, of which 
he has given us so particular an account, vol. ii. p. 216, &c. 

^ Condatum. Modern historians call this castle Lande, and say that it 
stood at the mouth of the Vienne. They call the lord against whom the 
expedition was undertaken, Normand de Montreuil. M. Le Prevost thinks 
that for Mortreuil should be substituted Montrevault, near Beaufreau, 
and for Lande, Cand^, which is, in truth, the Condate Turonum of the 
Romans. 

VOL. III. B B 



370 ORDEEICUS VITALIS. [P.XI. CH.XTI. 

Anjou, inspired by divine zeal, he lamented the miseries of 
his country which, in the enjoyment of peace, would have 
abounded with everything good. 

At length, by order of his uncle Geoffrey, who was the 
lawful heir (but who had been, though the perjury of Eulk, 
deprived of his county and imprisoned for nearly thirty 
years in the castle Chinon, from whence he with difficulty 
escaped in the presence and by the order of the venerable 
Pope Urban), his father also consenting, Geoffrey Martel 
undertook the government of the county of Anjou, and 
used every effort to do justice to the simple people and the 
poor, and laudably gave security to the church. By God's 
help, he quickly restored peace throughout the province, and 
gloriously surpassed all his predecessors in courage and 
equity : his career was soon ended, but he accomplished much 
in a short time. 

Three years after he undertook the government, Geoffrey 
Martel, as I before stated, laid siege to Cande, and gallantly 
pressed the rebels shut up in the fortress with the force of 
his arms. The chiefs of the garrison had come out to treat 
of concluding peace with him and surrendering the place to 
him on the following day, when, suddenly, a cross-bow man, 
instigated by the devil, levelled a bolt from the castle and 
shot the brave young prince while he was holding a conference 
with the chiefs, mortally wounding that excellent guardian 
of justice in the arm. The legitimate defender of his 
country died on the morrow, and was buried with general 
lamentations in the abbey church of St. Nicholas, bishop of 
jMyra.i 

On his death, Philip, king of Prance, invested his step-son 
Fulk^ in the county of Anjou, but as he was a minor, the king 
appointed William, duke of Poitiers,^ who happened to be 
then at court, his guardian to protect him during his journey 

* This sad catastrophe happened on Fridrjy, the 18th of May, 1105. 
The abbey of St. Nicholas d'Angers waa founded in 1020, by Fulk Nerra, 
in the suburbs of Angers on the right bank of tlie Maine. 

* Fulk, fifth of that name, son of Bertrade de Montfort, was afterwards 
count of Anjou and king of Jerusalem, Our author seems to intimate in 
this passage that Fulk was put into immediate possession of Anjou, whereas 
he was only acknowledged as heir to it in reversion of his father. 

' William, seventh of the name, count de Poitiers, the same who had 
recentl/ returned from the Holy Land with little glory. 



A.D. 1105.] KING UENKT BUENS BATETJX. 371 

and conduct him in safety to his flither. The duke, having 
led him as far as the frontier of his own territories, there 
arrested him, regardless of his duty and the account he would 
have to give, and kept him in confinement for more than a 
year. The plethoric king of France,^ being informed of this 
outrage, was greatly displeased, and employed both entreaties 
and menaces to procure the liberation of the yonng count.^ 
Bertrade, his mother, being the king's wife, used all her 
influence with him, and urged many others, to effect the 
rescue of the captive, to no purpose. At length the king, 
stimulated by frequent solicitations, threatened severe 
vengeance for the outrage. But the haughty duke, despising 
the king because of his corpulence, detained the young count 
for some time, until his father surrendered for his son's 
ransom some castles on the confines of the two counties. 
The father died soon afterwards, at an advanced age, and the 
young count married Eremburga, daughter of Elias, count of 
Maine, who bore him a noble family of both sexes. 

Ch. XVII. King Henry's troops reduce and hum Bayeux — 
Caen surrenders, he is repulsedfrom Falaise, and returns to 
JEnyland. 

In" the spring of the same year,^ as it has been already stated, 
King Henry sailed over to Normandy, and asserted his 
rights to the inheritance of his father which was trodden 
under foot by perjurers, robbers, and bullies. Employ- 
ing Elias count of Maine and his troops, he besieged Bayeux 
which was held by Grunhier d'Aunai. That knight came 
forth to the king, and out of regard to him liberated without 
ransom Robert Eits-Hamon, whom he had before taken 
prisoner, but he gave a flat refusal to Henry's imperious 
demands for the surrender of the place. The kiilg there- 
upon immediately issued orders for the assault, and setting 
fire to the city burnt it to the ground, taking the afore- 

1 See before p. 355. 

'•* It must have been in 1107 that William, count de Poitiers, restored 
the young Fulk to his father. The latter died the 14th of April, 1109, 
and was succeeded by Fulk, whose marriage with Eremburga was solem- 
nized in 1110. He had four children by her. 

* In the last week of Lent, lli"*5, and not 1106. 

B b2 



87:2 OllDERICUS vitalis. [b.xi. ch.xvii. 

said governor, with bis followers and fellow soldiers 
prisoners/ 

On learning the destruction of this important city, the 
other garrisons were struck with terror, and afraid to 
offer any resistance to the king who was advancing with so 
much resolution. The people of Caen, hearing of the des- 
truction of Bayeux and apprehensive of being exposed to like 
ruin, sent envoys to the king who was hastening tbither in 
great rage, and made peace with him on the terms be dictated.^ 
Accordingly they presently expelled the governor En- 
guerrand, son of llbert,^ with his troops and surrendered the 
fortress to the king. Henry gave Darlington in England, 
worth eighty pounds of yearly rent, to the four principal 
townsmen of Caen,^ and it is called the traitors' village to 
this day, although it does not now belong to them. The 
king then marched to Ealaise, but did not attack it because 
count Elias retired at the request of the Normans.^ There 
was however a passage at arms there, in which Eoger de 
Gloucester, a brave knight, was slain .<^ 

* This event occurred in the month of Au^^ust, 1105. The garrison of 
the castle abandoned the defence of the ramparts in a cowardly manner 
a!id fled to the cathedral for refuge. The destruction of that magnificent 
edifice was the consequence. 

^ Robert Curthose was at Caen durint^ these negotiations, which are 
given by Wace in much greater detail. The duke was compelled to make 
a precipitate retreat, and could not even prevent the pillage of his baggage. 

^ This Enguerrand appears to have been son of Ilbeit de Laci. Wp 
have seen before the devoted attachment of this family to tlie duke, and 
the confidence he placed in them. 

* The names of the four traitors are preserved. The first who principally 
managed this dark intrigue was named Theodore, son of Ralph, son of 
Ogier, a knight. 

* The events just related occurred in the month of July. Count Elias 
having been persuaded by the Normans to withdraw, and having executed 
this movement, Henry felt from his failure at Falaise, that his forces would 
not be strong enough during the rest of the campaign to terminate the 
struggle with his unfortunate brother. Tie, therefore, returned to England 
suddenly in the month of August, deferring the completion of his conquest 
to the following year. Our author's anachronism at the beginning of the 
chapter is therefore apparent. If these occurrences took place in 1106, 
Henry could not have found himself in the month of September in Nor- 
mandy with Count Elias and a force sufficient to crush the duke's army at 
Tinchebrai. It required an interval of a year to prepare for the decisive 
blow. 

** Roger de Gloucester had time enougli after his mortal wound to make 



A.D. 1107.] DEATH OF THE EMPEEOTl HENIIY IV. 373 

The brother princes, the king and the duke met at Cin- 
teaux in Whitsuu-week, and held a conference \Yhich lasted 
two days on terms of peace ;^ but as discordant factions 
interrupted the negotiations, they parted without coming to 
any agreement. Both parties now made preparations for 
carrying on the war with all their strength, the nobles and 
young knights choosing the side to which they should 
adhere, and from Whitsuntide to the feast of St. Michael,^ 
the country was pillaged and given to the flames. 

Cn XYIII. Death of the em'peror Henry IV. — His son 
Henry V, marries the princess Matilda. 

Then Henry, emperor of Grermany, died on the seventh of 
the ides [7th] of August, but as he had not made satisfaction 
to Grod, in the judgment of the church, for his numerous 
crimes his remains were not committed to the earth, nor did 
they obtain the rites of sepulture for many years. Charles 
Henry Y. his son succeeded him as emperor, and three years 
afterwards married Matilda daughter of Henry king of Eng- 
land, but had by her no heir^ to the throne. 

Ch. XIX. The simoniacal ahhot of Dim undertahes to betray 
King Henry — The king storms his fortress — The abbot's 
tragical end. 

KoBEET, the intrusive abbot of Dive, amongst hia other evil 
deeds, added the treason of Judas [Iscariot] to the iniquity of 

a gift to the abbey of St. Peter at Gloucester which was confirmed by King 
Henry. — Monast, Anglic, vol. i. p. 113. 

' This interview between the two brothers at Cinteaux, near Falaise, 
must also be assigned to the year 1 105, in the end of May or beginning of 
June, Whitsuntide that year falling on the 28th of May. The siege of 
Falaise must, therefore, have taken place in that month, 

2 The state of disorder and anarchy lasted not only four months, as our 
author states, but sixteen ; from Whitsuntide, 28th of May, 1 1 05, to the 
end of September, 1106. Two circumstances concurred in inducing King 
Henry to defer his projects for the entire deposition of his brother, the 
retreat of count Elias, which, as already suggested, did not leave him a 
BufHcient force to act decidedly, and the exhaustion of his treasury by the 
insatiable covetousness of the Norman lords, who were quite as ready to 
sell themselves to the king as he was to buy them. 

' The emperor Henry IV. died at Liege, the 7th of August, 1107. His 
corpse was carried to Spires, where it remained unburied, on account of hia 
being excommunicated. Henry V. did not marry Matilda till January 7, 
1114, and consequently muny years later than our author states. 



874 ORDEEicua yitalis. [b.xi. cn.xTX. 

Simon (Magus). ^ He made an agreement with dukeEobert 
and his barons at Falaise to bring King Henry, into their 
power before long, attended by only a few followers, and 
the Normans were to be prepared to lay hands on the king. 
This treachery having been planned, abbot Eobert went to 
Caen and meeting the king said to him in a friendly manner, 
" If you will come with me, I will put into your hand& the 
fortress which I have on the river Dive." The king being 
pleased with this oifer, the abbot added : " It is not requisite 
that you should bring an army with yon, for such numbers 
would occasion a great noise and mighc be an obstacle to 
our enterprise. I have only a small garrison in the place, 
and they are entirely devoted to me." 

In consequence, the king rose by night, and putting himself 
at the head of seven hundred horsemen rode all night and at 
day break found himself near the place. Meanwhile, Eey- 
nold de Warrenne " and the young Eobert d'Estoteville,^ with 
one hundred and forty men-at-arms, had increased the garri- 
son at Dive, and when the king arrived at sun-rise received 
him with shouts of laughter and abuse. They were also 
followed by many other troops from Falaise and other castles 
in the neighbourhood who sought the opportunity of coming 
to close quarters with the king and his partisans. Henry, 
much enraged at finding the snare into which he had fallen, 
gave orders for an instant assault on the garrison. The 
royal troops therefore made a fierce attack, and hurling fire 
burnt both the fortress and monastery. Eeynold and Eobert, 
brave young knights, and several others, were made prisoners, 
many also who had taken refuge in the tower of the church 
were burnt. Their adherents who were hastening to support 

* This evidently belongs to the year 1106. In consequence of the 
anachronism which has been pointed out, Ordericus omits to mention the 
interview at Northampton, noticed by Henry of Huntingdon and described 
with simple pathos by John Brompton, when Robert threw himself in 
vain at the feet of the author of his misfortunes. 

On Assumption day the king and St. Anselm met at the abbey of Bee, 
in the centre of the duke's dominions, and within ten leagues of his capital. 

2 Reynold de Warrenne, brother of William, second of the name, earl 
of Surrey. The two brothers fought on opposite sides. 

' Robert d'Estoteville, third of that name, and son of the knight men- 
tioned by our author just before (p. 367) in connection with a miraculous 
occurrence on Easter day, the preceding year. 



A.D. 1106.] WAR BETWEEN HENRY AND ROBERT. 375 

them, seeing the vast body of flame, made all the haste they 
could to return to Falaise. The victorious king pursued 
their steps, but no one ventured to sally forth and encounter 
him. Evil fell upon them deservedly, according to what the 
apostle says. " If any man defile the temple of God, him 
shall Grod destroy."^ Behold they had converted the 
house of God into a den of thieves, irreverently polluting it 
Vvith the dung of men and horses, and they met the fate they 
merited by the sword or devouring flame. 

The traitor Eobert was taken, and having been thrown 
across a horse like a sack, was brought before the king, 
who said to him : " Traitor, begone from my territories : 
were it not for my respect to the sacred order, whose habit 
you wear, I would have you this moment torn limb from 
limb." The apostate being therefore set at liberty fled with 
shame to Trance where he was born, and not being able to 
submit to the poverty and quiet of a monk in a cloister, he 
obtained the office of provost of Argenteuil.^ In the course 
of the same year having taken proceedings against one John, 
and violently demanded some customary payment, of which 
I know not the particulars, the peasant in a great rage 
struck him dead, and thus the miserable man expired with- 
out having done penance for his sins, of which he had great 
need. 

Ch. XX. King Senry resumes hostilities in Normandy — Ms 
message to Duke Robert — Battle of Tinchehrai — Rohert 
taken prisoner — Tlie king assumes the government ana 
marches to Rouen. 
The autumn of this year in Normandy was marked by 
thunder storms and violent rains as well as battles, and 
the flames of war, fanned by a variety of circumstances, burst 
forth openly. In truth, Eobert de Belesme and William 
earl of Morton, with many others, obstinately attached them- 
selves to Eobert the duke, and fearing the king too much to 
think of submitting to his yoke, resisted him with all their 
power. In consequence, Henry having assembled a vast 
multitude of his adherents, constructed a fort before Tin- 

» 1 Cor. iii. 17. 

2 Argenteuil, near Paris, first an abbey for nuiw, and then a priory 
dependent on the abbey of St. Denya. 



S76 OEDSRICrS TITALIS. [e. Xr. CII. XT. 

chebraV and stationed in it Thomas de St. Jean,' ^ithalarge 
body of horse and foot to check the sallies of the garrison. 
William, earl of Morton, to whom the place belonged, col- 
lected a gallant band of troops, and threw into it a convoy 
of provisions and other things of which he knew the besieged 
were in need, in sight of the royal army, and to their great 
annoyance. He caused the green corn to be cut in the fields^ 
and supplied to the garrison as forage for the horses. The 
activity of this young nobleman was such, and he possessed 
so large a share of military skill, that the royal army engaged 
in the siege could not venture out of their intrenchments 
and engage with his troops to intercept the relief they threw 
into the fortress. On receiving intelligence of this the king 
was very indignant, and took measures for a more determined 
attack on the enemy. In consequence he united his troops 
before Tinchebrai, and pressed the siege for some time. 

Under these circumstances, William earl of Morton, 
claimed the aid of the duke, and of E-obert de Belesme and 
his other friends, and speedly obtained succour against the 
king. The duke having assembled an army, required his 
brother to raise the siege of a place which lay in his terri- 
tories, or otherwise he challenged him to battle. The king 
however, persisted in carrying on the siege, and accepted 
the duke's hostility, though it was worse than a civil war, 
in order to secure peace for the future. There were four 
counts in the royal army, Elias of Maine, William of Evreux, 
E,obert de Mellent, and William de Warrenne, with several 
great barons, viz. : Ranulfof Bayeux,* Ralph de Conches, 
Eobert de Montfort, Eobert de Grantmesnil, and several 
others, with their vassals. On the other side, Duke 
Robert had with him Robert de Belesme and his nephew 
Wilham earl of Morton, Eobert d'Estoteville,^ William do 
Eerrers,^ and many more with their followers. He could 

' Tinchebrai near Dorafront, between that place, Vine, and Briouse. 

^ His domains lay between Avranches :'nd Granville. 

' We cannot understand what corn-crops could be growing at this season 
of the year. 

* Ranulf de Briquessart, viscount of Bayeux. See vol. ii. p. 505. 

^ Robert d'Estoteville, the father. See before pp. 367, and 37-^ ; not the 
SOP, who had been taken prisoner at the assault on l)\\e, and was not 
released till the eve of the battle of 'J'inchebrai. 

•^ For William dejj^errers, sec vol. ii. p. 508. In the interval he accom- 
panied Duke Robert to the Holy Land. 



A.D. 1106.] KING henry's tlttmatum. 377 

not muster so many knights as "his brother, but his army 
coutaiued a more numerous body of infantry. In the oppo- 
site forces now in presence, brothers and kinsmen were 
arrayed on different sides, and some of them were ready 
to exchange blows with each other. Some treacherous 
deserters were also under arms, but they were not firm in 
their adhesion to the duke, and in their disaffection thought 
more of flight than resistance. 

Several men of religion interfered to prevent so horrible 
a conflict, dreading to be witnesses of brothers shedding 
each other's blood. Especially Vitalis the hermit,^ wlio 
was considered one of the most venerable persons of the 
times, was more zealous than the rest, and interposing as 
arbiter between the contending brothers, boldly interdicted 
them from a single combat, lest the tragedy of the sons of 
CEdipus, the horror of all ages, should be again acted, and 
the fearful and accursed fate of Eteocles and Polynices 
should justly become theirs. 

At length the king carefully reviewed the complicated 
state of affairs, and, having collected the opinions of his sage 
advisers, reflected deeply on their various counsels. He 
then sent a message to his brother of the following tenor : 
•*My brother," he said, "I have not come here actuated 
by worldly ambition, nor did I propose to deprive you of 
your rights in the duchy, but, in answer to the sorrowful 
complaints of the poor, my desire is to succour the church 
of G-od, which is like a vessel without a pilot, in peril 
from a tempestuous sea. As for you planted in this land 
like a barren tree, you offer no fruit of good works to our 
Creator. Tou are duke ii\ name only, while you are openly 
mocked by your vassals, and take no pains to punish the 
insults you receive. Thus the cruel sons of iniquity, under 
the shade of your protection, oppress by their iniquities 
the Christian people, and have already almost depopulated 
whole parishes in Normandy. Witnessing these things, I 

^ The holy Vitalis, a native of Tierceville, in Bessin,'' had already 
received a promise of the site of his abbey from Ralph de Foucheres, but 
it was not confirmed by charter till 1112. He also possessed the entire 
confidence of the count of Mortain, whose chaplain he was, and who placed 
vmder his superintendence, in 1105, the rising abbey of Neuborg de Mor- 
tain. 



S78 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XI. CH-XX. 

burn with zeal for God, who is our ruler, and am eager to 
expose my life in the cause of my brethren, and this beloved 
people and country. Taking these things into consideration, 
I entreat you to profit by my advice, and you will find it 
distinctly proved that my proceedings are not dictated by 
ambition, but by goodwill. Yield to me all the strong places 
in Normandy, with the entire administration of justice and 
the management of affairs, and one moiety of the duchy, 
reserving to yourself the revenues of the other half, without 
care or trouble, and I will pay you annually out of the 
treasury of England, a sum equivalent to the revenue of the 
moiety ceded to me. After that you may revel in feasts 
and sports and all such delights with perfect security. As 
for me, I shall submit to the toils required for the main- 
tenance of tranquillity, and, while you enjoy repose, faithfully 
acquit myself of the engagements I enter into with you, 
and by God's help, bridle with justice the fury of the 
oppressors, so that they shall no longer buff'et the people 
of God."\ 

On receiving this message, the duke summoned his coun- 
sellors, and laid before them the king's proposals, which 
they unhesitatingly rejected, and deterred the duke by their 
violent language from listening to the conditiono of peace. 
The royal ambassadors having announced on their return 
that the duke and his adherents preferred war at all hazards 
rather than peace, the king commending himself to God, said: 
" God Almighty, in whom I trust, knows that I fight this 
battle on behalf of his suffering people. I implore our 
Maker, from the bottom of my heart, to grant the victory 
in this day's conflict to him by whom it is the divine will to 
secure to his people protection and rest.^ 

' We know not whether this messap;e is authentic, but it was impossible 
to use language more disdainful or more hypocritical. 

* It appears from this pa8sa'j;e and several others that our author gave 
Henry credit for the truth of these hypocritical protestations. All the 
Norman clergy offered prayers for his success, less, perhaps, on account of 
their being shocked by the licentious morals of Robert Curthose, than because 
his indolence and weakness offered no guarantee for the security of their 
persons and of ecclesiastical property from the strong hand of violence. 

The clergy had a third cause of aversion to Robert Curthose ; his having 
declined the crown of Jerusalem, when it was offered him, after the city 
was taken, before all ether competitors because of his rank aa a king's son. 



A.D. 1106.] BATTLE OF TINCHEBEAI. 370 

Having said this, he assembled the commandera of his 
forces, and laying before them his plan of operations in the 
battle, brieflj directed them to act as time and circumstances 
required. Eeleasing Eeynold de Warrenne and the rest 
who were made prisoners in the abbey at St. Pierre-sur- 
Dive, he vowed to Grod to rebuild the church which was 
burnt down. He then drew out his troops in battle array, 
and they marched forward in well disciplined order. 
Banulf of Bayeux, commanded the first division, Eobert earl 
of Morton, the second, and William de Warrenne the third. 
This earl William was very thankful for his brother's libera- 
tion, and earnestly exhorted all his comrades to fight with 
the utmost determination. The king reserved the English 
and JSTorman infantry for his own command, stationing the 
Manceaux and Bretons,^ at some distance on the field, under 
the orders of count Elias, 

In the enemy's army, William earl of Morton led the 
first division, and Eobert de Belesme commanded the rear. 
When the ranks met, and the squadrons of Earl William 
attemped to charge Eanulf's division, the troops were 
thronged so closely, and their weapons so locked together 
that it was out of their power to injure each other, and both 
parties in turn attempted in vain to break the impenetrable 

Henry of Huntingdon says : " Thus the Lord took vengeance on Duke 
Robert, because when he had exalted him to great glory in the holy wars, 
he rejected the offer of the kingdom of Jerusalem, preferring a service of 
ease and sloth in Normandy to serving the Lord zealously in defence of 
the holy city." — Antiq. Lib. p. 242. All the misfortunes which befel the 
duke, even the loss of the battle of Tinchebrai and his long and close cap- 
tivity Avere considered the just punishment of his crime of treason against 
the Divine Majesty. Henry I. made good use of this prejudice, as if the 
refusal did not arise from a sense of his own want of ability and judgment, 
which rendered him unfit for a post surrounded by so many difficulties and 
dangers. 

' William of Malmesbury says of the Bretons (whom he calls the 
Britons over the sea) that Henry, in his early days, took into his pay a 
number of them from the neighbourhood of his fortresses, Domfront and 
Castle-St. Michael, they being a people who, suffering much want in their own 
country, were always ready to sell their services abroad (Hist. b. v.). These 
lawless bands were the scourge of Normandy and England, having no 
respect either for the persons or the property of the ecclesiastics. They were 
particularly addicted to stealing the horses belonging to the clergy, appro- 
priating them to their own purposes wherever they could lay their hands 
on them. 



380 OEDEEICUS VITALTS. [s.Xr. CK. XX. 

phalanx. Cries and shouts bein^ raised from both armies, 
Elias made a rapid charge with his auxiliaries on the flank 
of the duke's ill-armed infantry, in which two hundred and 
twenty-five of them presently fell. As soon as Eobert de 
Belesme perceived this, he took to flight, leaving the con- 
querors to deal with the duke's army, which was now in 
complete confusion.^ 

Then Baudri seized the duke and delivered him to the 
king's guards. This man was one of Henry's chaplains, who 
joining a body of knights took part in the battle. He was 
shortly afterwards made bishop of Laon, but having deeply 
aggrieved the people of his 'diocese, he was killed by the 
inhabitants of his own city, in a garden, on Friday in Easter 
week, with seven dignitaries of his cathedral." 

^ Ordericus gives a very meagre account of the important battle of 
Tinchebrai. Henry of Huntingdon supplies some few additional details, 
showing that Henry's victory was not quite so easily won as our author 
intimates. '' The duke," he says, " with his few followers boldly charged the 
king's numerous troops, and, well trahied in the wars of Jerusalem, his 
furious onset repulsed the royal arm»y. William, earl of Morton, also 
attacking it from point to point, threw it into confusion. The king and the 
duke, with great part of their troops, fought on foot that they might make 
a determined stand, but the Breton knights bore down on the flank of 
the duke's army, which, unable to sustain the shock, was presently routed." 
—Antiq. Lib. p. 242. 

Ordericus has not even recorded the precise day on which the battle was 
fought, but we know from abundant sources of authority that it was on the 
28th of September, the eve of St. Michael, and the anniversary of William 
the Conqueror's landing at Hastings in 1066. 

Our author has also omitted to inform us that Edgar Atheling, who had 
so often exhibited his attachment to the duke, accompanied him to the 
fatal field of Tinchebrai, and was made prisoner with his friend. King 
Henry thought the Anglo-Saxon prince a person of such small importance 
tlmt he at once dismissed him. 

* It appears that Baudri employed the wealth heaped upon him for the 
capture of Robert Curthose to secure his election by the chapter of Laon. 
But this profanation did not last long. Public opinion revolted at seeing 
a mere clerk attached to the court, who was nut even a subdeacon, raised 
to the episcopal and ducal see of Laon. By the king's influence, who 
probably was glad to be rid of him, he was provided with a canonry of 
Rouen, and received subdeacon's orders. However, it was only by the 
intervention of Pope Paschal U. to whom Baudri appealedat Dijon, that he 
was confirmed in his see. But as he was grossly ignorant, associated only 
v/ith the military, and could talk of nothing but dogs and horses, he became 
odious to his clergy, who accused hhn of several murders and other acts of 
violence. At lust, liaving opposed the establishment of the municipality 



A.D. 1106.] THE PUISONERS IN THE BATTLE. 381 

Tlie Bretons, on their side, took "William earl of Morton/ 
and the king and his friends had great difficulty in getting 
him out of their hands. Eobert d'Estoteville, "William de 
i'errers, and many others were taken prisoners, some oi 
whom were released by the king's favour, and rejoiced in 
the recovery of their liberty, while others, for their offences, 
were detained in prison till the day of their death. 

The king, having gained the victory, re-assembled his 
troops, made a prudent disposition of affairs, and gave orders 
for the strict custody of his captive enemies. The duke 
Robert thus addressed him : " Some Norman traitors led me 
astray by their perfidious counsels, and deterred me, my 
brother, from following your advice, which it would have 
been really to my advantage to have embraced. I begged 
the people of Falaise, when I left them, not to surrender the 
fortress to any one but myself or William de Ferrers, whose 
fidelity to me I have never had reason to doubt. Now there- 
fore, my brother, lose no time in sending William to receive 
the surrender of the place lest Robert de Belesme should 
forestall you by some stratagem, and being the first to get 
possession of this strong fortress, hold it long against you." 
Henry led his brother with him in a friendly manner, but 
with due caution, and immediately despatched William de 
Ferrers to obtain possession of the castle. The king him- 
self, quickly following, made a hasty march to Falaise, 
and, by the duke's own order, the fortress was put into his 
hands, and the burgesses paid him fealty. They then pre- 
sented to him the young William, who was brought up in 
that place, and the king, looking with an eye of compassion 
on the boy, who, trembling with fear, was exposed to 
such misfortunes in his tender years, comforted him with 
promises of kindness. Afterwards to prevent occasion lor 
calumny, if any mischance should befall the lad while he was 

of Laon, he was massacred in a popular tumult on Tuesday, the 22nd of 
Aprix, : ' 2, and his body having been subjected to a thousand outrages, 
was left naked in the public street till the next day. He was at length 
buried, out of compassion, but without ceremony or prayers. See Gall. 
Christ, t. ix. col. 526, &c. 

» It would have been better for the earl of Morton to have remained in 
the hands of tne Bretons than to have fallen into those of his royal uncle. 
Thev might have put him to death, but probably would not have torn out 
hia eyes. 



3S2 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XXI. 

in his hands, he resolved not to retain him under his own 
guardianship, and entrusted his education to Elias de St. 
Saens.^ For the duke had some time before given his 
daughter, by a concubine, in marriage to that knight, and 
granting to him the county of Arques,^ made him rank high 
among the barons of Normandy. 

The clergy felt exceeding joy on receiving intelligence of 
the king's victory, while all who set the law at defiance, and 
were abandoned to evil courses, were filled with sorrow and 
dismay, knowing well that a yoke they could not shake off was 
now imposed by Heaven on their stubborn necks. In con- 
sequence, the factious free-booters finding that the king who 
had already proved a stern administrator of justice, had by 
God's aid defeated his enemies in the battle, were so convinced 
of his great qualities that they immediately dispersed into 
various retreats, and ceased from their outrages from mere 
dread of his name. The bands of robbers thus scattered, 
even changed their dress in order to escape being recognized 
by those they had before oppressed. 

The king proceeded to Rouen, accompanied by the duke, 
and the citizens receiving him with acclamations, he restored 
the laws of the Conqueror, and re-established the ancient 
privileges of the city. Hugh de Nonant, by the duke's orders 
surrendered the castle of Eouen into the king's hands, and 
recovering his own domaains by the king's assistance from 
Eobert de Belesme, who had violently usurped them, he held 
them free from disturbance for the rest' of his life. The 
other lords of castles throughout the whole of Normandy 
were released by the duke from their fealty to him, and, with 
his consent, transferred them to the victorious king, with 
whom they were reconciled. 

Ch. XXI. King Henry summons the Norman harons to 
Lisieux and mahes decrees for restoring order — The 
prisoners removed to England. 

In the middle of October the king came to Lisieux, where 

* Elias de St. Saens, near Neufchatel, son of Lambert de St. Saens, 
whose father, it is said, was Richard, viscount of Rouen, and Ids mother, a 
niece of the duchess Guimor. For this genealogy, which is doubtful, see 
the continuator of William de Jumieges; Duchesne's edition, p. 343. 

2 The county of Arquea, formerly called the county of Talou. 



A.D. 1106.] PEACE EESTOEED IN NOEMANDT. 383 

lie summoned all the barons of JS^ormandy to meet him, 
and held a council, from which the church reaped great 
advantage. ' It was there declared by the roval autho- 
rity, that peace should be strictly observed through the 
whole of Normandy, that robbery and violence being re- 
pressed in every quarter, the churches, and other lawful 
proprietors should possess their lands as they held them at 
the time of William the Conqueror's death. He also took 
into his own hands all the fiefs which belonged to his father, 
annulling, by advice of his council, all the grants which his 
brother had made through his imprudence, or which had 
been wrung from him during his feeble administration. The 
king sent over to England all his enemies taken in the war, 
condemning William earl of Morton, Eobert d'Estoteville, 
and several others to perpetual imprisonment. He was 
inflexible in his resolution to treat them with this severity, 
and constantly withstood all the influence of entreaties, 
promises, and gifts from many quarters, employed to mollify 
his resentment. 

Ch. XXII. Bohert de Belesme submits to King Henry, after 
consulting ivlth Count JElias, who mediates between them. 

Meanwhile, Eobert de Belesme, finding all his hopes frus- 
trated, and affairs turning out very diflferently from what he 
expected, was reduced to great distress, but still struggling 
to try the fate of war against King Henry, had recourse to 
Count Elias: "Sir count," he said, "I pray you lend me your 
aid, for I am your own liege-man, and have great reliance on 
you. Under present circumstances I look to you for suc- 
cour, for the affairs of the world are in strange confusion. 
You see a younger son in arms against his elder brother, a 
vassal defeating his superior in battle, and throwing him 
into prison ; he has robbed him of the heritage of his ances- 
tors, and usurped his rights by forfeiting his oath of fealty. 
Eor my part, I have maintained my allegiance to my natural 
lord, and as I faithfully obeyed the father, will serve the 

^ The meeting at Lisieux was not a council, properly so called, as no 
decrees were made respecting the doctrine or discipline of the church. 
Ranulf Flamburd must have previously submitted to the king, or it would 
scarcely have been held at Lisieux ; the wary politician lost no time in 
adopting his course. 



384 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XXII. 

son for the rest of my days. Never while my life is spared 
will I permit the man to govern Normandy in tranquillity 
who holds in chains the prince, who is my liege-lord, and, 
what is more, his own. I am still in possession of thirty 
four castles, which are strongly fortified, and from whence 1 
can assuredly infest the usurper with most harassing irrup- 
tions. I only require your aid to enable me to succour my 
captive lord, and restore to him or to his heir the duchy ot 
Normandy. 

Elias replied to this application in the following words: 
"Every prudent man should be careful, in the first instance, 
not to enter on any undertaking which he cannot or should 
not carry into eifect. Again, it is his duty not to attempt to 
raise any one to an elevation of which he is not worthy, or 
place him in command over others, who cannot rule himself. 
For as the common proverb says: 'He who tries to support 
a fool's pretensions, has the presumption to contend with 
Grod.' I am in alliance with King Henry, and I can find no 
pretence for severing it. I have no desire to give causeless 
offence to so powerful a prince, and I ought not to listen to 
you or any one else in this aftair. He is endowed with 
judgment, power, and wealth, and there is no one in my 
opinion, who is his equal in these western countries. If, as 
you assert, he has made war on his elder brother and his 
superior lord, he was driven to it by imperious necessity, and 
has been called in by the prayers of the churchmen who 
were miserably persecuted by accursed rufiians. Moreover, 
to adopt a phrase which is in daily use: 'One must do evil 
to prevent what is still worse.' I speak thus according to 
the vulgar proverb, but do not mean to claim divine autho- 
rity for it. Eor once there has been a battle between two 
brothers, that those everlasting conflicts which made tlie 
land drunk with the blood of her sons may for ever cease. 
Prom the moment the duke returned from Jerusalem and 
resumed the government of the duchy of Norinandy, he 
abandoned himself to an idle and careless life. Encouraged 
bv his indolence, the enemies of order have insufferably 
devastated Normandy by their ravages, both clandestinely 
and in the face of day, and our holy mother church lias been 
for six years exposed to grievous losses by fire and pillage. 
lii consequence crowds of poor people have been driven to 



A.D. 1106,] ROBERT CURTIIOSE IMPRISONED FOR LIFE. 385 

to seek refuge in foreign countries, and the converts of 
the monks have been spoiled of the property and possessions, 
with which they were endowed by pious barons. No one 
escaped the violence of these lawless men; distress and 
alarm universally prevailed. The flood of evils continually 
increasing, almost all reverence for divine worship was lost. 
It is needless to dwell on this melancholy state of aifairs. 
In various parts of Normandy we witness the churches burnt, 
the dioceses depopulated of the parishioners, and the cities 
and villages in all quarters a prey to disorders and cala- 
mities. It is you and your fellows who have ruined this 
noble province, and roused the anger of God against your- 
selves. It is by God's righteous providence that victory 
has been divinely vouchsafed to the guardians of peace and 
justice, and that their adversaries have been utterly crushed. 
I can by no means agree to revolt against King Henry, lest 
I should offend the Almighty who is evidently his protector, 
and provoke his wrath against myself. If however, aban- 
doning your evil courses and crooked policy, you are desirous 
of conciliating the favour of this powerful monarch, you may 
rely on my readiness to become a mediator with him on 
your behalf." 

Eobert de Belesme, finding Elias inflexible in his resolu- 
tion not to join his disorderly faction, and being satisfied 
that bis counsels were profitable and full of good sense, 
suddenly changed his mind, which was naturally versatile, 
and thanking his sage adviser, employed him to effect his 
reconciliation with King Henry. As a very confidential 
intercourse was maintained between the king and the count, 
Elias secured Argentan to Eobert de Belesme, on his restor- 
ing all the fiefs belonging to the dukedom of which he had 
obtained possession, but he was reinstated in the viscounty 
of Ealaise and whatever domains belonged to his father. 

Ch. XXIII. King Henri/, keeping his brother Bobert a 
close 'prisoner, holds Normandy the rest of his life — His 
political and personal character. 

King Henry having, by God's help, humbled his enemies, 
he razed to the ground all the unlicensed castles^ which Eobert 

^ Adulterina castella. To clearly understand this passage, refereno; 
must be made to what our author has said before b. viii. c. 1, p. 427. 
YOL. III. C 



386 ORDEEICTTS YITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XXTIT. 

[de Belesme] and other factious nobles had erected. He 
sent his brothers to England to prevent the malcontents 
from disturbing the peace of the well-disposed, under colour 
of taking the duke's part, who was therefore kept a close 
prisoner for twenty-seven years, but amply supplied with 
luxuries of every kind. Meanwhile, Henry governed the 
duchy of Normandy as well as his kingdom of England with 
a firm hand, being to the end of his days careful to maintain 
peace ; and though he enjoyed his prosperity according to 
his own pleasure, he never faltered in his stern career and 
the severity with which he administered justice. His able 
policy enabled him to keep the greatest nobles and lords of 
castles, and the most turbulent barons, in due subjection, 
while he was at all times ready to encourage and protect his 
peaceable subjects, the men of the church and the commons of 
the land. His power being established on both sides of the 
channel in the eighth year of his reign,^ it was his constant 
endeavour to procure peace for the populations under his rule, 
and he rigorously punished offenders against w^hom he 
enacted severe laws. Surrounded by all the indulgences 
which his vast wealth could procure, he was criminally ad- 
dicted to one vice" from the days of his youth until he was 
advanced in years, having had several sons and daughters by 
concubines,^ By his unwearied industry he profusely 

of the number of castles illegally erected by the Norman nobility, as soon as 
they found themselves relieved from William the Conqueror's iron yoke. 
The barons who possessed ancient castles expelled at the same time the 
governors and garrisons who had the custody of them in the duke's name, 
aud occupied them with their own retainers. It was Henry's first object to 
put an end to these disorders. 

1 This computation is incorrect ; see the note p. 273. 

" Huic vitio; Ordericus might have conscientiously used the plural 
rumber. Avarice, at least, was one of Henry I.'s most deeply-rooted and 
odious vices; he made a market of every thing, to provide means of 
paying for the secret information, corruption, and treachery which he 
organized on a vast scale. 

^ It is but justice to remark that if Ordericus has too often represented 
some of the worst parts of Henry's conduct in too favourable a light, he 
very frankly condemns in this passage his irregular life, a task from which 
other cotemporary historians have shrunk. The singular apology offered 
by William of Malmesbury must be quoted in its original language : — 
" Omnium tota vita obscenitatum cupidinearum expers, quoniam (v.t a 
consciis (wcepimus) non effreni voluptnte, sed gignendcp. prolis amore, 
mulicrum c/remio infunderetur, nee dignaretur advence ddeclalioni prce- 



A.D. 1106.] CHAEACTEB OF IIENRT T. 387 

augmented his worldly wealth, amassing vast stores of all 
valuable objects which he coveted. Eeserving for his own 
sport the beasts of chace in the forests of England, he even 
caused all dogs kept on the verge of t}ie woods to be mutilated 
by having one of their claws chopped off, and reluctantly 
licensed some few of the greater nobles and his particular 
friends to have the privilege of hunting in their own forests, 
A close observer, he investigated all subjects with great 
acuteness, and his memory was very tenacious of the im- 
formation he received.^ His inquiries extended to all the 
proceedings of his ministers and great officers, and he regu- 
lated the multiplied affairs of England and Normandy accor- 
ding to the dictates of his own sagacious judgment. He 
penetrated every one's secrets, and the most private 
transactions, so that the actors were at a loss to under- 
stand how the king obtained his knowledge. After a careful 
examination of ancient history, I boldly assert that, in 
regard to worldly prosperity, no king of England was 
mightier or richer than Henry. 

Ch. XXIV. Robert de Montfort hanished — lie joins, with 
otlier kniglitSj £oJiemond's expedition against the emperor 
Alexius — Its failure before Durazzo — The Franks disperse, 
after a humiliating treaty. 
In the year of our Lord 1107, King Henry assembled his 
barons, and appealed to them for judgment against Robert 
de Montfort," on a charge of having broken his fealty. Being 
conscious of his guilt, he obtained leave to depart for Jeru- 
salem, giving up all his lands to the king. He then 

here assensum, nisi ubi semen regium procedere posset in effectum; 
effundens naturam ut dominus, non obtemperans libidini id famulus." 

^ Our author might have added that Henry T. was curious in objects 
connected with zoology. He established a menagerie at Woodstock, in 
which he collected lions, leopards, camels, and lynxes. There was also a 
porcupine sent to him by William of Montpellier, of which Malmesbury 
speaks with great admiration. The king was very proud of this collection, 
which he took great pains to increase by applications to princes with w hom 
he had friendly relations. To gratify him in this particular was one of the 
best means of making court to him, and we are told that Paul, earl of 
Orkney, often employed it. 

- This nobleman, as we have already learnt, was commander-in-chief of 
the Norman army in Maine in the year 1090: He was brother of Hugh, 
third of that name, and uncle of Hugh IV. de Montfort, who married Ade- 
line de Meulan. 

c c 2 



B88 UBDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XXIT. 

commenced his journey in company with some of his com- 
panions in arms, and arriving in Apulia, met Bohemond, and 
found to his joy several of his countrymen. For Hugh 
de Puiset,^ Simon Anet, Ealph de Pont-Echanfre, and 
Josceline his brother,^ and some other Cisalpines were with 
Bohemond. Several knights from other countries were 
waiting for an opportunity of crossing the sea, all desirous of 
fighting with the duke against the emperor, and in the 
meantime both they and their horses were maintained by 
Bohemond' s liberality. He supported so many troops for 
two years that he exhausted his treasury; providing also 
cheerfully ships for all without any passage money. He 
gave a hearty welcome to Eobert de Montfort, and not 
having learnt the cause of his quitting his native country, as 
he was hereditary marshal of Normandy* the duke gave 
him a high rank in his army. He had long assembled ships 
and troops in the ports of Italy, and furnished all with 
abundant provisions out of his revenues, so that a powerful 
armament was prepared for making war on the emperor. At 
length the crusaders sailed to Thessaly,'' with a fair wind, 
and besieged Durazzo for a long time. The magnanimous 
duke tried various methods of assaulting the place, but he 
found his greatest impediment in those who ought to have 
seconded his efforts. Even his brother Guy and Eobert de 
Montfort, in whom he trusted most, had the treachery to 
espouse the emperor's cause, and being blinded by the large 
bribes he sent them, had the address to derange the plans of 
their chief.^ Eor the duke having prepared his engines, and 

* This was not the first crusader of this family who went to the Holy 
Land. See before p. 78. 

^ See before p. 367. 

^ It does not appear how Robert de Montfort possessed an hereditary 
title to command the army of Normandy ; if any such right existed it 
would have belonged to his eldest brother. 

* Bohemond's fleet was moored in the port of Valonna the 9th of 
October, 1107, and his army encamped before Durazzo the 13th of the 
same month. 

* Anna Comnena denies these intrigues in the crusaders' camp, adding 
that the report was invented by her father to sow discord among Bohe- 
mond's followers. But as that chief was brutal and avariciou?, while the 
tmperor was a rich and practised corrupter, and the Frank warriors were 
greedy and dispirited adventurers, there seems notliing improbable in the 
accounts given by the "Western writers. As to Guy's trea*t>n, the historian 



A.D. 1107, 1108.] bohemond's siege of durazzo. 389 

appointed a certain day for making the assault, they on some 
crafty pretence demanded a truce or gave the enemy clan- 
destine intelligence by which they might avoid their imi- 
nent danger. In this manner Bohemond and his army were 
long deceived by the treachery of his friends, and provisions 
begining to fail, the crusaders dwindled away in a foreign 
land. At length, not being able to endure the severe famine, 
they deserted in small bands, and dispersing through Mace- 
donia, came to the emperor's terms, who gave them the choice 
of either remaining in his service, or departing where thev 
pleased. Many of them partook of his ample donations, and 
enjoying his munificence, returned him thanks for relieving 
them from their state of utter penury. 

Bohemond was much distressed on finding that he could 
not accomplish his vast designs, but although daily pressed 
by his comrades to seek the emperor's favour, he long refused. 
They argued thus: "We are paying the penalty of our own 
rashness in having engaged in a bold enterprise far from our 
native country and beyond our strength, and having pre- 
sumed to raise our hands against the holy empire. We have 
not been led to join in this expedition to sustain our here- 
ditary rights, nor has any prophet sent by God roused us to 
arms by divine oracles ; but yon are actuated by the ambition 
of ruling in the teritories of another prince to engage in this 
arduous enterprise, and, as for us, the love of money has led 
us to undergo the burden of toils and battles. But as God 
is not mocked, and his judgments fail not, nor does he sub- 
vert justice, he has heard with favour the prayers of those 
who cry to him against us in Greece, and has dispersed our 
troops, enfeebled not by battle but by famine, and destroyed 
our force without eff"usion of blood. We entreat you there- 
fore to make peace with the emperor before you fall into his 
hands and are condemned to death, and by your loss all your 
followers are plunged into inextricable difiiculties.^ 

of Louis-le-Gros is still more explicit than our author : *' Bohemond asking 
him what had been going on, he confessed that the emperor had promised 
to give him his daughter, with Durazzo, and other rewards ; that the place 
would have been long ago stormed, or given up by the citizens but for his 
communications with them. Having revealed this enormous wickedness, 
he retired, followed with curses. 

' Among Bohemond's companions in arms who poured forth these com- 
plaints, we may distinguish Hugh Bunel, the assassin of Mabel de Bel^sme, 



390 ORDERICUS yiTALIS. [b.x. ch. xxy. 

By this language the valiant duke understood plainly the 
disaffection of his comrades, and being apprehensive of 
incurring the disgrace of an irretrievable disaster, he gave a 
reluctant consent, and, making peace with the emperor ^ 
returned in deep grief to Apulia. Peeling great confusion 
in presence of the Trench to whom he had promised 
extensive sovereignties, he gave them leave, with shame, to 
pursue their pilgrimage.^ Then Hugh de Puiset, Ralph de 
Pont Erchanfre, with Josceline his brother, and many others 
proceeded to Constantinople,^ where they were honoured by 
the emperor Alexius with noble gifts, and from thence they 
continued their journey to Jerusalem. The wife of Ealph, 
who was daughter of Goislen de Leves,^ died in the imperial 
city, and was buried there with great solemnity. Some of 
the pilgrims having performed their devotions returned to 
their native country, and ended their career by various 
accidents. Guy fell sick soon afterwards, and publicly 
confessed the treachery of which he had been guilty, but he 
could never obtain his pardon from his brother. Eobert de 
Montfort also, his accomplice in the treason, died about 
the same time, and no one said a word in his praise. 

Ch. XXV. Death of Boliemoncl and Tancred — Bogei" their 
successor at Antioch falls in battle uith the Turks — Bohe- 
mond II. becomes prince of Antioch. 

In the year of our Lord 1111, the fourth indication, ]\Iark 

who, being proscribed had long sought his fortunes in the East (see before 
p. 170). "Prince,** said he to Bohemond, "of all the knights who are 
come here to do battle, there is not one who has had an opportunity of 
using his lance. We are fighting against stone walls. Make peace, and 
let us be gone." — Hist, du Bas-Empire, t. 84, p. 1 108. * 

' This treaty, the humiliating conditions of which may be seen in the 
work just referred to (t. 18, p. 382), is dated in the month of September, 
1108. Anna Comnena has preserved to us the verbose engagements 
imposed on Bohemond, but unfortunately does not give the signatures nor 
even the names of any of his followers. 

'^ We doubt very much whether this licence was explicitly granted. 
Bohemond not only broke all his promises to his companions in arms, but 
he returned to Apulia without taking leave of them. 

3 This journey did not take place till the spring of 1 109. 

* Gouelkin de L6ves, near Chartres. The family of Girnie with which 
Ralpli was connected on his mother's side, was intimately related to several 
houaes in the district of Chartres. See vol. L, pp. 451, 6c c. 



A.D. 1111.] KOGER SUCCEEDS BOHEMOND. 391 

Bobemond died, after many conflicts and triumphs in the 
name of Jesus/ Tancred, that knight so renowned for his 
defeats of the Pagans, was his uncle's successor for several 
years.^ On his death Eoger, son of Richard, a cousin of the 
before named princes, obtained the principality of Antioch, 
but, entangled in difficulties, he did not hold it long. 

The death of these invincible princes being known through 
all the world became the cause of deep grief to the Christians 
and exultation to the Pagans. In consequence, Emir Gazis,^ 
nephew of the sultan, prince of Persia, declared war against 
the Christians, and laid siege to Sardanas, a castle of the 
Christians, ten leagues from Antioch, with a numerous army. 
Eoger, son of Eichard, prince of Antioch, marched out to 
give battle, against the advice of the patriarch Bernard, and 
without waiting for the arrival of Baldwin, king of Jeru- 
salem, who was summoned to their aid. Eoger was a daring 
and brave knight, but inferior to his two predecessors, being 
careless, obstinate, and rash. 

The patriarch, witb paternal solicitude for the safety of 
his people, thus iiddressed the impatient duke : " Temper 
your valour with prudence, brave duke, and wait the arrival 
of King Baldwin and Josceline,and other faithful knights who 
are now zealously hastening to our succour. Precipitation 
has been the ruin of numbers, and the greatest princes have 
in consequence thrown away life and victory. Look into 
ancient and modern history, and reflect seriously on the fates 
of celebrated kings. Think of Saul and Josiah, and Judas 
Maccabaeus, as well as of the defeat of the Eomans by 
Hannibal at Cannae, and use wise precautions that you 
do not precipitate yourself and your subjects into similar 
ruin. Wait for your venerable allies who are eminent for 

^ Bohemond died in the month of February, 1111, not at Antioch 
according to an interpolation adopted in Duchesne's text of Ordericus, but 
in Apulia. The original MS. had the word Antiochice, but it has been 
erased, probably under the eye and by order of the author. 

^ Tancred did not succeed his uncle in the principality of Antioch, but 
governed it as guardian of Bohemond II., who was only four years old at 
his father's death. Nor is it correct to say that the guardianship lasted 
several years, as Tancred died the 6th of December, 1112. 

* We may easily recognize the name of Al-Gazy, the Turkoman prince 
of Maridin and Aleppo, of the family of Ortok, as that of the emir Gazis, 
niven him by our author. 



392 ORDEKIOUS VITALIS. [b.X. CH.XXV. 

their piety and many yirtues, and in company with them 
fight against the Pagans, in the power of Ahnightj God, 
and by his aid you will gain the victory you covet." 

The prudent bishop used language of this sort, but the 
arrogant duke, treating all he said with contempt, marched 
out and pitched his camp in the plain of Sarmatan, with 
seven thousand troops. Upon this, the emir Gazis and his 
numerous bands of Gentiles raised the siege without loss of 
time, and rushing suddenly from the mountains on the 
champaign country, covered it like clouds of locusts. Then 
hurrying to the tents of the Christians, who were taken by 
surprise, they slew their prince E-oger and seven thousand 
men.^ Robert de Vieux Pont,^ and other knights and 
squires, who had left the camp in the morning for foraging 
or hawking, or other employments, witnessing this sudden 
attack, fled seven leagues to the city, and with the fearful 
news roused the citizens in alarm to defend their country. 
Nearly one hundred and forty escaped by being out of the 
camp, and were reserved, by God's mercy, for the protection 
of the faithful. 

On learning these circumstances, the patriarch took 
measures manfully to defend the city with all the men, both 
clergy and laity, he was able to muster. Cecilia, daughter 
of Philip, king of France, Tancred's widow, knighted 
Gervase the Breton, son of Haimon, viscount of Dol, and 
invested several other squires with knightly arms to fight 
against the Pagans. Elated by their great slaughter of the 
Christains, the emir's troops rapidly advanced in a body to 
Antioch, thinking they should take the city by surprise, now 
that its defenders were slain; but by God's providence they 
were completely repulsed from the fortifications by a small 
band of the faithful. • 

At the end of fifteen days, the king of Jerusalem, and 



^ It is quite possible that the patriarch Bernard may have addressed 
Roger to this effect, though probably with less display of erudition, but it 
is certain that Bernard remained at Antioch, and the jirchbishop of Apa- 
mea performed the episcopal functions on the field of battle. 

^ The battle in Avhich Roger de Principatu fell, was fought in 1119, near 
Artesia, at a place called the Field of Blood. 

* Probably a son of Robert de Vieux-Pont-sur-Dive, who assumed the 
monastic habit in the abbey there in the reign cf William the Conqueror. 



A.D. 1118.] BOHEMOND II., PRINCE OF AKTIOCK. 393 

Pons, count of Tripoli,^ united their forces at the castle of 
Harenc, and giving battle in the name of the merciful Jesus, 
obtained the victory and broke the power of the infidels. 
The young knight Grervase slew the emir Gazis, and Chris- 
tian valour crushed the might of the Gentiles.^ The Chris- 
tians were enriched with the spoils of their enemies, and 
returned hearty thanks to God. 

Then king Baldwin^ took possession of Antioch, in con- 
sequence of Tancred's having left no issue,^ and defended it 
several years against the Gentiles. At last, the young 
Bohemond came from Apulia to Syria, and being received 
with universal joy, married the king's daughter and re- 
covered all his father's territories. He governed them with 
distinction for four years, treading in his father's steps, 
but like a bright flower, he soon faded.^ 

Ch. XXYI. Baldwin II. and some CJiristian TcnigTits fall into 
an ambusli near JEdessa, and are detained in captivity — 
Their escape. 

Mea-NWHile, Balad,^ Sahanas, that is the viscount, of Bagdad, 
who had married the daughter of Eodnan, king of Aleppo 
and obtained the kingdom in her right, contended fiercely 
with the Christians for a long period. This old warrior, 

' Pons, count of Tripoli, grandson of Raymond of St. Giles, succeeded 
his father Bertrand in 1 1 12, This brave prince married Cecilia of France, 
Tancred's widow. 

* The Christians were encamped on the mountain of Danitz when the 
Moslems attacked them on the 14th of August, 1120. Al-Gazy did not 
fall in the battle as our author relates, but made his escape and died some 
time afterwards. 

^ Baldwin II., suraamed du Bourg, eldest son of Hugh, count de 
Rethel, kinsman of Baldwin I., succeeded him on Easter-day, 1118. 

* It was not pro defectu TancredintB stirpis that Baldwin took posses- 
sion of Antioch, Baldwin's posterity having no right or pretension to the 
principality, but on account of the extreme youth of Bohemond II., who 
was then only twelve years old. 

^ He married Alice, twelfth daughter of Baldwin II., and fell in 1130, 
during the assault of the castle of Athareb by the Atabek Ismaelian Zenghi, 
leaving only an infant daughter named Constance. His widow Alice 
married Zenghi. 

® In this chapter we go back to the year 1123, and the reign of Balak, 
nephew and successor of Al-Gazy. 



894 OEDEEICUS YITALI3. [b.X. CH.XXYI. 

while he was besieging Maubeg,^ and breathing slaughter 
against the Christians, learnt that King Baldwin and Josce- 
line with several others intended to go to Rages, and there 
celebrate the solemnities of Easter. He therefore cautiously 
drew off from the siege forty thousand men, in the last week 
of Lent, and on Eriday of the Lord's Supper made prison- 
ers Josceline de Turbessel ^ and Waleran de Puiset, who were 
in advance of the other Christians. Then he concealed him- 
self with his troops, like a wolf, in a dense olive grove, 
lying in ambush at Ponte-Torres on the Euphrates, on the 
Saturday of Easter, and waiting for King Baldwin, who was 
uninformed of what had happened to his friends who pre- 
ceded him. The insidious enemy on the watch first saw the 
chaplains and some common people who were unarmed, but, 
looking out sharply for a worthier prize, he allowed them to 
pass without molestation. The king following without sus- 
picion at the head of thirty-five horsemen, was immediately 
seized, and the infidel commander then let loose all his 
squadrons like savage tigers on the unarmed crowd, and 
commanded the whole to be put to death on the spot. All 
these therefore, with the king's chaplains w^ho were in front, 
were butchered like sheep on the Saturday of Easter. 

Balad, exulting in his great success, conducted the king 
and the knights as prisoners to Charran, and then to 
Carpetra,^ where they were confined a long time. This place 
is remarkable for a vast, stately, and strongly fortified citadel, 

^ Maubeg, the Hierapolis of the Greeks. 

^ Joscelin II. de Courtenai, second son of Josceline I., accompanied Ste- 
phen, count de Blois to the Holy Land in 1101. He obtained from Bald- 
win I. the lordship of Tiberias or Tabaria, and from Baldwin du Bourg the 
county of Edessa. It was not from a fancy for celebrating Easter cit 
Edessa that the king fell into the ambuscade of Balak, but while he was 
imprudently on his march there for the relief of Josceline. This knight 
took his surname of Turbessel from one of the places which Baldwin du 
Bourg had given him on the west of the Euphrates. He had a brother, 
Geoffrey de Courtenai, surnamed Chapelu, who also distinguished him- 
self in the Holy Land, and perislied there in 1 1 39, while endeavouring to 
relieve the castle of Montferrand, besieged by the infidels. 

We need not be surprised to see one of the family of Puiset in his 
company. They were neighbours, and probably kinsmen or allies. 

^ Khartpert, Karpout, Q,uart-Pierre, to the east of the Euphrates and 
N.E. of Edessa, where Baldwin was imprisoned in the month of February, 
1 124. It was not till his second captivity that the king was conducted to 
Charan. 



A.D. 1123, 1124.J BALDWIN II.'s CAPTIVITY. 395 

one of the first, in the whole world, of those fortresses which 
are the strength of tryants. 

In this citadel King Baldwin, with Josceline and Waleran, 
Pons de Gavarret, the viscount, the young knight Gervase, 
Guiumar the Breton, son of count Alan,^ and thirty-two 
knights were confined together for a whole year, as well as 
forty Armenian and Syrian Christians who were already 
captives there. 

Balad committed the custody of the citadel and the 
prisoners to three hundred and fifty soldiers, and ordered the 
king to be tortured by fasting, to compel him to yield up the 
fortresses which were most desirable. The rest of the 
prisoners were employed, under guard, in various works and 
daily labours. Balad then levied a numerous army and led 
them without delay against the Christian states, whom he 
expected to find at his mercy in the absence of their chiefs. 
Having laid siege to the castle of Sardanas, near Antioch, he 
blockaded the place for a long time, but the mighty God of 
iSabaotli protecting the garrison, he could not reduce it. 

Meanwhile the captives were in servitude to their Gentile 
keepers, and obeyed their orders, chained by one of their 
feet. They fetched water daily from the Euphrates, at the 
distance of a mile, and performed cheerfully other tasks which 
were enjoined them. The Gentiles treated them kindly as 
they would do good beasts of burden, and finding them useful 
artificers and workmen, fed them well that their strength 
might not fail. King Baldwin only and Josceline were in- 
dulged with repose, but they were strictly guarded. By 
Baiad's orders, the king was only allowed food on Sunday 
and Friday in every week, and then he gave a meal to the 
three hundred and fifty soldiers who composed his guard. 
Not only so, but he provided subsistence in great plenty for 
his companions in captivity, as well as the forty prisoners 
he found in the castle ; exhibiting thus a royal munificence, 
and at the same time securing the good opinion of the guards. 
This liberality was a great advantage to the captives, for the 
gentile soldiers treated them with respect, and, contrary to 
the orders of Balad, often privately supplied the king with 

■ We know of no son of Alan Fergan called Guiumar, which appears 
to be the Breton form of Guy. Geoffrey-le-Roux, his second son, died at 
:'=»rusalem in 1116. 



396 OTIDERICTJS YITALTS. [b.X. Cn.XXVI. 

plentiful meals. The emir of Caloiambar,^ his wife's uncle, 
rendered him aid by sending him a hundred bezants every 
week. 

The crafty Gentiles were sometimes favourably disposed 
towards the Christians, but perish for ever their accursed 
faith! Twice during their solemn festivals they dragged from 
the prison two knights chosen by lot, and binding them to 
stakes shot their arrows at them till they fell amidst the 
je3rs of the Grentiles. 

At this sight the captives were sorely troubled, and pre- 
ferred a noble deatli to life in so much misery. In conse- 
quence, at the expiration of a year, the Christians roused 
themselves to a bold enterprise, and one Sunday, when the 
guards had made a plentiful meal provided by the king, they 
enticed them to drink till they were intoxicated. As the 
Pagans fell asleep, the Eranks seized their arms, and being 
joined by the forty Armenian and Syrian Christians who 
had been long in captivity, slew all the Turks, and having 
thus disposed of their guards, took posession of the entire 
fortress. The next day they made a bold irruption into 
the city, and putting several thousand Pagans to the sword, 
carried off the booty they pillaged into the castle, the strong 
fortifications of which protected them for nearly eight 
months. They then dispatched Josceline and Geoffrey le 
Grele, to demand succour from all the Christian states.^ 

About this time, the queen of Jerusalem, who was an 
Armenian by birth, employed a hundred chosen men of her 
own race to disguise themselves as Turks in their dress and 
arms, and endeavour to render assistance to her husband in 

' Calaat-Gieber, or Calgembar, the castle of Giabar, a fortress near the 
Euphrates. 

2 It would be a vain task to endeavour to separate the history from the 
romance of this narrative, which has the same characteristics as that of the 
deliverance of Bohemond in a former chapter. We know for certain that 
the captives were delivered by the Armenians in disguise sent by Morphia 
to their relief. It was during Baldwin's second captivity, and not his first, 
that Josceline and Geoffrey le Grele made their escape, as Onlericus him- 
self concurs in stating a little further on. As for the particulars of their 
escape, they must be left on the -.mthonty of our author. Modern writers 
have attached too little credit to these narratives, in which there is probably 
a good deal of truth. Their rejection of them is the less excusable, as tJiuy 
have nothing to otfer instead. 



A.D.1123 — 1124.] ESCAPE OF JOSCELINE AND GEOFFREY. 397 

his captivity. These men coming to Karpout, were admitted 
into the castle, and being well versed in the language and 
manners of the Turks rendered great assistance to the 
Franks. 

Josceline and Geoffrey, having to explore a road with which 
they were unacquainted, and fearing, in a strange country, all 
alike as enemies, chanced to fall in with a peasant who, with 
his wife mounted on a little ass, was journeying from 
Mesopotamia to Syria. As they travelled and talked together, 
the peasant soon recognized Josceline, who, though a valiant 
warrior, became so alarmed at the barbarian's assertion, that 
he told him he was under a mistake. The Pagan however 
said to him : " Tour denial is useless, brave knight, for I 
know you are Josceline, formerly my own master; I have been 
often employed in your household, and was glad to do the 
bidding of your humblest servants. I fetched water and 
lit fires, receiving from your bounty food and clothing like 
the rest of your domestics. After some years, I went among 
my Turkish relations, and am now leaving them again, 
infidels as they are, intending to rejoin the Christians, under 
whom I lived more happily than with my own kinsmen and 
country folk. I have heard, worthy sir, of your misfortunes, 
and long and heartily grieved at the disaster which befel you 
and your friends. Now that you are released from captivity 
and on the way to your own country, I will be your faithful 
attendant, and guide you on the road to Antioch." The 
Pagan conversing in this manner, with much more to the same 
purpose, Josceline was highly delighted with his companion. 
They forthwith exchanged clothes, the barbarian taking the 
lead as master, and conversing with those they met on the 
road, while the two Christian knights followed like vile slaves, 
silently praying to the King of Sabaoth for their mutual 
safety. They cheerfully carried in their arms by turns the 
Saracen's little daughter, who was six years old, and thus 
passed through the fortified places and towns without being 
recognized. 

Listen now to what befel those who were left in extreme 
peril at Karpout. There were three of Balad's wives con- 
cealed in the castle, whose existence the Christians did not 
discover for fifteen days. Patima, daughter of Ali, king of 
the Medes, was the most distinguished of these ladies for 



398 ORDERICUS VITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XXTT. 

beauty and rank ; tbe second was the daughter of Eoduan 
of Aleppo, and the third of the emir of Caloiambar. The 
daughter of Eoduan wrote a letter to her husband who was 
besieging Sardanas with a hundred thousand troops, and 
fastening it to the neck of a carrier-pigeon, let loose the 
bird from the summit of the tower. In this letter she gave 
a particular account of the seizure of the castle, the massacre 
of the guards, and the devastation of the country. As soon 
therefore as Balad received this intelligence, he raised the 
siege of Sardanas in violent alarm, and returning hastily to 
Karpout collected forces from all quarters and blockaded it 
during eight months. 

At this time Josceline and his companions passed through 
the camp of Balad without being recognized, and arriving at 
home richly rewarded his guide. Causing the whole family 
to be regenerated in the waters of baptism, he conferred 
great wealth on the husband and wife, and, as for the girl he 
had carried in his arms and thus passed undiscovered through 
the gentile tribes, he espoused her honorably to a Christian 
knight.^ 

Balad besieged Karpout for a long time with a numerous 
army, but Baldwin and his followers gallantly resisted all 
their attacks. The citadel contained a number of spacious 
and elegant apartments, and chambers within the main walls 
in which vast treasures were deposited, consisting of gold and 
silver, precious stones, purple and silk, and all kinds of valua- 
bles. A plentiful stream of water, led from the Euphrates 
by a subterranean canal of admirable construction, supplied 
abundantly the wants of those who were shut up in the 
castle. It contained also stores of bread, wine, and meat, 
both fresh and salted, sufficient for the support of a thousand 
soldiers for ten years. Thus the indomitable Franks could 
confidently rely on maintaining their position until Josce- 
line's return with a reinforcement of Christians. 

In consequence, Balad in great anxiety repeatedly sent 

* " II fallait que cette jeune fiUe de six ans eut grandi bien vite." — Le 
Prevost. But every one knows that in the east girls are betrothed in 
childhood and marriageable at a very early a;};e. The author may have anti- 
cipated an event which did not take place for a few year?, in order to wind 
up his romantic story, and dispose of the inferior characters in his drama | 
according to the approved fashion. 



A. D. 1123 — 1124(,] Baldwin's captivity. 890 

able ambassadors to King Baldwin, who made great offers 
sometimes accompanied by severe reproaches. " O king," 
he said, " you are guilty of a foul deed, which will stain your 
honour in the present and future generations. Much to 
your shame, you treat with cruelty and outrage the feelings 
of noble matrons, in a manner unbecoming your royal dignity 
and Christian profession. Why do you detain my help- 
less wives, who have never done you an injury, confined like 
captives in the castle ? "Why do you bind in fetters princesses 
of royal birth like thieves or traitors ? Tour conduct is the 
deepest disgrace to your nation, and will reflect dishonour 
on your religion throughout all ages. Harden not your 
heart, I beseech you, but have compassion on my grey hairs, 
and the feebleness of women. I entreat you to restore me 
ray wives, and I will engage by a solemn oath that I will 
make no attack on you and your companions for a whole 
year, in order that Josceline the bearer of your message may 
have time to return with the relief you need. Meanwhile, if 
you grant me the favour of sending back my wives, I will 
draw off my forces, and attend to the administration of my 
affairs, while you will enjoy the peace I grant for the 
appointed term. Tou shall enjoy the liberty of the markets 
throughout my territories, and you can freely use for that 
purpose the vast treasure belonging to me w^hich chance has 
placed in your power. Gazis, Bursethin, and other persons 
of rank conveyed this message to King Baldwdn, and used 
all their eloquence to persuade him to come to terms with 
their own prince. 

Baldwin assembled all who were in the castle, and laying 
before them Balad's proposals, demanded their advice. 
Various opinions being offered, and there being much 
difficulty in arriving at a positive determination on so doubt- 
ful a subject, the queen Patima thus addressed the assembly ; 
" I perceive, brave men, that you hesitate what reply you 
shall send to my lord's propositions. I beseech you there- 
fore to listen to what I have to say. Give no heed to my 
lord's promises, for they are not to be trusted. All the 
offers by which he endeavours to wheedle you are treacherous. 
A.S long us you hold possession of this impregnable castle, 
and detain me and my companions in your custody, there is 
no doubt but Balad will be afraid of you, and not venture to 



400 ORDERICUS VITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XXVJ. 

assault the fortress. He well knows, and often declares in 
the company of his intimate friends, that should any evil 
happen to us while he is attacking you, he will be afterwards 
exposed to endless hostilities. All our relations, who are 
lords of the greatest part of the East, would rise in arms 
against him, and never rest till they had put him to death. 
Wait then until you receive the succour of Heaven and your 
faithful friends, and beware prudently of the dangerous wiles 
of your crafty foe. You position is commanding, and 
enables you to repel assaults by hurling darts and stones 
on the enemy. "What is wanting, if you are only firm ? 
You are well furnished with arms, and abundantly provisioned. 
You have in this impregnable fortress bread, water, wine, and 
flesh-meat. Call to mind the ten years' siege of Troy, and 
think of the heroic deeds which your actors daily represent 
before you, and let such recollections supply you with 
strength and animate your courage.^ Fight bravely accord- 
ing to the custom of the Franks, and persevere until you 
have gained the victory, lest your shame be told in songs 
throughout the world. Hitherto the glory of the warriors 
of the West is universally celebrated, and the fame of the 
Franks has even penetrated to the Persian realms. It does 
not grieve us to be confined with you, although King Balad 
taunts you with it as a thing to be ashamed of We prefer 
such incarceration to the worship of demons with idolaters, and 
willingly adopting your kindly manners are favourably dis- 
posed to your faith and religion, hoping that if, through 
the divine favour, we safely make our escape from hence in 
your company, we shall speedily be admitted to the heavenly 
sacraments of the Christians." 

The other princesses heartily agreed with what Fatima 
had said ; and the exhortations of the foreign women pleasing 
tlie Christains, they were encouraged to persist for a long while 
in holding the castle. At length, however. King Baldwin 
yielded to the prayers and promises of Balad, and restored 
him his three wives, much against their own wishes, escorted 
by five brave knights. Having conducted them to Balad, 
becomingly attired, the knights proposed returning to their 

^ " Voila encore," observes M. Le Prevost, " une veritable Sultar.e 
d'opera comique, bien vers«Se en outre dans la connoissance des chansons de 
geste, et paiticuli^rement de celles qui ruulaient sur la guerre de Troie." 



A. D. 1123 — 1124,] CRUSADERS AT RAGDAD. 401 

friends in the castle, but were detained by the tyrant to the 
p^rief of many. Thus Guiumar the Breton, Grevase of Dol, 
Eobert of Caen, Musched of Mans, and Eivallon of Dinan, 
were made prisoners by the treacherous Balad and presented 
as captives to Ali, king of the Medes. He was a very pow- 
erful prince, and having detained the Eranks and treated 
them honourably nine months, gave them to the caliph 
of Bagdad.^ On the morrow, the soldan received them from 
the caliph, and shortly setting them at liberty loaded them 
with presents. There the four knights chose Guiumar, sou 
of Count Alan, their leader, and took service with the soldan 
for three years and a half, returning to Antioch in the course 
of the fourth year.^ 

The merciful God did not leave his faithful children with- 
out aid in their exile, for the five knights of whom we have 
spoken and who were led so far in captivity, found great 
favour among the barbarians. The king of the Medes 
placed them under the care of the governor of the city, 
ordering that they should come to him every day dressed in 
thel^rench fashion. They had garments of silk embroidered 
with gold, horses, arms, and all sorts of furniture, and what- 
ever they chose to ask of the king or the governor. They 
were objects of wonder to the Persians, and the Medes 
regarded with admiration the dress of the Pranks. Kings' 
daughters were struck with their handsome persons and 
smiled at their pleasantries, and kings and princes wished 
to have descendants of the blood of the Franks. No one 
however compelled them to change their religion in the 
slightest degree, or depart from the worship of Christ. • 

They tell wonderful stories of the soldan' s wealth and of 
the strange curiosities they saw in the east. The word 
soldan means sole-lord, because he rules over all the princes 
of the east. In the fourth year, he gave them permission 
to return home, and presented them with a golden arrow, as 

' Mostarchid was caliph of Bagdad at this time, 1118 — September 28, 
1135. 

* Our autlior, as usual, is not fortunate in his chronology. He makes 
the Christian prisoners spend three years and a half in their travels ; in the 
fourth they find Balak besieging Monbec, and still keeping Baldwin in 
close confinement. But we know that he was not taken prisoner for the 
first time before the year 11 23, and that Josceline slew Balak with his own 
hand in the spring of 1124. 

VOL. III. D D 



402 OEDERicus viTALis. [b.xi. cn.xxvi. 

a token of their liberty being restored by the prince. He 
offered them the daughters of his most powerful nobles, with 
immense riches and posessions, if they chose to remain ; but 
as they were resolved to depart, he showed them his vast 
treasures and wealth of all kinds. At last, having been 
loaded with gifts, and taken leave of their acquaintance and 
benefactors, they returned to Antioch under the conduct of 
David, king of Georgia, and Thorold de Montanis,^ and joy- 
fully related to their friends how they had lived in Nineveh, 
Bagdad, and Babylonia, and the many strange things they 
had seen in the countries of the East. 

They heard at Antioch that Balad was besieging Monbec, 
and still kept King Baldwin in close confinement, after put- 
ting to death all his companions. Josceline, after his escape 
from prison, had sent trusty messengers to the emperor 
John,^ and the Greeks and Armenians, and after eight 
months hastened with a large body of troops to the relief of 
the king who, as before related, was left in the castle of 
Karpout. Meanwhile Balad had continued the siege and 
frequently sent Gazis his nephew, and the young Bursechi- 
nus,^ the commander of his forces, to Baldwin, assuring him 
on oath that if he would surrender the castle peaceably he 
should have liberty to depart where he would with all his 
followers, and receive from him whatever he demanded. 
The king, weary of his long confinement and too easily 
trusting the treacherous pagan, surrendered the citadel, to 
the scandal of the Christians and great joy of the infidels. 
The king having marched out, Balad ordered four of his 
teeth to be extracted,* and Waleran de Puiset's left eye to 

' We find no account of the king of Georgia mentioned by our author. 
As for the prince of Armenia, who appears here under the disguise of a 
Norman name, he must have been Thoros, brother, lieutenant, and 
successor, after the year 1185, of Leon, Levon, or Li von. Both were sons 
of Gabriel, prince of Melitene, as they were brothers of Morphia, queen of 
Jerusalem, and wife of Baldwin II. These princes of Armenia were called 
by the western nations, de Montanis, from the mountainous character of 
their territories. The impregnable castle which was their usual residence, 
stood at the distance of an easy day's journey from Antioch, and they 
were consequently in continual contact with the lords of that principality. 

^ The emperor John Comnemis, August 15, 11 18 — April 8, 1143. 

^ The same person we have already met with under the name oi Burse 
thinus. See before, p. 399. 

* We trust the readt r will not attach more credit to the extraction of 



A.D. 1121.] baldavjn's eelease. 403 

be pulled out, and the nerves of his right arm to be severed, 
so that he might no longer carry a lance. Their companions 
were sentenced to lose their heads : all which was carried 
into execution. Waleran died from the injuries he received ; 
the king was again thrown into prison, where during 
four years his suiFerings were greater than before ; and 
twenty-four knights and one hundred and forty Syrians or 
Armenians were put to death by being beheaded. May 
they live with Christ, whose confessors they were and whom 
they served in this life ! Josceline, having learnt on his way 
the king's surrender and the slaughter of his late fellow 
prisoners, halted his troops, and the whole Christian army 
joined in lamentations ; then after a consultation it dis- 
banded. The intelligence of their disaster being spread in 
all quarters, the Christians were overwhelmed with sorrow, 
and the Gentiles triumphed with excessive joy. 

Balad, finding that all which we have related succeeded 
to his wishes, and that the Christians throughout Syria and 
Palestine made a firm resistance without thinking of their 
king, sent messengers to the kings and emirs throughout the 
Gentile world. Having united their forces to his, he again 
laid siege to Monbec. Josceline and all the Christians 
rejoiced at receiving this intelligence, and lost no tim e in 
assembling to give them battle. At this juncture, by the will 
of our Saviour, the five illustrious knights were in the army, 
having returned the same week from captivity among the 
barbarians. A great battle was fought on the vast plain 
between Monbec and Castle-Trehaled, in which Musci and 
Heron his brother, and several other emirs, engaged on the 
side of Balad, and strove to the utmost to defeat the Chris- 
tians. Balad on the field of battle sent two ass-loads of 
gold to Godfrey the Monk, count de Mareis,^ begging him to 
four of Baldwin's teeth, than to our author's etymology of the word soldan. 
After Balak's death, Baldwin remained prisoner at Charan, and was 
released from his captivity by being ransomed in 1 125. 

1 We have no information relative to this person. He may havo been 
the father or kinsman of " Reynold de Mares," who was slain with the 
prince of Antioch in a battle against the Turks, the 27th of June, 1 158." 
— Hist, de la Maison de Courtenay, p. 9. However that may be, it is not 
true that Balak fell by his hand, but he was killed by Josceline. " La 
tete du farouche enemi des Chretiens fut port^e en trioniphe devant lea 
murs de Tyr, ou ce spectacle doubla Tenthousiasme belliqueux des assie- 
geants." — Hint, des Croisades, ii. 70, 

D D 2 



404 ORDEBICUS TITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XX.TI. 

retire alone from the "battle, lest both of them should fall 
that day. For his sister, who was a skilful sorceress, had 
read in the stars that Godfrey and Balad should slay each 
other in the fight, and had sent in alarm a message to her 
brother warning him to take precautions for his safety. 
The religious count spurned the tyrant's gifts like dross, and 
offered himself willingly to the sacrifice in the confession of 
Christ. Having avenged the blood of the saints by slaying 
Balad, he fell himself gloriously fighting for Christ. *His 
pennon was found on the corpse of Balad, by whose death a 
dreadful and heavy yoke was removed from the necks 
of the Christians. In that battle nine hundred Christian 
soldiers fought against three hundred thousand Pagans, 
and conquered them by the powerful aid of the mighty 
Grod of Israel. On the side of the Christians only 
six knights and eleven foot-soldiers fell in the battle, whife 
thirteen thousand of the Pagans perished, whose names 
were found written in Balad's muster-rolls. The Almighty 
Emanuel, son of the immaculate Virgin, gave strength and 
victory to his Israelites, filling them with joy at the defeat of 
their enemies whom he had employed to chastise their 
offences like a rod of iron ; and after the storms of their 
affliction were dispersed, gave them prosperity and peace. 
The Lord thundering from heaven broke the horns of the 
Grentiles, and the Christians lifted up their hands and gave 
praises to the invincible King of Sabaoth. 

The Emir Gazis, nephew and heir of Balad, king of Alep- 
po, succeeded him ;^ but his recent disasters and diminution 
of wealtli prevented him from undertaking great enterprises 
and withstanding the difficalties in which his predecessor, 
taught by long experience, had been involved, and which his 
fertile genius enabled him to conduct and support. In 
consequence Gazis, accepting fifty thousand bezants for the 
ransom of King Baldwin, released him from prison, requiring 
forty youths, chosen from the principal families of Jeru- 
salem, or the neighbouring provinces, as hostages for the 
restoration of all the Pagans who were in captivity among 
the faithful. These terms having been agreed to, he released 
the king, and waited at the appointed time near the castle 
of Gis in the country of Csesarea Philippi. The Christians 

^ Bal.'ik's successor was not called Gazis, and was not his nephew. It 
was Timourtasch, son of Yl-Gazi, and he was already king of Maredin. 



A.D.1124.] SIEGE OF TYllE. 405 

arrived there with the money stipulated for the king's ran- 
som, and making a bold attack in the name of Christ, took 
the emir and the castle, and recovering their hostages, 
returned to Jerusalem with joyful thanksgivings to God. 
Gazis redeemed himself by paying one hundred thousand 
golden bezants, and engaged to maintain a durable peace 
with the Christians ; but his sovereignty was of short dura- 
tion.* 

Ch. XXVII. Siege of Tyre ly the crusaders from Jerusalem^ 
and the Venetians — On its surrender, an Englishma7i ap- 
pointed archbishop — A church built on the spot ivhere our 
Lord preached. 

"While King Baldwin was detained a prisoner, as we have 
now related, and the Christians almost despaired of his deli- 
verance, the bishop exhorted the clergy and people of Jeru- 
salem not to faint in their tribulations, but trusting in Christ 
to oppose the Gentiles resolutely, and enlarge their borders 
by force of arms to the Creator's glory. Envoys were there- 
fore despatched to Italy, who summoned to their aid the 
duke of Venice with a powerful fleet. Tyre, a city famous 
both in sacred and profane history, was then invested both by 
sea and land, and the siege was pressed till it was forced to sur- 
render.^ When at last the place was taken, a certain clerk, 
who was a native of England, was ordained bishop,^ and a 

^ All that our author relates of the circumstances attending the liberation 
of Baldwin is the subject of controversy. It is a fact that in 11 25 Timour- 
tasch lost Aleppo, which was besieged by Baldwin, and it was given up to 
his liberator, the sultan of Mot^soul; but he retained the kingdom of Maredin 
and Miafarehin until his death in 1152. 

Baldwin, whose imprisonment only dated from the month of February, 
1123, was released by ransom the 29th of August, 1124. The kingdom of 
Jerusalem was administered during his captivity by Eustace Gamier, lord 
of Cesarea and Sidon. 

'^ Tyre was taken on the 7th of July, 1124, after a siege of five months 
and a half. The doge of Venice, who assisted in its reduction, was Domi- 
nico Michaele, 1117—1130. 

^ A person named Odo was nominated by Baldwin II. to be the Latin 
archbishop of Tyre as early as 1122. He appears to have been consecrated 
by the patriarch Gormond, but never took possession of his see, as the city 
was in the hands of the infidels when he died in 1124. After the place 
was taken, the king and patriarch, with the nobles of the kingdom, 
assembled in 1127, the fourth year after Odo's death, and by universal 
concurrence raised to the archiepiscopal dignity, " William, a venerable 



406 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XT. CIT.XXYiri. 

cliLircli bailt, under the invocation of St. Saviour, outside 
the city, on the spot where the Lord Jesus preached to the 
people the word of eternal salvation.^ The altar was con- 
structed of a large stone on which our Lord sat while he 
was teaching ; not having been willing to enter a city of the 
uncircumcized, lest he should seem to give an occasion of 
scandal to the Jews, if He, being a Hebrew, should enter a 
city of the Gentiles and have any intercourse with them. 
The faithful collected the fragments which the masons 
chipped off from this shapeless stone, and, from reverence to 
our Lord's seat, carried them into various countries, where 
they are deposited in consecrated places among holy relics. 

Ch. XXYIII. Negotiations letween the court of Constanti- 
nople, and afterwards that of Jerusalem, for a marriage 
tvith the heiress of Antioch. 

A CERTAIN Greek of high rank, named Bavendinos, arrived 
at Antioch, and brought a message from the emperor 
Alexius^ to Prince E-oger already mentioned, demanding 
his daughter in marriage for John, the emperor's son. The 
hostility he had long fostered had gradually abated, in con- 
sequence of that sagacious monarch having reflected that 
the common lot of mortals had carried of Bohemond and Tan- 
cred, and other rebels, and that he had reason to apprehend 
that the same fate speedily threatened himself. He, there- 
man, a native of England, where he was prior of St. Sepulchre's, and of 
worthy life and conduct." — William of Tyre, 1. xiii. c. 23. The good 
intelligence subsisting between the two prelates did not last long, for in the 
course of the same year the archbishop, in opposition to the will of his 
patriarch, went to Rome to demand the pallium, which was granted him 
by Honorius II. He died in 1132 or 1133. Tyre, in the thirteenth 
centur)', was called by the Franks 5'wr, derived from Tyr, by introducing 
the s, Tsur. 

'- Matt. XV. 21. Mark vii. 24. 

The gospels appear to bear out the statement that our Lord's discourse 
with the Syro-Phcenician woman was held outside the city; but the precise 
spot, and the circumstance of his having seated himself during it on a par- 
ticular stone, rest on local tradition. 

" Our author forgets that Alexius died the 15th of August, 1118, and 
Roger in 1119. There is another circumstance which exhibits the incor- 
rectness of the present narrative. Baldwin I. left no posterity, and those 
of Baldwin II. were not cotemporaries with the emperor Alexius. It will 
appear in the sequel that Ordericus speaks of the latter. 



EMBASSY FROM COXSTAKTINOPLE. 407 

fore, determined to form an alliance of one of his family 
with that warlike race/ that at least his heir might recover 
the principality of Antioch by the rights of marriage, as lie 
despaired of accomplishing it by force of arms. He, there- 
fore, employed in the embassy to the Normans the Greek 
already mentioned, who, while he was waiting for a reply to 
his message, met with a serious disaster. Tor, being thus 
detained at Antioch until an honourable answer was agreed 
on in a general assembly, the emir Gazis, the Persian, made 
a sudden irruption, as I have already related, into the terri- 
tories of the Christians, and Kavendinos, accompanying 
Boger against the enemy, was taken prisoner and compelled 
to pay fifteen thousand bezants for his ransom. The Turks 
would not do him any injury because he was a Greek, 
sparing him from their knowledge of his nation, which was 
a neighbour of theirs, and from their respect for the 
emperor ; so that having received the ransom they dismissed 
liim in safety. The ambassador, finding that Eoger and all 
his troops had perished, and that King Baldwin had united 
the principality of Antioch to the kingdom of Jerusalem, 
went to him on the part of the emperor, and demanded his 
daughter in marriage for his son John. King Baldwin 
received the message with great satisfaction, and, consenting'? 
to the proposal, sent the ambassador to Jerusalem to see his 
daughter, furnishing him with a secret despatch addressed 
to the queen only. Ravendinos accordingly proceeded to 
Jerusalem, and was well received by the queen and her 
daughter, the king's commands being cheerfully obeyed. 
The beautiful princess, appearing in public, was the delight 
of all beholders, and she herself, having heard tidings of her 
happy prospects, cherished fruitless hopes. Indeed, nothing 
is stable but that which the only Creator of all things orders* 
by his providence. The emperor's ambassador, with his 

1 It was not Alexius Comnenus who wished to marry his son John to 
the heiress of Antioch, but John who proposed the alliance for his son 
Manuel, who was born in 1120. Irritated by the preference given to 
Raymond, thr.t emperor invaded Cilicia, and then turned his arms against 
the prince of Armenia, the ally of the prince of Antioch. 

These events appear to have occurred between the years 1135 and 1137. 
It is, therefore, not impossible that some imperfect account of them may 
have reached Ordericus before he concluded his history. 



408 OEDEEICTJR YITALIS. [b.XI. CJr.XXTllI. 

attendants and the companions of his journey, sailed to the 
island of Cyprus, the duke of which, resolving to accompany 
him to Constantinople jn fifteen days, commanded them all 
to be hospitably entertained until AYhitsuntide. Lodgings 
were assigned them in a handsome mansion at some distance 
from the palace, and while they anxiously waited for the 
appointed time, they were supplied abundantly with provi- 
sions at the duke's expense. 

Meanwhile, he was assassinated in his own apartments 
during a general insurrection, and a plank was removed 
from each of the ships which were moored on the sea shore. 
The bloody homicides also fixed and published the day on 
which the envoy and his fellow travellers should be put to 
death, but impediments were adroitly raised, and it was 
frequently postponed by a prudent man who was in the con- 
spirators' counsels. He said : " I beseech you, friends and 
brothers, to spare these men for your own sakes, and refrain 
from dipping your hands in the blood of those who have 
done you no injury. Gruide your actions by discretion and 
the rule of right, lest you exasperate God and man against 
you by the enormity of your crimes, and incur the vengeance 
of the greatest princes on all sides. You have already per- 
petrated an abominable outrage against the emperor in 
having murdered in the night his cousin, one of the dukes 
of the empire of Constantinople. As yet you may shelter 
yourselves against his anger under the protection of the 
king of Jerusalem, against whom you have hitherto com- 
mitted no offence. But if you give umbrage to the mag- 
nanimous Frank who rules at Jerusalem, and are threatened 
with war on both sides, what will you do ? Where will you 
find refuge ? " By such words as these, the prudent noble- 
fnan restrained the fury of the fierce rebels, who could 
hardly restrain their bloody hands from the massacre of the 
innocents ; and with great difficulty he obtained permission 
for their departure about the feast of St. John. 

At last, they obtained leave to embark in two old ships, 
and, after incurring great risks in a voyage of several days, 
landed in lUyrium, from whence they pursued their journey 
in greater security to Byzantium, through the cities cele- 
brated iu the verses of the poets, namely, Athens, the 
mother of eloquence and the inventrix of liberal arts, and 



A.D. 1125 — 1130.] BOHEMOND II., PEIifCE OF A^'TIOCI[. 409 

Thebes, the nurse of tyrants, who breathed only civil war.' 
Eavendiuos reported to those who had commissioned him 
melancholy intelligence of the events of his embassy, and, 
on the other hand, learnt that many changes had taken 
place in his own country. During the interval, King Bald- 
win had been made prisoner by Balad, as I have already 
related. The emperor Alexius laaviug died shortly before, 
his son John mounted the imperial throne. In such altered 
circumstances, the overtures for the proposed alliance were 
entirely abandoned. 

Ch. XXIX. Bohemond II. assumes the government of the 
principality of Antioch — His untimely death in battle. 

Constance, the illustrious daughter of Philip, king of 
France, had a son by Bohemond, who was educated by her 
with great care at Tarentum, in Italy, and duly kept under 
her maternal guardianship until he arrived at the age of 
puberty. The young Bohemond, who was naturally endowed 
with excellent qualities, grew up worthily, and on his 
attaining manhood was invested with knightly arms amidst 
general demonstrations of joy. Emulous of his father's 
glory, he studied to imitate his courage and conduct, and 
led those who observed him to expect great things from the 
indications he gave of virtue and valour. The people of 
Antioch, having heard of this during King Baldwin's 
captivity for six years ' in Balad's dungeons at Karpout, 
sent frequent messages, inviting the lawful heir to cross the 
sea in security, and, landing in Syria, take possession of his 
father's principality with the good will of his subjects. 
However, he was detained by his mother's anxieties until the 
king was released from captivity, as already stated. At last, 
Baldwin, learning the wishes of the inhabitants of Antioch, 
and believing that from the influence of his father's name 
it would be advantageous to the people, he offered his 
daughter in marriage to Bohemond, with the advice of his 
nobles, and invited him to take possession of his father's 
duchy without delay. In consequence the amiable young 

^ Our author again alludes to the story of (Ed i pus, more distinctly 
referred to before, p. 377- 

^ It has already appeared that these six years must be reduced to 
eighteen months. 



4]0 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b.XL. CH.XXIX. 

prince embarked, with universal prayers offered to God on 
his behalf, and, crossing the sea to Antioch, assumed his 
father's principality amidst general rejoicings, and married 
Baldwin's daughter, who bore him a daughter. Established 
in his government, he ruled his subjects with a gentle 
sway, but made war on the Gentiles, and fell, alas ! after a 
short reign of scarcely three years, when he was suddenly 
cut off to the great grief and loss of his friends and people/ 
Dissensions having arisen between the Christian princes, 
Bohemond and Leo the Armenian, the blood of the faithful 
flowed in this accursed quarrel, and the Gentiles gained a 
triumphant victory. This Leo was son of Thorold de Mon- 
tanis,^ and uncle of Bohemond' s wife, and the young prince 
assembled an army to attack him, and led it into the enemy's 
country. Having reached the banks of the Euphrates, 
where he pitched his camp, an Armenian brought him 
inteUigence that the emir Sanguin ^ was at hand with a vast 
body of Turks, and was on the point of an irruption into 
the Christian territories. Bohemond at first gave little heed 
to the news, but being desirous of ascertaining its correct- 
ness, and unwilling to trust the reports of others, he left his 
camp, and putting himself at the head of two hundred 
youthful troops, climbed to the summit of a mountain to 
make his observations. Erom this eminence he discovered 
seven companies of foragers, forming the van of the enemy's 
army. Holding them cheap, he instantly charged them, 
and, after a sharp engagement, put them nearly all to the 
sword, with the loss, however, of his whole party, except 
twenty knights. Meanwhile the main body of the enemy 
came up, and the survivors perceiving their vast numbers, 
and that their impetuous leader was astounded by grief and 
surprise, they cried out to him with earnest intreaty : " Lose 
no time in rejoining your troops, range them in order of 

^ Correcting the calculations according to the preceding note, we may 
fix the arrival of Bohemond II. in Palestine about the year 1125 or l\2G, 
and as he did not fall in battle till 1130, it is not correct to state that he 
governed his principality scarcely three years. 

^ This prince of Armenia was not a son of Thoros, but of Gabriel prince 
ot Melitene, as already observed. Queen Morphia was his sister, and 
Moros his eldest brother. 

^ Emadeddin Zenghi, sultan of Mossoul and Aleppo. This event took 
place in 1 130, as we have just had occasion to remark. 



A.D. 1107 APEATRS IN KORMANDT. 411 

battle, and, attacking the enemy, gallantly defend your 
country." Bobemond refused to follow their advice, pre- 
ferring, after the loss of his comrades, death to flight. 
Thus the beardless youth rushed against a host, and fell 
fighting in the cause of Christ.^ Some few who found 
means of escaping forded the Euphrates, and bore the sad 
tidings of the deS.th of the duke to their companions in 
arms. The whole army then immediately dispersed, retiring 
in bodies to their fortified places, and putting the province 
in a state of defence against the Gentiles. 

Baldwin, king of Jerusalem, on learning the death of his 
son-in-law, proceeded by hasty marches at the head of his 
troops to oppose the pagans in Syria. Being welcomed by 
the faithful in that region, he defended the whole country 
against the enemy, retaining possession of the principality 
of Antioch for a long period, and bequeathing it to his 
successor, Tulk of Anjou, whom he had made his heir.- 

I have collected these accounts of the faithful soldiers of 
Christ who for his sake are exiles in the East, simply and truly 
committing to writing for the information of posterity the 
particulars which I have learnt from those who were pre- 
sent at these transactions. I now return to my narrative 
of affairs in Italy, Erance, Spain, England, and Elanders. 

Ch. XXX. King Henry regulates affairs in Normandy — 
The abbey churcli of Fecamj) rehuilt — Succession of the 
ahhots. 

In the year of our Lord 1107, the fifteenth indiction, Henry 
king of England,^ having reduced Normandy to submission 
by the success of his arms, frequently summoned to his court 
those who had jurisdiction over the people, and prudently 
warned them against the tumults and hostilities in which 

* We have no other details of the defeat and death of Bohemond II. 
than those added to our authors short account in note to p. 393. The 
narrative, herefore, rests on the authority of Ordericus. 

^ Fulk of Anjou, Baldwin's successor, administered the principality of 
Antioch until the year 1 1 37, when he invited to the east Raymond de 
Poitiers, youngest son of William IX., to marry Constance, daughter and 
heiress of Bohemond II. 

^ We now return to the affairs of the West, with a satisfaction which 
will probably be participated by the reader. 



412 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [e.XI. CH.XXX. 

they had been engaged, admonishing all, both with entreaties 
and threats, to observe the rules of justice. 

In the month of January there was a meeting at Falaise, in 
the king's presence, of the principal persons of that neighbour- 
hood. During this assembly, Eobert, abbot of Caen, was 
seized with a sudden disorder and gave up the ghost. Eudes, 
a monk of the same abbey, filled his. place for several 
lustres.^ 

In the month of March, also, the king held a meeting at 
Lisieux, and with the advice of the nobles made a variety of 
edicts to meet the wants of the commons, his subjects ; and 
thus allaying the evils of war, restored order in Normandy by 
his royal authority.^ William de Eos, third abbot of Fecamp, 
fell sick while returning from this assembly, and died happily 
before the end of the same month.^ This venerable man 
was eminent for his good conduct and worth. From his 
childhood his sweet disposition expanded in virtues of all 
kinds, and both as a clerk and a monk he shone in the sight of 
men as a mirror of good works. He was raised to the 
government of his convent while yet a novice in the monastic 
order, and administered it nearly twenty-seven years, during 
which he made great improvements both within and without. 
He pulled down the chancel of the old church erected by 
Duke Eichard, and replaced it by a building in an improved 
style of exquisite beauty and of increased proportions, both 
in length and breadth. He also enlarged the nave of the 
church with great elegance, where the chapel of St. Fromond 
stands ; and when the works were at last completed he 
procured their conseceration by xlrchbishop William and 
four other bishops, on the seventeenth of the calends of 
July* [15th June]. At his death he was interred before the 



^ Robert I., abbot of St. Stephen at Caen, is only known by the short 
notice here given by our author. His successor, Eudes, governed the abbey 
truly, for^' many lustres," as he held it until 1140. 

^ This meeting at Lisieux must not be confounded with that mentioned 
by our author not long before, see p. .'383. There was an interval of five 
months between them. The acts of the second council are lost, as well as 
those of the first. 

=» On the 2Gth of March, 1107; not 1108, as the editors of the Gallia 
Chris/iana state. 

* The 15th of June, HOG. 



A.D. 1107.] WILLIAM DE EOS, ABBOT OF FECAMP. 413 

altar of the glorious Virgin Mary in the new building he 
had caused to be constructed.^ 

Manj illustrious and learned men, inspired with love of 
the kind abbot, flocked to Eecamp, and in that school of 
divine worship served with reverence under his rule the 
holy and undivided Trinitj. His faithful and devoted 
disciples composed many pieces to his memory both in prose 
and verse, but the remarkable epitaph written by Hildebert, 
bishop of Mans,^ was selected and engraved in letters of 
gold on his tomb. 

Here Fecamp's pious abbot, William's days were blessed, 

His body only, earth, his wealth the poor possessed, 

Bending his way from Egypt's barren waste, 

He sought Jerusalem with eager haste ;^ 

Made war with vice, was virtue's constant friend. 

The fight, the concord, keeping to the end. 

Six days before the clouds of April lowered. 

He gave his soul to heaven, his dust to earth restored. 

Adelelm, a monk of Flavigni,* who had long lived at 
Fecamp with universal respect, and was deeply erudite in 
the twin sciences of sacred and profane literature, was firmly 
attached to Abbot William until the end of his life by the 
ties of an ardent affection, as may be seen in the able works 
he published. He inscribed his memoirs with great eloquence 
on the rolls of the abbey of Fecamp,^ adapting to his vene- 
rable life the brilliant flowers of holy writ, insomuch that tears 
of loving regard were drawn from the eyes of those who perused 

* Only a small portion of the works constructed by Abbot de Ros at 
Fecamp now remain. The nave was rebuilt in the thirteenth century, and 
the chapel of the Virgin in the fifteenth or sixteenth, as well as all the 
south side of the choir; but it is probable that we may attribute to him 
several of the arches on the north of the choir, and perhaps a semicircular 
chapel on the same side. 

* Respecting this prelate, see before, p. 227. 

' M. Dubois considers these lines to be figurative of Abbot William's 
appeal to the pope against the intrigues of the archbishop of Roueji. 
We conclude that they rather express in language borrowed from scripture 
the pious abbot's zeal to quit the world, devoting himself to a life of reli- 
gion, with the holy city in prospect. 

* L'Histoirj litteraire de la France, ix. 386 — 388. 

5 On the subject of the Mortuary Rolls, see a Memoire, by M. Leopold 
Delisle, entitled : Des Monuments paltographiqucs concernant Vnsage de 
prier pour les morts. — Bibl. de I'Ecole des CharieSf II. serie, t. iii. 



414 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XXX. 

them. In this work, it is not merely, I think, human genius 
which is so happily displayed, but heavenly grace has mani- 
fested to the gentle readers those inspirations with which it 
gloriously adorned the faithful guardians of the spouse of 
Christ, for the profit of multitudes, and permitted him to 
shine in this world like a light set in a candlestick. Many 
of the readers shed pious tears on the roll, and, marvelling 
at the gifts of divine grace, offered mournful prayers to God 
for the soul of his faithful servant. Hildebert composed 
three elegiac couplets, which I rejoice to have an opportunity 
of inserting, in memory of the devoted servant of the 
Almighty. 

William de Rob, an honoured name. 

Left in the church a triple fame: 

Bayeux beheld him spurning wealth, 

And Caen seeking ghostly health, 

Taught in her holy discipline ; 

While grateful F^camp's stately shrine 

Reflects the glory all his own 

She borrowed from his great renown. 

Six days before the April sun, 

Life's struggle ceased and heaven begun. 

Soon after the death of this father, Eoger of Bayeux^ was 
elected abbot, and consecrated on the twelfth of the calends of 
January [21st December], by William the aged metropolitan.'^ 
He was the fourth abbot of Fecamp. The first was William 
de Dijon,^ who organized the society with piety and skill in 
the time of Duke Eichard ; he was succeeded by John the 
Italian, who governed it fifty one-years.'' The third abbot was 
William of Bayeux, who for his great modesty was surnamed 
Puella, and having received the profession of his successor 
in the monastic order taught what it would be one day 
his turn to teach. Then the aged prelate ordained Eoger 
and one hundred and twenty other priests on the feast of 
St. Thomas the Apostle, and on the following day gave Eoger 
the benediction belonging to the office of abbot, at Eouen. 

' Robert d'Argences, December 21, 1107— March 22, 1138 or 1139. 

' William Bonnc-Ame, archbishop of Rouen. 

3 The holy William de Dijon, 1001—1028. Our author appears to 
have forgotten that, like his successor, he was a native of Italy. 

* John, lirst of thnt name, born in the neighbourhood of Ravenna, 
(1028— February 21, 1078 or 1079.; 



A.D. 1093.] OllDElilCUS OllDAINED PRIEST. 415 

The new-made priest and abbot returned to Pecamp to keep 
the festival of Christmas, and has now continued in the 
government of the abbey nearly thirty-two years. ^ 

I have spoken more particularly of this ordination, because 
I was present, and, unworthy as I am, took upon me the 
burden of the priesthood by the command of the lord Eoger, 
my own abbot.'^ On this occasion great numbers of the 
clergy assembled at Eouen, and the household of Christ 
received happily an accession of nearly seven hundred clerks 
in orders of different degree. Inspired at that time with 
the fire of youth I wrote some hexameter verses, in which I 
enumerated in a few lines the number of priests and deacons 
then ordained. 

When holy hands were laid upon my brow, 

The office of the priesthood to bestow, 

Full fivescore others shared the sacred rite, 

Sent forth to combat in the Spirit's might ; 

Two hundred white-stoled Levites^ joined the throng, 

And while the arches pealed with chant and song, 

Sub-deacons forty-four, in less degree, 

Received by grace divine, authority 

Rightly to minister in holy things, 

And serve the altars of the King of kings.* 

Ch. XXXI. Flamhard resigns Lisieux to King Henry and 
returns to Durham — His successor iii the see of Lisieiox — 
Death of Maurice, bishop of London. 
During- the storms of troubles to which Normandy was 
exposed for want of a competent ruler, the see of Lisieux, 
after the death of Gilbert Maminot, its bishop, was long 

' This passage must have been written in the year 1139. 

- Our author was ordained deacon by his former abbot, Serlo, who had 
become bishop of Lisieux, on the ^Gth of March, 1093, being then of the 
age of eighteen years. Fifteen years then elapsed, it appears, before he 
"took upon him the burden of the priesthood." M. Guizot remarks in 
his introduction to the present work (vol. i., p. ix.), that " all the records 
of those ancient times concur in infoiming us with what holy fear truly 
pious men then re<;arded the duties of the priesthood, how they shrunk 
from undertaking them, and often only consented to accept the office upon 
the express command of their superiors." 

^ Levites, a common name for deacons. 

* Robert i'Argences died the 2-2nd of March, 1139(?). Our author was 
ordained priest at the same time with the abbot, and one hundred and 
twenty others. Two hundred deacons and only forty-four subdcacons 



410 OEDEEICUS TITALI3. [b.XI. CH.XXXI. 

desolate, and more in the power of wolves than of pastors, lay 
at the mercy of robbers, having no protectors. AYheD, 
however, King Henry gained the victory of Tinchebrai, his 
enemy, Eanulph Flambard, who resided at Lisieux as lord of 
the place, considering how best he might adroitly escape the 
consequences of this turn of affairs, despatched in all haste 
messengers to Henry, while he was rejoicing in his recent 
triumph, and, humbly imploring his favour, offered, if 
peace was granted him, to give up the city which he held 
to the king.^ That wise prince, who preferred peace to war, 
always the source of so many calamities, pardoned the pacific 
bishop his past offences, accepted at once the surrender of 
Lisieux, and restored to Flambard, with whom he was recon- 
ciled, his bishopric of Durham. He gave the see of Lisieux 
to John, archdeacon of Seez, and having prudently arranged 
the affairs of Normandy crossed over to England to attend to 
those of that kingdom.^ 

That archdeacon was the son of a Norman dean, and was 
educated from childhood in the church of Seez, being cotem- 
porary with Eobert, Gerard, and Serlo, bishops of that see, 
and was distinguished for his ability both in secular and 
ecclesiastical affairs. Tor his singular judgment and 

having been ordained at the same time, the rest of the seven hundred 
clerks must have received minor orders. The great number of clergy 
admitted to ecclesiastical offices at one time was probably the consequence 
of the distracted state of Normandy for a long period before, and of the 
countenance and protection now afforded the church by Henry I. 

' This transaction must have taken place immediately after the battle of 
Tinchebrai, as in the middle of October Henry came to Lisieux to preside 
at the assembly of the bishops and nobles. 

2 Our author connects two events, separated by a considerable interval. 
After Ranulph Flambard's submission, Hervey, bishop of Bangor, under pre- 
text of the devastations committed on the lands belonging to his see, prayed 
to be translated to Lisieux. The king wrote to St. Anselm on the subject. 
The archbishop replied that it was a serious affair, and could not be accom- 
plished without the consent of the bishops of the province and the aposto- 
lical sanction. 

The king returned to England during Lent, bringing with him the 
prisoners he had taken at the battle of Tinchebrai. He held his court at 
Windsor on Easter-day, which, we are told, " was attended by the nobles 
of England and Normandy, with fear and trembling." It was, in fact, the 
first occasion on which the leopard, now secure of his prey, made them 
feel his claws. The tone in which he addressed them was very different 
from his humble and honeyed phrases of the preceding year. 



A.D. 1107.] JOHN, BISHOP OF LISIEUX. 417 

eloquence he was promoted by these bishops to the office of 
archdeacon, and took his place in the first rank of judicial 
authorities, managing ecclesiastical affairs with great pru- 
dence for many years. At length the fury of Eobert de 
Belesme burst forth against bishop Serlo, and his animosity 
included the archdeacon who was the main support of his 
bishop ; Eobert therefore began to harass him with fierce 
threats and persecutions. As the tyrant was at that time 
at the height of his power, and scarcely any one in Normandy 
could resist his attacks, the defenceless clerk took refuge in 
England, and being graciously received by the king, to whom 
he Mas already known, he remained there in exile. Appointed 
one of the king's principal chaplains, he was often summoned 
to the royal councils among the king's intimate advisers. At 
last, as I have already mentioned, Henry, becoming attached 
to him for his intrinsic worth, appointed him to the see of 
Lisieux. In the month of September, John the deacon was 
ordained priest by Serlo of Seez, and shortly afterwards 
he was consecrated bishop by "William the metropolitan. 
Firmly governing his see for nearly thirty-four years,^ he 
reformed many things in the church and clergy and 
people of God.^ 

At the same time died Maurice, bishop of London,^ a good 
and pious prelate, in whose time the church of St. Paul the 
apostle and great part of the city was burnt to the ground. He 
was succeeded in the see by Eichard de Beaumais, viscount 
of Shrewsbury, who zealously exerted himself in the con- 



' This appears to have been written at an advanced period of the year 
1041. 

^ As already remarked, John, bishop of Lisieux, did not immediately 
obtain possession of his see. He was not ordained priest by Bishop Serlo 
till the month of September, 1107, and afterwards consecrated by William 
Bonne-Ame; so that he had not completed thirty-four years in his bishop- 
ric, when he died in the month of May, 1 141, as will presently appear. 

3 The 26th of September, 1107. This prelate had been chancellor to 
William the Conqueror, before he was advanced to the see of London. 
William of Malmesbury speaks in terms of high admiration of the size of 
the new cathedral of St. Paul's, begun by Bishop Maurice, in place of the 
former church, burnt down in 1087. " Such," he says, " was the area of 
the crypt, and so spacious was ihf church above, that it seemed as if it 
wculd contain r.ny number of peopU'." 
TOL. 111. E E 



418 OEDEEICTJS TITALIS. [b. XT. CH.XXXTT. 

struction of the new cathedral begun by bis predecessor and 
nearly completed the works be commenced.^ 

Ch. XXXII. Death of Bicliard de Beviers, and Moger 
Bigod, founder of TJietf or d priory — Sis ejpitaph. 

At that time Eichard de Eeviers,^ and Eoger surnamed 
Bigod,^ barons of England, died and were interred in the 
monasteries for monks which they bad founded on their own 
domains ; Eoger being buried at Thetford in England, and 
Eichard at Montebourg in Normandy. The monks of 
Cluni wrote this epitaph on Eoger Bigod. 

This little space of earth is all that's left 
To Roger Bigod, of his honours reft. 
Ah ! what avail wealth, honours, eloquence, 
Or royal fevour, or e'en manly sense ! 
What enervates the soul like opulence ? 
Thee, may God's counsels grant a happy fate, 
Thee, piety and virtue elevate ! 

For four-and-twenty nights the God of day 
With the bright Virgin wedded, tracked his way,* 
When thy brave spirit, Roger, passed away. 



^ Richard de Beaumais, on the Dive. He often appears as witness to 
charters relating to the abbey of St. Peter at Shrosbury, but we never 
find the title of viscount given him. According to the annals of Winches 
ter he had been attached to the chapel of the count de Bel^sme, which 
seems most probable. See the Anglia Sacra, i. 297. After having 
exhausted all the resources of bis see to complete the church begun by his 
predecessor on so vast a scale, he became so discouraged that he retired to 
St. Osythe's at Chick, in Essex, where he had founded a priory, of which 
William de Curboil, afterwards archbishop of Canterbury, was the first 
superior. 

2 Richard de Reviers; see vol. ii., p. 498. Our author is mistaken in 
representing him as the first founder of the abbey of Montebourg. He 
only restored the lands which Henry I. had wrested from it and granted to 
him ; adding a new donation. It was founded by William the Con- 
queror. 

* Roger Bigot, son of Robert Bigot, a native of the county of Mortain, 
and one of the witnesses to the charter of foundation of St. Philibert-sur- 
Risle in 1066. According to the Monast. Anglic, he founded the priory 
of Thetford in 1103. 

* Soli nubehat Virgo ter noctibus octo. From this fanciful mode of 
expression we learn that Roger Bigod died the twenty-fourth day after the 
sun's entrance into the sign of the Virgin, that is to say, on the 15th of 
September, 



A.D. 1108.] WILLIAM, COUNT OF EYREUX. 419 

Cll. XXXIII. The count of Eorcux founds a 'priory at 
Noyon — His character and that of his countess — Thorney 
Abbey — Succession of its abbots. 

William, count of Evreux, being advanced in years and 
justly alarmed at the approach of inevitable death, by the 
influence of his wife Helvise,^ determined to erect on his 
domains a temple to Grod, in vi^hich a chosen body of monks 
might fitly carry on the war of faith under the King of 
kings. In consequence, both husband and wife requested the 
advice and aid of Eoger, abbot of St. Evroult,' in the matter, 
and applied for twelve monks by name, to build a monastery 
at Noyon.^ The twelve brothers, with Abbot Roger, assem- 
bled there on the third of the ides [13th] of October,* and 
began to live a regular life in a desert place called Boucheron,*^ 
near the chapel of St. Martin the Archbishop.^ Many 
persons of different ages, offering themselves for conversion, 
were well received, and zealously taught the regular course 
of life, according to the rule of St. Benedict. However, as 
the seed sown is subject to many injuries before harvest, 
and all the grains of corn do not flourish or perish alike, 
but have to struggle through the rains of winter and the 
summer heats, so men, in their several orders or congregations 
are exposed to various trials, neither enjoying equal pros- 
perity, nor subject to the same calamities. 

In the year of our Lord 1108, the count of Evreux, with 
his wife, laid the foundations of a spacious church in honour 
of St. Mary, mother of Grod, and applied large sums of 
money out of his own funds towards carrying on the works, 

' Notwithstanding his advanced age, we have lately seen this nobleman 
present at the battle of Tinchebrai, as he w:is forty years before at that of 
Hastings. His countess, Helvise, was daughter of William I., count of 
Nevers. 

^ Roger du Sap, abbot of St. Evroult. 

* Noyon-sur-Andelle. This place has taken the name of Charleval since 
the time that Charles IX. frequented it, and laid the foundations of a royal 
residence, the jilaiis and elevations of which are preserved in Du Cerccau's 
work, Des Bastiments de France. 

* October 13, 1107. 

* No vestiges of this local name remain in the neighbourhood. 

^ It was only a chapel, as our author states. The parish church has 
always been dedicated to St. Denys. The buildings of the priory were 
levelled to admit of the foundation of the chateau of Charles IX., and the 
monks were sent back to St. Evroult, 

E E 2 



420 ORDERICUS VITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XXXTIT. 

but he was prevented from completing them by grievous 
worldly troubles. Indeed, the count's faculties were 
naturally somewhat feeble, as well as blunted by age,^ and, 
trusting perhaps more than was becoming to his wife's 
abilities, he left the government of his county entirely in her 
hands. The countess was distinguished for her wit and 
beauty; she was one of the tallest women in all Evreux, and 
of very high birth, being the daughter of AVilliam, the iJlus- 
trious count of Nevers. Disregarding the counsels of her 
husband's barons, she chose rather to follow her own opinion, 
and her ambition frequently inspiring bold measures in 
political affairs, she was easily led to engage in rash enter- 
prises. The earl of Mellent and other Norman lords were 
little inclined to brook this female presumption, and in 
consequence they denounced her to the king, and incensed 
him against her by their bitter accusations. At length, 
Count William and the countess Helvise, having levelled to 
the ground the king's donjon at Evreux, and oifended him 
in other matters in which their fealty was not properly 
observed, he deprived them of their possessions in Nor- 
mandy, and they were twice compelled to become exiles in 
Anjou. These troubles caused great hindrances in the work 
of building the monastery, and the death of both, whicli 
speedily followed, was a great loss to many persons. The 
countess, who died first,^ reposes at Noyou ; the count was 
afterwards struck with apoplexy, and died without receiving 
the last sacraments ; his mouldering corpse is laid with his 
father's at Fontenelles.^ 

As the count died without issue, and his nephew Amauri 
had incurred the royal displeasure by his indiscretion, the 
king retained the county of Evreux in his own hands. 
Oreat mischief resulted from this, as will appear in the 
sequel ; the city and all the countrj^ round being exposed to 
pillage and burning. Meanwhile the monastery which the 
count had begun building at Noyon has remained unfinished 
to this day, under the priors Eobert, Boger, and Banulf. 

^ We must not forget that the good lord was nephew of Ralph I^te- 
d'Ane. 

» In J114. 

' The IGth of April, 1118. Le Brasseur, who supplies thia date, says 
tl.at the count was buried at Fecamp, which is a mistake. 



A.D. 1113.] TiroPcXEY Ar>nEY. 421 

The first of these priors, Eobert de Primieres,^ was the son 
of Haimon de Prunieres, a loyal squire, and was distin- 
guished for his profound eradition among the accomplished 
philosophers in the schools of the grammarians and dialec- 
ticians. The king summoned him from his priory to cross 
over to England, where he entrusted him with the govern- 
ment of the monastery of Thorney,- on the death of Abbot 
Gunter, and he ruled it ably during twenty years. ^ 

Thorney means in English the Island of Thorns, so called 
because a wood of various sorts of trees is surrounded on 
all sides by flowing rivulets of deep water.* On it stands a 
monastery of monks dedicated to St. Mary, mother of God, 
which, secluded from all secular habitations, was distin- 
guished for its pure v>'orship of the Supreme Divinity. It 
was founded by the venerable Ethelwold, Bishop of' Win- 
chester, in the time of King Ethelred, who translated to it 
the remains of St. Botolph, abbot of Ikanhoe,^ with many 
other relics of saints, after the massacre by the Danes, 
in which St. Edmimd, king of the East- Angles, fell a martyr 
in the confession of Christ. The monks only and their 
servants dwell in the deep recesses of Thorney, where in 
security they ofler faithful service to God. No females 

^ The name was afterwards spelt Purnelai, or Punelai. In Henry I.'s 
charter to St. Evroult, we read, 5". Gervasius de Fruneleio, in that of 
Robert III. of Leicester, Ecclesiam S. Gervasii de Purneleio. Antjlice, 
Purnell. It is now one of the two churches of the commune of des 
Moutiers en Auge, near CouUboeuf. The other, dedicated to St. Martin, 
belonged probably to Haimon de Prunelai, Robert's father. 

2 TorneicB. Thorney abbey, in Cambridgeshire. Its primitive name 
was Ancraifj ; in "the charter of foundation by King Edgar in 97-% it is 
called Thorney. It is singular that our author, whose practice of intro- 
ducing the Til in words to which it does not belong, as has been frequently 
remarked, should have always omitted it in this, where it is required. 

^ It w.is in 1113 that Robert de Prunelai left the priory of Noyon to 
succeed Gontier of Mans, the first abbot of Thorney. According to a 
document inserted in the Monai>t. Anglic, he governed the abbey not 
twenty, but twenty-six years, 111.3 — 1139. 

* From the marshy character of the soil, the underwood which gave the 
name to the island must have mainly consisted of the black thorn, pnums 
spinosa. The i'.bbey of Westminister originally bore the name of Tiiorney 
from the same circumstance. 

^ St. Botolph, brother of St. Adulph, bishop, founded the monastery of 
of Ikanhoe, near Boston, in Lincolnshire (Botulf's Town), towards the 
middle of the seventh century. 



422 ORDEBICUS YITALIS. [b.XI. CH. XXXIII. 

are allowed to enter the island but for the purpose of devo- 
tion, nor are they permitted to sojourn there on any pre- 
text whatever, and all dwellings inhabited by women are 
studiously prohibited by the monks within nine miles from 
the abbey. After England was conquered by Norman 
vdour, and King "William had reduced it to subjection con- 
formably to his own laws, he gave the government of 
Thorney to Fulcher, a monk of St. Bertin's at Sithin ; a man 
of deep erudition, who administered it for nearly sixteen 
years without receiving consecration as abbot. He was 
courteous, pleasant, and charitable, and well skilled in 
grammar and music. He left to future generations in Eng- 
land some precious monuments of his talents having pub- 
lished several works wortiiy of memory, containing charming 
narratives, suited to be sweetly sung, of the lives of St. 
Oswald, bishop of Worcester,^ and other saints of English 
origin. In consequence of disputes with the bishop of 
Lincoln, he retired, and was succeeded by G-unter of Mans, 
a monk of Battle Abbey, who had been archdeacon of Salis- 
bury. This abbot introduced the rules of Marmoutier in 
the government of the convent at Thorney, and erected 
from the foundation with great industry a most elegant 
church, with lodgings for the monks, where, being interred 
by his faithful disciples, he now reposes. The following 
short epitaph composed on him will convey to the reader in 
a few verses the knowledge of his character : — 

Here in the abbey, which his care restored, 

Lies GoNTiER, ancient Thornet's mitred lord ; 

His care for six-and-twenty years to rule 

And guide his flock in virtue's holy school. 

He built this church, and by such woiks of love 

Strove to obtain a place in realms above. 

To him — who died in August, happily. 

The fifteenth calend — Christ propitious be!* 

' St. Oswald, bishop of Worcester in 960, and archbishop of York in 
972, holding it with his former see. He died the 28th of February, 992, 
and was buried in the cathedral of Worcester, which he built. He was a 
great patron of the monks. 

* In this epitaph, Abbot Gontier of Mans, monk of Battle abbey, is 
represented as having presided at Thorney abbey only twenty-six years. 
In the document before cited, he appears to have governed it twenty-eight, 
1083—1113. 



A.D. 1113.] PRIORY or NOYON. 423 

Eobert, his successor, was bis superior in learning, and 
became celebrated among the most eminent prelates of 
England for his constancy and eloquence. As for Koger, 
who succeeded him as prior of Noyo«, he spent nearly twenty- 
four years in carrying on the new works and furthering the 
interests of his monks. At last, he took to his bed, and, 
being well prepared, died on the twelfth of the calends of 
January [December 21st]. One of his friends sung of him 
these short verses : — 

Fourth of Noyon's' reverend priors. 
Gathered to his worthy sires 
On St. Thomas' festafday 
Roger's spirit passed away. 
Studying grammar in his youth, 
Still intent on sacred truth. 
From the fleeting world he sped 
And a life of virtue led, 
Sheltered in the cloistered cell, 
Where his holy burthen well 
Almost forty years he bore; 
Noyon's prior, twenty-four, 
For the common weal he strove, 
Bound the monks with cords of love; 
While his life, with profit fraught. 
Traced the lessons which he taught. 
Most, it was his special care 
To complete this house of prayer, 
•And the stately fabric raise 
In Mary's name, to God's high praise. 
May He all his sins release, 
Grant him endless life and peace ! 

Having said thus much of some of my friends and co- 
temporary acquaintances, I return to the course of the 
annals from which I have a little disgressed. 

» If Roger was the fourth prior of Noyon, as the epitaph represents him 
to have been, our author has omitted to notice his two predecessors. But 
in the text of the history he calls him the successor of Robert de Prunelai; 
in that case, as we are told, he administered the priory twenty-two years, 
he must have died about the year 1137. Concerning Robert de Prunelai, 
who was described as the Foudre d' Eloquence, by his cotemporaries, see 
I'Histoire Lilteraire de France, ix. 89. 



421 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XI. CK.XXXIT. 

Ck. XXXIY. JPJiiUp I., hing of France, dies— His son 
Lewis-lc-Gros succeeds liim — State of affairs in France. 

In the year of our Lord 1108, Philip, king of Erance, took 
to his bed, and, after a ^ong illnes.s, being sensible of the 
approach of death, he made a faithful confession, and 
assembling his nobles and particular friends, thus addressed 
them ; " I am aware that the tombs of the French kings are 
at St. Denys, but I feel that I am too great a sinner to pre- 
sume on being interred near the relics of that holy martyr. 
So heinous are my crimes that I am under the deepest 
alarm lest I should be delivered over to the devil, and be 
dealt with as we are told in history was the fate of Charles 
Martel.^ I love St. Benedict, and, humbly imploring that 
beneficent father of monks, I desire to be buried in his 
church on the Loire. He is a kind and merciful saint, and 
propitious to all sinners who resolve to amend their lives 
and seek the favour of God according to the discipline of 
his rule." King Philip, having finished this sensible dis- 
course, and added more to the same purpose, died on the 
fourth of the calends of August [July 29th], in the forty- 
seventh year of his reign, and was buried in the abbey of 
St. Benedict, at Pleuri, according to his request, between 
the choir and the altar.^ 

The following Sunday^ Lewis Theobald, his son, was 
crowned at Orleans, and swayed the sceptre of Prance in 
prosperity and adversity twenty-eight years.* He married 
Adelaide, daughter of Humbert, prince of Dauphiny,*^ who 
bore him four sons, Philip, Lewis Elorus, Henry, and Hugh. 
He experienced a variety of accidents, as happens in human 

^ On this tradition of the torments inflicted on Charles Martel " in tlie 
lowest depths of hell (inferno inferiore) for having abstracted the property 
of the saints, and distributed it among strangers," see the preface to the 
Jjife of St. Eucher, bishop of Orleans, in tlie Act. SS. ord. S. Benedict, 
ScKc. iii. part i. p. .'595. 

'^ Philip I, died at the castle of Melun on Wednesday the 29th of July, 
1 108, and was buried in the church of Fleuri-sur- Loire. 

^ The following Sunday, the 2nd of August. 

* This calculation is not exiict. Louis-le-Gros died the 1st of August, 
1137, and consequently reigned twenty-nine years. Le Prevost. 

^ Inlcrmontinm. Adelaide was daughter of Humbert, second of that 
name, called Le Renforce, marquis of Susa, and count of Maurienne. 
Lewis had by her eight children, seven sons and one daughter. 



A.D. IIOS.J DEATn OF nilLIP T. OF FliANCE. 425 

affairs, and in his military enterprises Avas often the sport of 
a, fortune, unstable as the rolling wheel. The nobles of 
Prance were frequently in arms against him, and harassed 
the king and his adherents with a succession of injuries 
and outrages. Even during the life of his father, who <vas 
inert both in war and the administration of justice, they 
were arrogantly rebellious against both princes, setting at 
nought the commands of father and son alike. 

The royal authority had been much weakened in the 
hands of King Philip, worn out, as he was, by age and 
infirmities, and the severity of the laws against oppressors 
had fallen into abeyance. Lewis was therefore compelled, 
among his first cares, to call on the bishops through the 
whole of the kingdom for aid in crushing the tyranny of 
freebooters and rebels. At that time the communes in 
France were organized by the bishops, so that the priests 
accompanied the king to a battle or a siege with standards 
and the whole force of their parishioners.^ 

Ck. XXXY. Lewis of France claims the county of Rocliefort 
— His invasion repulsed icith loss. 

Lewis had espoused in his youth the daughter of Guy the 
Eed, count of Rochefort, and aimed at reducing to subjec- 
tion that county, asserting claims to the inheritance. He, 
therefore, laid siege to Chevreuse, Montlheri, Bretencourt, 
and other fortified towns, but the resistance of many of the 
nobles was so determined that he failed of success, especially 

* Thus, at the siege of Breval, in 1094, Ordericus informs us that " the 
priests Avith their parishioners brought their banners, and the abbots, assem- 
bling their vassals, joined the besieging army." See before, p. -4. 

M. Le Prevost only remarks that " fhese levies en masse were inconve- 
nient and of very little use." We are disposed, however, to attach some 
importance to these passages, as incidentally illustrating a vvell-knowji 
feature in the political system of the middle ages. Our point of view does 
not so much regard the bellicose spirit attributed to the clergy of those 
days, nor the weak and defenceless character of the Norman poijuhition as 
contrasted u-ith that which the newly invigorated Anglo-Scandinavian 
people of England frequently displayed. We rather find evidence in our 
author's short notices that the bishops and clergy used, their natural 
influence among their flocks on the one hand in the ort^anization of tlie 
commons, fo; municipal purposes, we believe, as well as military; and on 
the other, threw their whole weight into the scale of the supreme authority, 
against their common oppressors, the feudal barons. 



426 OEDEIilCUS YITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XXXV. 

as he had given in marriage to Gruiscard de Beaulieu the 
young Lucienne, to whom he was betrothed.^ 

Then Matthew, count de Beaumont,- and Burchard de 
Montmorenci ^ ravaged the lands of St. Denys the Martyr, 
and in spite of the king's prohibition persisted in devastating 
them with pillage, fire, and slaughter. In consequence, 
Lewis, to whom his father had entrusted the government of 
the kingdom, when he heard the complaints addressed to 
him by Adam, the abbot of St. Denys,* with tears in his 
eyes, besieged Montmorenci,^ assaulting the three gates of 
the castle at once with great vigour. The young Simon de 
Montfort, who had succeeded to the honours and domains 
of his brother Eichard,*' strengthened the Trench forces by 
his courage and activity. The countess Adela also had 
reinforced the king's troops with a hundred knights com- 
pletely armed, count Stephen, her husband having gone on 
the crusade,'^ and her two eldest sons, "William and Theobald, 
being prevented by their tender years from appearing in 
ai'ms at the head of their vassals. At length the traitors 

* In fact Lewis-le-Gros espoused in 1104 Lucienne, daughter of Guy the 
Red, count of Rochefort, and seneschal of France. This marriage was 
annulled in 1107 by the council of Troyes, on account of consanguinity, 
before it had been consummated, and Lucienne married Guichard, lord, not 
as our author says, of Beaulieu, but of Beaujeu. Guy the Red was so 
indignant that he joined the enemies of Lewis-le-Gros, who besieged his 
places of Montlheri, Chevreux, and Bertholcnrtis (probably St. Martin de 
Bretencourt, in the canton of Dourdan, about two leagues S.S.W. of 
Rochefort). These events took place before the death of Guy, which 
happened in 1108. Ordericus would make them precede the dissolution 
of the marriage, but his view cannot be adopted. Nor can we understand 
what right of "inheritance" he could assert to the domains of the families 
of Rochefort and Montlheri. 

'^ Matthew, count of Beaumont sur-Oise, brother-in-law of Hugh de 
Grantmesnil. He was at the court of Duke Robert in July, 1096, and 
was one of the subscribers to the charter which made the abbey of Aumale 
a dependence on St. Lucien de Beauvais. 

' Bouchard III. de Montmorenci, another brother-in-law of Matthew. 

* Adam, abbot of St. Denys, Suger's predecessor, 1094 — 1122. 

* The castle of Montmorenci was besieged in 1101. 

® Amauri, third of that name, lord of Montfort, and eldest brother of 
Amauri the Strong, Richard and Simon, surnamed the Young, died without 
having been married. See vol. ii. pp. 485, 487, 495. 

' Our author ap[)ears to have forgotten that Stephen of Blois not only 
joined the crusade, but had been killed in it in the year 1102. See before, 
p. 305 



A.D. 1108 — 1118.] LEWIS-LE-QROS. 427 

who favoured the rebels, and aimed at impunity in robbery 
and murder, took to flight, regardless of military discipline, 
and, creating a panic among their comrades more by their 
treacherous retreat than from fear of an attack, forced them 
to retire amid the jeers of the enemy. Then Eambold 
Creton,^ a most valiant knight, who had been the first to 
mount the walls at the siege of Jerusalem, was, alas ! 
suddenly killed, as well as Richard Centurio of Lewes, 
another crusader.^ 

The king again assembled the ^French army the following 
year, and laid siege to Chambli,^ in opposition to the count 
de Beaumont, but, being the victim of similar treachery, he 
was obliged to retreat with disgrace and the loss of several 
of his adherents. It was not in his power to take full 
vengeance for so many crimes, as his father was still living 
when these events occurred, and his step-mother caused 
him much mischief by her private intrigues, and iniquitously 
created him many enemies. 

Ch. XXXYI. Leivis-le-Gros engaxjes in hostilities against 
some of his turbulent nobles — Theobald de Blois — Robert, 
earl of Flanders, accidently killed. 
Ok the death of King Philip, Lewis ascended the throne, 
and being more firmly established in the government, held 
the sceptre with a firm hand, and took strong measures 

1 See before, pp.171, 177. 

' Ricardus Centurio de Laquis Jerosolymita. We have no other 
account of this person, but suppose he was a native of Lewes in Sussex, 
where William de Warrenne founded the priory of St. Pancras. His 
surname points him out to have been a crusader, as well as Rarabold 
Creton. 

Suger avoids allowing that Lewis-le-Gros was repulsed. According to 
him, " Burchard was so liumiliated by these and other disasters that he 
submitted to the king's pleasure, and settled the dispute which was the 
cause of the hostilities."' 

3 Chambli, in the Beauvoisis. A terrible storm caused a panic in the 
army of the young prince, which dispersed, after setting fire to their tents, 
while Lewis was still sleeping. In the confusion which ensued, several 
lords were taken prisoners, among whom we find Hugh de Clermont, 
Matthew's father-in-law, whose claims to a moiety of the oastie of 
Lusarche, usurped by his son-in-law, was the cause of this unfortunate 
enterprise ; and Guy de Senlis. 

The year following, Lewis returned with a force thrice as large, at the 
approach of which, Matthew lost no time in reconciling himself to the 
king. 



4'2S ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XXXTI. 

ngainsfc the factious. First, be laid siege to Puiset and 
reduced Hugh to submission by the power of his arms. 
This knight was liandsome but ill-conditioned. His castle 
was the special retreat of freebooters and outlaws, where 
unheard-of crimes were committed ; and their evil deeds 
were neither restrained by royal threats and indignation nor 
episcopal censures. One day, while a body of the king's 
troops were in pursuit of Hugh along a narrow road, and he 
was endeavouring by a hasty retreat to get into the castle, 
he happened to meet Ansel de Grarlande, commander of the 
Prench army, and suddenly killed him with a thrust of his 
lance. ^ Meanwhile, Theobald, count de Blois, came to the 
relief of the besieged with a powerful reinforcement, and 
compelled the king to draw off his troops. Lewis afterwards 
re-assembling his army, again appeared before Puiset, and 
by the superiority of his force compelled the rebels to sur- 
render. Pie was induced by the importunities of his 
auxiliaries to pardon the besieged ; but, although he spared 
their lives, little as they deserved it, he razed the fortress, to 
the great joy botli of travellers and the country people 
residing in the neighbourhood. 

Lewis also besieged Gournai-sur-Marne, and severely 
straightened the garrison for want of provisions. Hugh de 
Creci, son of Guy the Eed, held the place, and refused to 
obey the knight's command to restore it to the heirs of 
Garlande who laid claim to it.^ 

One day, Count Theobald, at the head of a numerous body 
of knights, rode to the bank of the rivulet called Torci,^ and 
engaged in battle with the royal troops. As they were, how- 
ever, too strong for their assailants, the count and his com- 
panions in arms were forced to retire, and being pursued as far 
as the entrance of Lagni, many of them were taken prisoners 

' Our author has confounded the first siege of Puiset, in 1111, with the 
third, in which Ansel de Garlande, seneschal of France, was killed in 1118. 

'^ Hugh de Rochefart or Montlheri, second son of Guy the Red, lord ot 
Crdci en Brie, Gomets, and Cliateaufort, and seneschal of France, after his 
father, and before Ansel de Garlande, was guilty of great atrocities in his 
war against Louis-le-Gros, and having been compelled to surrender to the 
king his castle of Gournai-sur-Marne, took the monastic habit in an abbey 
of the Cistercian order, about 1118. 

^ A stream between Torci and Gcuverne, to the west of Lagni and east 
of Gournai. 



A.D, 1111.] HOBERT II. OF FLANDERS KILLED. 420 

in the vineyards and enclosures, where they had concealed 
themselves. In consequence, the garrison of Gournai were 
so much terrified that they came to terms and laid down 
their arms. 

Theobald, descended from a race of kings and counts, 
was distinguished among the French lords for his wealth, 
influence, and illustrious birth, and had many powerful and 
fierce vassals, who were cruel oppressors of their countrymen 
and neighbours. Some of them neither respected God nor 
man, as was plainly exhibited by their conduct. In conse- 
quence, the king having heard frequent reports of their 
outrages, was much incensed, and took measures for 
restraining their oppression of the lower orders by his royal 
authority. The count's partisans, apprehending the king's 
power, and the restraint he endeavoured to impose on their 
evil enterprises, sought refuge under the protection of their 
powerful lord, and, relying on his support, often dared to 
engage in criminal undertakings against God and the church. 
This gave rise to frequent quarrels between the king and 
the count, and as the malignants persisted in their outrages, 
much blood was shed on both sides. 

On one occasion, the king made an irruption against 
Count Theobald in the district of Meaux, having in his 
company Eobert, earl of Flanders, and many other nobles. 
Lewis met with a vigorous resistance from the count's troops, 
who, being superior in numbers, put to flight the royal 
force. During the rout, the earl fell from his horse in a 
narrow way, and, being trampled under foot by the cavalry, 
he was unable to remount, and, having been raised from the 
ground with great difiiculty, for his limbs were severely frac- 
tured, he expired a few days afterwards.^ Icings, and princes 
and many people deeply lamented his death, and as far as 
Arabia the fate of the warlike crusader was deplored both by 
Christians and Gentiles. His corpse was carried by the 

^ We now return to the year 1111. Robert, the second earl of Flan- 
ders of that name, surnamed the Jerusalemite, and brother-in-law of 
Pope Calixtus II. was in fact trampled under horses' feet in an expedition 
in which he accompanied Lewis-le-Gros against Theobald IV., count of 
Chartres and Blois, and expired a few days afterwards. Some accounts 
give the 4th of October, and others the 4th of December, as the date of his 
death. His corpse was conveyed to St. Vedast's at Arnis. Historians 
disagree as to the circumstances .-is well as the time of his death. 



480 OEDEBICUS VITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XXXTII, 

Elemings with great sorrow to tlie city of Arras, which, not 
long before, he had fortified against Henry the emperor, 
sarrounding it with a stately wall of white stones. He was 
interred in the church of St. Yedast the Bishop, founded by 
King Theodoric in expiation of his unjust murder of St. 
Leger, bishop of Autun.^ 

Ch. XXXYII. Baldwin VII., earl of Flanders — Henry I. 

attempts to arrest the young prince William, pretender to 

tJie duchy of Normandy — After many wanderings he takes 

refuge with Baldwin. 
Baldwiit, the son of Eobert, earl of Flanders, succeeded 
his father, and, as he was still a youth, his mother Clemence 
was for some years joined with him in the government of 
his hereditary states. The opening virtues of the young 
prince gave indications from which his friends formed san- 
guine anticipations of his future wortli, but he faded in an 
instant, as the choicest flower shrinks under the slightest 
touch. ^ 

King Henry, returning victorious to England, condemned 
Duke ^Robert and others who were taken prisoners with him 
to perpetual imprisonment. He committed William, the 
young prince,^ to the guardianship of Elias de Saint-Saens, 
but afterwards resolved by the advice of his friends to put 
him under arrest. For this purpose, Eobert de Beauchamp, 
viscount of Arques,* by the king's orders, unexpectedly 
presented himself at the castle of Saint-Saens. The 
viscount arrived there one Sunday morning, when the 
people who were assembled in the church were much amazed 
at his sudden appearance. Elias himself, the young prince's 
guardian, was absent at the time, but his friends, M^thout a 

^ It is incorrect to represent this abbey as founded by Tlieodoric, but 
he richly endowed it, and was buried there. 

^ Baldwin VII. earl of Flanders, surnamed a-la-Hache, died the 17th 
of June, 1119, from the consequences of a wound which he received at 
the siege of Arques, aggravated by his intemperance. 

^ See before, p. 382, where we find that Elias was brother-in-law to the 
young prince. Ordericus calls him Infaniem, and in the course of the 
paragraph, Ciitonem-f equivalent phrases in those times. The former is 
still preserved in the Spanish title oi Infanta, given to princes of the blood 
royal. Clito, like the Anglo-Saxon Etheling, was the peculiar designation 
of the heir apparent or presumptive. See the note in vol. i., p. 147. 

* Arques is only five leagues distant from St. Saen, 



A.l). 1111.] EGBERT DE BEA-UCHIMP. 431 

moment's delay, roused the boy, \Yho was asleep in bed, and 
secreted him from the search made for liim, that he might 
not share his father's imprisonment. Elias, hearing of tliis, 
made haste to discover the retreat of his amiable ward, and, 
having recovered him, conducted him into foreign lands, 
where he carefully nurtured him during his exile. Mean- 
while, the viscount, Kobert de Beauebamp,^ seized the castle 
of Saint-Saens, belonging to Elias, for the king, w^ho after- 
wards gave it to William de AVarrenne, his cousin, to engage 
him to strict fidelity in his service, and determined resistance 
to his enemies. Elias carried the boy with him in all his 
wanderings, and brought him up as his own son. to years of 
puberty. In the various countries he visited, the young 

' Though there are several places of the name of Beauchamp in the 
district of Caux, and some of their former lords are known, we have reason 
to believe that this viscount of Arques beloni^^ed to the illustrious family of 
Beauchamp of Avranches, whose seat lay betv/een that city and Granville, 
as in almost all the charters given in the Monast. Anglic, in which this 
Eobert de Beauchamp is mentioned, it is either as a donor or witness in con- 
nection with William de Morton or Robert de Mowbrai, the great lords in 
that quarter. In the list of the benefactors to St. Pancras at Lev/es, we 
find Dionysia, uxor quondam domini Roberti de Beauchamp^ and their 
eon Richard. 

We are unable to supply the link between Robert the viscount and 
Hugh de Beauchamp, who attended the Conqueror and was rewarded with 
forty-three lordships, mostly in Bedfordshire, the ancestor of the barons 
Beauchamp-of-Bedford, which line, however, soon failed. Walter de 
Beauchamp of Elmely, in Worcestershire, of the same family, was the 
founder of the main line, which in its several branches became so distin- 
guished in English history. He was steward (dispensator) to Henry I., who 
appointed him sheriff of Worcestershire and Warwickshire; and an especial 
favourite with his daughter the empress Maud. William de Beauchamp, 
the fourth in descent from Walter, married Isabel, sister and heiress of 
William Manduit, earl of Warwick, through whom he inherited the honours 
and estates of that powerful family. Walter de Beauchamp of Alcester 
and Powick was his youngest son, and his lineal descendant in the fifth 
generation having been created Baron Beauchamp-of-Powick. 25 Henry VI. 
that title became extinct in the second generation, as the honours of the 
Warwick line had been long before. Richard, the last Baron Beauchamp- 
of Powick, left three daughters, the eldest w:)f whom, Elizabeth, married 
Willoughby, lord Brook, in whose house the earldom of Warwick was 
afterwards restored. Anne, the second daughter, married William Lygon 
of Maddresfield, in Worcestershire, in favour of whose descendant, of the 
same name, through Margaret, the heiress of that family, the barony of 
Beauchamp of Powick was revived by a new erection. (46 George III.) 
An earldom was afterwards added; so that this ancient Norman name 
like so many others, still ranks among the peers of England. 



432 ORDEllICUS VITALIS. [u. XI. CH. XXXVII. 

prince was introduced to many great princes and noble 
lords of castles, who were attracted by his polished manners. 
Both by his importunities and his promises, Elias earnestly 
conciliated the regards of all he could influence in his ward's 
favour; and, publishing the piteous tale of his wrongs, 
inclined the hearts of many to compassionate his misfor- 
tunes. Numbers of Normans espoused his cause, and 
ardently desired to have him for their prince, thus offending 
Ihe powerful monarch who then ruled them, and exposing 
themselves to suspicion in various ways. Above all, Eobert 
de Bel esme, mindful of the friendship and intimate relations 
which subsisted between himself and Duke Eobert, and not 
having forgotten the vast power which, during his govern- 
ment, he exercised over the greatest of the Norman nobles, 
used his utmost efforts on behalf of the illustrious exile, 
the duke's son. There was a frequent interchange between 
them of hasty messengers who communicated secret intelli- 
gence from the one to the other. Thus Eobert and Elias 
encouraged each other by mutual exhortations, and toiled 
unceasingly to advance the cause of their duke's son. 
They communicated with Lewis, king of France, "William, 
duke of Poitiers, Henry, duke of Burgundy, and Alan, 
prince of the Bretons, and several other powerful princes ; 
frequently stirring them up by envoys and letters, and 
using every means to engage them to lend their aid to 
William Clito. 

At last, Fulk, count of Anjou, betrothed his daughter 
Sibylla to him, granting him the county of Maine, and for 
a time was a firm supporter of the young prince.^ But 
through the prevailing influence of King Henry, who 
lavished menaces, entreaties, gold and silver, and a thousand 
other weighty arguments, the marriage was broken off*. He 

• Our author considerably anticipates these events. It was not till after 
the death of his son^n-law, King Henry's son William, in 1122, that Fulk 
betrothed his other daughter to William Clito, as the young Norman pnnce 
was called. However, Henry, who in the zenith of his power and prosperity 
never lost sight of Anjou, suspeclam semper habuit potentiam Andevagen- 
sium ; put every engine in motion to hinder this alliance, which he effected 
by all kinds of menace, entreaty, and corruption. He soon afterwards 
chose Fulk's son for the husband of his daughter and heiress ; so indispen- 
sable did he consider the re-union of Normandy, Maine, and Anjou, as a 
check to the power of the French kin^s. 



A.D. nil — 1122. J THE pretender's FORTUNES. 433 

employed able pleaders, who raised the question of consan- 
guinity, which, according to the Christian law, prevented the 
union of the young couple/ For Richard, son of Gonnor, 
and duke of Normandy, was father of Eobert I., whose son 
was William the Conqueror, the father of Duke Robert, 
who was father of William the Clito. On the other side, 
Robert the archbishop and count, who was brother of Duke 
Richard, had a son named Richard, count of Evreux, which 
Richard had a daughter called Agnes, wife of Simon, who 
bore Bertrade, Eulk's mother, and whose daughter Sibylla 
was. It was thus that the affinity between William and 
Sibylla was made out, and the long-expected union of the 
illustrious youth was' frustrated. Thej'oung prince was in 
consequence forced to leave Anjou, ana again compelled to 
seek the aid of strangers with fear and toil. At last, after 
many wanderings, he took refuge with his cousin Baldwin, 
earl of jFlanders, throwing himself on his good faith, intre- 
pidity, and resources. The count gave him a cordial 

^ Questions of consanguinity, as canonical impediments to marriage, 
were one of the scandals which caused most vexation in the middle 
ages, and which the court of Rome fomented with the greatest activity. 
The memory of Innocent III. cannot be too much honoured for having 
fixed a reasonable limit in 1245. In the example now before us, there 
were eleven degrees of consanguinity between the parties betrothed ; but 
Henry, that mirror of continence, who did not scruple to marry a nun, and 
filled the court of England with his bastards, was ready to invoke the 
thunders of the church on the enormity of a marriage between cousins in 
the eleventh degree, when it was contrary to his interests; and the impedi- 
ment alleged by so rich and powerful a monarch could not fail of having 
immense weight. 

Ivo de Chartres called marriages between kindred of the twelfth degree 
incestuous, the very language adopted by the pope on this occasion. It must 
be remarked that the court of Rome was as violent as Henry himself. A 
few months before his death. Pope Calixtus confirmed the sentence of 
excommunication, pronounced by his virtuous legate, John of Crema, 
against the betrothed princess* On the 26th of August, 1123, he wrote to 
the bishops of Chartres, Orlf ans, and Paris to have it executed in their 
dioceses, and that the holy mysteries should be suspended wherever a 
person guilty of so enormous a crime should reside. It was, indeed, a 
strange abuse of words to call such an union incestuous, and a deplorable 
use of the thunders of the church to launch them against such imnginary 
crimes. But William, the young prince, had not at command the irresistible 
arguments alluded to, and although powerful and zealous friends interposed 
in his favour, he never possessed the means which were indispensable to 
success at the court of Rome. 

VOL. III. I- F 



434 ORPEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XI. Cri.XXXYIII. 

reception, promising to stand by him under all circum- 
stances, and maintained his rights until he was slain in 
battle, fighting in his cause, as we shall find hereafter/ 

Ch. XXXVIII. An epidemic disease and had season in 
France — Henry's daughter 31atilda married to the em- 
peror. 

1^ the year of our Lord 1109, the second indiction, the 
divine vengeance punished the sins of men with a variety of 
inflictions, and mercifully terrified mankind, according to the 
usual dealings of Providence, in order to bring sinners to 
repentance, that so its clemency and pardon might be 
extended to the pei^tent. In Trance, particularly about 
Orleans and Chartres, numbers were attacked by an inflam- 
matory disease,^ which debilitated them, and in many cases 
ended' in death. The harvest was rotted by deluges of rain, 
so that a terrible dearth ensued, and the vintage almost 
totally perished. The gifts of Ceres and Bacchus thus 
failing, a severe famine consumed the people in all quarters. 
This fatal year was the third of the reign of Lewis, son of 
Philip, king of Prance, and the ninth of Henry, son of 
"William the Bastard, duke of Normandy and king of Eng- 
land. 

The same year. King Henry gave his daughter Matilda in 

^ There was an old grudge between the kings of England and the counts 
of Flanders, which is worth mentioning. 

William the Conqueror granted to Earl Baldwin, his father-in-law, a 
yearly pension of three hundred silver marks for the succour he had afforded 
him in his English expedition. In the time of Robert the FrisiaUj this 
pension was not regularly paid ; but William Rufus was induced to admit 
the obligation, Robert of Flanders, the crusader, on his return from Jeru- 
salem, haughtily demanded the arrears : it was then that Henry I. replied 
that if the matter was left to his generosity, he would do what he could in 
it, but if they made too much noise about it, he would not give a sou. How- 
ever, the affair was compromised, and by a convention on the 17th of May, 
1 101, the payment was raised to four hundred marks, and Robert, on his 
part, engaged to furnish the king of England a force of five hundred men 
in time of war. The number was even doubled by a fresh convention of 
the 10th of March, 1103; but it appears that it was not long before the 
misunderstanding between the two princes was renewed. 

* St. Anthony's fire, a disease very anciently known, as it is mentioned 
in Virgil, under the name of ignis sacer. It appears to haye been 
endemic if not epidemic in the middle ages. 



A.D. 1109 — llll.J HENRY V. MAEEIES MATILDA. 4S5 

marriage ^ to Charles, son of Henry, emperor of Germany. 
Burchard,^ archbishop of Cambray, received her from her 
father, and conducted her to her husband. Eoger, son of 
Hichard,^ and several others of the Norman nobility, accom- 
panied the young princess, believing that this union would 
raise them to posts of eminence in the Roman empire, and 
that they might be able to carve out for themselves the 
highest honours by their valour and intrepidity. In this 
way their ancestors had gained a footing in England through 
Emma, Duke Eobert's daughter, and in Apulia by means of 
Sichelgarde, daughter of Waimalk, duke of Salerno.* The 
politic emperor, who was well informed on such subjects, 
penetrated their designs, and took precautions against being 
subjected to the pretensions of overbearing aliens. In con- 
sequence, by the advice of his Grermans, he sent them all 
back to their own country with presents, 

Ch. XXXIX. Deaths of St. Anselm, of William, archbishop 
ofBouen, and Hugh, abbot of Cliini. 

A.T that time, several doctors of the church, eminent for 
their sanctity and wisdom, departed this life, namely, Anselm, 
archbishop of Canterbury, and William, archbishop of Rouen; 
those venerable superiors of monasteries, Hugh, abbot 
of Cluni ; Gi-ervase of Eennes ; ^ and "William of Cormeilles,^ 
and several others, were also taken from the world ; whose 
blessed spirits are, as we firmly believe, with God. The earth 
itself appeared to mourn the loss of these distinguished 
prelates, the fields and vineyards refusing to yield their 

^ It appears that the parties were betrothed in the year our author 
mentions, but the marriage wjis not celebrated till the 7th of January, 
1114, when the princess Matilda must have been still very young, us the 
marriage of her parents only took place on St. Martin's day, 1100. 

' Our author's memory fails here. It was not Burchard who was 
bishop of Cambray in 1109, but his predecessor Odo or Odouard, a native 
of Orleans, (July, 1108— June 19, 1113.) 

^ Roger de Bienfaite or de Clare, who was afterwards created earl of 
Hertford. 

* Second wife of Robert Guiscard. 

^ Gervase, abbot of St. Melaigne at Rennes, died in the year 1 109. He 
had been a monk of St. Florence at Sauniur, like his predecessor Even, 
archbishop of Dol, who died the 25th of September, 1081. 

« William, abbot of Cormeilles (July 27, 1109). Respecting him see 
the Histoire Litteraire de France, t. ix. p. 491. 

r r 2 



436 OKDEKICUS TTTALIS. [b.XI. CH. XXXIX. 

usual abundance. Even the unbelieving who were not 
moved by affection to lament the decease of these eminent 
fathers, were, at least, compelled to groan under the various 
calamities which the judgment of God inflicted upon them 
for their impiety. 

Anselm governed canonically the church of Canterbury 
sixteen years, the flower of all the men of worth who 
flourished in my time. Dom Eadmer, who had been a monk 
under the holy man and attended him in his travels, wrote 
his life in a clever and eloquent work. At length the saintly 
prelate, being called to receive the reward of his labours 
from the Lord, departed this life on the eleventh of the 
calends of May [April 21], and was interred at the foot of 
the crucifix in the church of the holy and undivided Trinity.^ 

Likewise, Hugh, the venerable abbot of Cluni, after cele- 
brating the passion and resurrection of Christ, fell sick on 
the following Tuesday, and, taking to his bed, prepared 
himself for his passage out of this life to the Lord, by 
confession and prayer. Having himself given commands to 
the brethren of the convent to choose his successor, he 
ratified their election of a young monk, named Pontius, by 
the sanction of his own authority. He then caused himself 
to be carried by the monks into the infirmary, where the 
aged abbot, on the Thursday, departed to Christ, whose 
soldier he had been from childhood. It is said that he 
governed the abbey of Cluni sixty-four years,^ and admitted 
more than ten thousand monks into the service of the Lord 
of Sabaoth. At his death he was buried in the church which 
he had himself erected from the foundations. 

Thus, two pillars of the church were removed together 
from the earthly Jerusalem, which is still engaged in pilgrim- 
age amongst aliens, and are, as we trust, immoveably planted 
for their persevering sanctity in the heavenly Zion. Anselm, 
the illustrious archbishop of Canterbury, died before Easter, 
and, robed and mitred, entered on Thursday the palace of 

^ St. Anselm died at Canterbury on Wednesday, the 21st of April, 
1109, in tlie 76th year of his age and the sixteenth of his pontificate. We 
have already explained what is meant by the expression, ante crucijixum. 

2 St. Hugh, abbot of Cluni, died eight days after St. Anselm, on Thura- 
day, the 29th of April, in the 85th year of his age, and the sixtytirst or 
hid adminiistration as abbot. 



A.D. 1110.] DEATH OF WILLIAM BONNE-AME. 437 

the Almighty King ; and on the Thursday following, during 
the solemnities of Easter, Hugh, his attached friend, passed 
away in like manner. Ealph, bishop of Bochester,^ was 
raised to the see of Canterbury, w^hich he beld nine years, 
although he w^as for some time afflicted with severe illness. 
Pontius, son of Count Melguel,^ undertook the government 
of the abbey of Cluni, which he relinquished some time 
afterwards for various reasons, as will appear in the sequel. 
Having performed a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, he died on his 
return in the prison of Calixtus at Home. His sanctity was 
nobly exhibited by undoubted miracles performed at his 
tomb. 

Ch. XL. Death and epitaph of Willium Sonne-Ame, arch- 
bishop of Mouen^ and of Count Elias — A comet and 



In tlie year of our Lord 1110, the third indiction, William, 
archbishop of E-ouen, who had worthily governed that 
metropolitan church for thirty-two years, died on the fifth 
of the ides [4th] of Febrnary. He was buried in the 
canons' chapter-house, which he had himself built. The 
following epitaph, cut on the wall on the east side, describes 
his character: — ^ 

We cherish William's memory, while we weep — 

His pious musings and devotion deep— 

A prelate by his clergy fondly loved, 

Within, without, his fostering care they proved. 

Light of the church, the priesthood's honoured chief, 

'Twas his in every need to give relief : 



* Respecting this prelate, see vol. ii. p. 251. 

* Melguel, now Mauguio or Mauguion, two leagues and a half from 
Montpelier. The counts of Melguel were persons of great importance. 
Abbot Pontius, or Pons, was nephew of Count Raimond de St. Giles, and 
godson of Pope Paschal II. His character was very different from what 
our author, who makes him a saint, represents him to have been. See the 
Histoire Litteraire de France, t. xi. p, 20, Ordericus'a predilection for 
him is the more extraordinary, as having visited Cluni, as he afterwards 
informs us, he had an opportunity of hearing on the spot the most 
authentic accounts of the scandals, the acts of violence, and the devasta- 
tions, still recent, which will for ever stain the memory of Pons. 

3 Respecting William Bonne- Ame, archbishop of Rouen (1079 — 1110), 
see vol. ii. p. 168, 



488 Or.DETlICTJS TITALTS, [b.XI. CH.XLII. 

For them this chapter-house his skill displayed, 
For them the cloisters spread their hallowed shade; 
Nor less his charity embraced the poor, 
He never spurned them from his open door. 
Rich gifts supplied the brethren's aliment, 
Churches and tithes, farms, houses, land, and rent. 
His pure example those he ruled deterred 
From sinful action and unseemly word. 
Two days before his vernal path the sun 
Traced in the Fishes, William's course was run,^ 

In the course of the same year a comet appeared in the 
zenith from the fourth of the ides of June to the day before 
the calends of July. [From the 10th to the 30th of June.] 
Elias, count of Maine, died shortly afterwards. 

For three successive years, from the second to the fourth 
indiction, a severe famine raged in Trance, by which the 
population was much diminished. 

Ch. XLI. Geoffrey^ a Breton, made arcJibisTiop of Mouen — 
His character — Pope Paschal II. a prisoner. 

]jT the year of our Lord 1111, the fourth indiction, Geoifrey 
the Breton, dean of Mans, was summoned to England by 
King Henry, and appointed archbishop of Eouen. This 
prelate, who was eminent for eloquence and learning, 
instructed his clergy and people in the catholic faith, and 
was a useful governor of the church of God for seventeen 
years.^ 

The same year,^ Pope Paschal was made prisoner by the 
Emperor Charles, who greatly disturbed the church as I 
liave related in another place. 

Ch. XLII. Death of Gilbert, lishop of Uvreua: — tvho huilt 
that cathedral. 

1^ the year of our Lord 1112, Gilbert, the venerable 
bishop of Evreux, having filled the see thirty-four years,* 

' It is hardly necessary to remark that in the usual phraseology of our 
author's epitaphs the sun was in the constellation Pisces, at the time of 
William Bonne- Ame's death, February 4, 1110. 

'^ He had been dean, and was proposed for the bishopric of Mans. 
See before p. 227. We shall presently find that this bishop's adminis- 
tration was neither so prudent nor prosperous as our author here describt's 
it, 

=» The 12th of Febniary. 

* From 1070 to the end of August, 1112^ is a great deal more than 



A.D 1113.] TISIT OT ITEKEY T. TO ST. EVROULT. 430 

died in a good old age on the fourth of the calends of 
September [August 29th]. He was interred in the church 
of St. Mary, Mother of Grod, which ke had himself erected, 
and enriched with funds and ornaments, augmenting the 
number of its clergy, and consecrating it to divine offices 
during the night as well as the day. He was succeeded the 
year following by Ouen of Bayeux, a chaplain of the king's, 
who was well versed in sound learning, and taught those 
who were committed to his charge the way of God, according 
to the rules of the church.^ 

Ch. Xlilll. Visit of Henry I. to tlie alley of St. UvrouU — 

Grants a charter to the monks. 
In the year of our Lord 1113, the sixth indiction. King 
Henry paid a visit to St. Evroult, attended by a numerous 
retinue of his nobles, and joyously celebrated the feast of 
the Purification of St. Mary, mother of Gfod. He remained 
seated a long time in the monks' cloister, examined closely 
their way of life ; and, having learned their rules of discipline, 
gave them commendation.^ The next day he was brought into 
the chapter-house, and, humbly soliciting to be admitted a 
member of the society, obtained his request. There were with 
him his nephews Theobald and Stephen,^ with Conan of Brit- 
tany,* William, bishop of Exeter,^ and several other counts 

thirty-four years. That part of the nave of the fine cathedral of Evreux, 
which has been lately restored with great care, toward the choir, was 
probably built by Bishop Gilbert. 

^ Ouen was a native of Cond^-sur-Noireau, and brother of Thurstan 
archbishop of York. 

^ We may suppose some personal communication to have taken place 
on this occasion between Henry Beauclerc, who affected to patronise men 
of letters and the learned monk, our author; and the king probably knew 
that he was engaged in writing the annals of his reign. Henry was too 
politic a monarch not to avail himself of the advantage of his position, and 
we may perhaps in part trace to this condescension the favourable view 
Ordericus takes of the English king's character. 

3 Theobald and Stephen de Blois — the latter afterwards king of Eng- 
land — sons of the countess Adela, Henry's sister. 

* Conan II., surnamed the Fat, in the course of the same year succeeded 
his father Alan Fergan, who retired to the abbey of Redon on account 
of his infirmities* See a curious charter on this subject in the Recueil des 
Historiens de France, t. xii., p. 506. Alan died the 1 3th of October, 
1119. 

* William WaVlewast, bishop of Exeter. See what is remarked before, 
p. 203. 



440 OKDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.XI. CH.ILIII. 

and nobles, with their barons. Then, having advised with 
Kobert, earl of Mellent, the king ordered a charter to be 
drawn, in which all the domains possessed at that time by the 
abbey of St. Evroult should be briefly enumerated. This was 
done accordingly, and afterwards Arnold the prior, and Gil- 
bert des Essarts^ carried the charter to the king at Eouen. 
Henry then willingly executed it by making a cross, and deli- 
vered it to the nobles who were present to be similarly ratified 
by their each affixing to it the sign of the cross. Those who 
subscribed were Kobert, earl of Mellent ; Richard, earl of 
Chester; Nigel d'Aubigni, Goel d'lvri, William Peverell,^ 
Koger de Thibouville,^ William de-la-Lund,"* Robert, the 
king's son,^ and many more. This charter was, by the advice 
of learned men, mainly intended for a protection against 
greedy heirs, who were yearly plundering the convent of the 
charitable foundations of their ancestors, and constantly ex- 
posed the monks to litigation, to the great injury of ecclesi- 
astical aflairs. Eor this reason the king ratified the aforesaid 
instrument with his seal, and forbade all men, by his royal 
authority, from impleading the monks in respect of any of 
the matters specified in the charter, except in his own court. 
He then gave sixty salted hogs and ten bushels of wheat ^ 

^ A village near St. Evroult, which furnished several monks and one 
abbot to that house. 

' There existed at this time two persons of the name of William Peverel. 
They were at least half-brothers, the eldest being the son of William the 
Conqueror. He had the custody of the castle of Nottingham, and his 
brother that of Dover. It is probably the latter who is introduced here. 

^ Roger de Thibouville, son of Robert, and father of William. 

* Probably lord of La Londe-sous-Farceaux, son of Rodulfus de la 
La7ida, mentioned in vol. ii. p. 187, 

* Robert, although the king's son, is named after all the rest, because he 
was illegitimate. He was afterwards earl of Gloucester, and married the 
daughter and heiress of Robert Fitz-Hamon ; and became one of the most 
eminent men of the succeeding times. 

" LX. Bacones, The trifling quantity of the royal dole of wheat to 
digest the pork leads to the remark that this grain was not very plentiful, 
npr much in use for ordinary purposes, in the age of Ordericus, The 
charter here mentioned has not been published, but it is to be found in the 
chartulary of St. Evroult in the Imperial Library of France, t. i. vol. iv, 
5. The gifts referred to in this note was not comprised in it, and appear 
to have been the subject of a separate order. It was not as bishop, but 
probably as viscount of Argentan;, that John was commissioned to provide 
them. 



A.D. 1112.] EOBEET DE BELESME's LAST OUTBUEAK. 441 

to the monks of St. Evroult, ordering John, tlie bishop of 
Lisieux to deliver the wheat to them at Argentan ; which he 
did wilhugly and without delay. The king, having spent 
the feast of the Purification at St. Evroult, as I have before 
stated, proceeded to visit the borders of his states, and 
Ibrtiiy the vulnerable points against enemies and freebooters. 

Cn. XLIY. hostilities between Fulk of Anjoio and Henry 
— Also letiveen Theohald of Blois and Lewis — Bohert do 
JBelesme arrested arid committed to perpetual imprisonment. 

In these times, while the children of light enjoyed peace 
and tranquillity, and the sons of darkness were instigated 
by restless iniquity, a violent quarrel broke out in France, 
which caused the effusion of much blood. Eulk the younger, 
count of Anjou, and son-in-law and heir of Elias, count of 
Maine, was induced by his uncle Amauri,^ to threaten 
damage to King Henry's territories, earnestly imploring 
King Lewis to afford him succour.^ Henry, however, poses s- 
ing both prudence and wealth, and being powerfully sup- 
ported by a regular army, frustrated the designs of his 
enemies, as cobwebs are swept away, and felicitated himself 
on having crushed them without loss on his own side. He 
caused two forts to be erected to oppose Gervase de Chateau- 
neuf^, who endeavoured to offer an obstinate resistance, one 
called l^ormancourt, the other Illiers,^ taking from him a 
third which has the name of Sorel.^ Many nobles of Maine 
joined Henry, and, having done fealty, put their castles into 
his hands. The same year, Theobald, count de Blois, 
stoutly opposed King Lewis, and by his enterprises caused 
him signal losses. He even, when the king was besieging 
the castle of Puiset, compelled him by force of arms to 
retire.^ Thus employing his youth, Theobald so occupied the 

1 Amauri de Montfort, brother of Bertrade. 

3 These first hostilities between Fulk and Henry I. are mentioned by no 
other author than Ordericus. Five years afterwards we shall find tliat 
they assumed a more serious character. 

^ Gervase de Ch^teauneuf, in the Thimerais, son of Hugh. See before, 
vol, ii. p. 487. 

* Illiers I'Eveque. 

* Sorel, near Chartres. 

^ Count Theobald was one of the most bitter enemies of Lewis-le-Gro-^. 
Affairs did not turn out so well for him as our author would have ua 



442 OEDEHICUS TITALIS. [B.XI. CH.XLTV. 

king of Erance, tliat he could not molest liis uncle the king 
of England by invading Normandy. 

Then Robert de Belesme exhibited the great malice which 
he had long nourished against the king, and having hitherto 
fawned on him with concealed venom, now broke into open 
rebellion. He was a crafty and powerful lord, full of avarice 
and cruelty, and an implacable oppressor of the church of 
God, and the poor ; so that, if I may so speak, Christian 
history does not exhibit his equal in wickedness. This person 
openly incurred the guilt of perjury by breaking his oath of 
fealty, and deserting Henry, his natural lord, at a time when 
he was exposed to the attacks of numerous enemies, and 
aiding Eulk of Anjou and the other open adversaries of his 
suzerain with his counsels and forces/ In consequence, 
lawful charges were preferred against him by the king at 
Bonneville on the day before ihe nones [the 4th] of JVovem- 
ber^, of having acted illegally against his lord, for that being 
thrice summoned to his court he had given no appearance, for 
not having made any return, as the king's viscount and officer, 
of the royal revenues from Argentan, Exmes and Ealaise, as 
well as other offences. Not being able to clear himself of the 
countless and enormous iniquities of which he was guilty, 
both against God and the king, he was, by the just judgment 
of the royal court, thrown into the strictest confinement.^ 
The tyrant, who had oppressed the country and was now 
preparing to add to his former crimes fresh enormities by 
rapine and fire in all quarters, -being thus in captivity, the 
people of God rejoiced at being relieved from the robber's 

believe. Defeated at Mellun and Lagni, and wounded at the castle of 
Fuiset, he was compelled to implore leave to retire to Chartres. 

* This must have been before Henry's reconciliation with the count of 
Anjou. 

* The French historians give the date of November 4, 1112, for Robert 
de Belesme's journey to Bonneville-sur-Touque and arrest. He appears to 
have ventured there in the character of ambassador from Lewis-le-Gros, 
which Henry did not respect in the person of his own vassal. 

' Robert de Belesme was taken to Cherbourg, and from thence to the 
castle of Warham, in Norfolk, when he ended his days in strict confine- 
ment. Henry of Huntingdon, whose character of this able but profligate 
nobleman, we have before quoted, speaking of the termination of his career, 
says : " Of him whose fame had been spread every where, no one knew, 
after he was in prison, whether he was alive or dead, and report was silent 
of the day of his death." Letter to Walter, Bo/m's Anliq, Lib, p. 310. 



A.D. 1113— 1114.] TRA-NQUTLLITT or NORMANDY. 413 

yoke, and offering thanksgivings to God their deliverer, 
wished Henry a long and happy life. The king then laid 
siege tOxilen9on, which surrendered in a few days, and he 
gave Godfrey, Adam Sor,^ and other knights who had the 
custody of the citadel, free leave to depart, setting at liberty 
also Hugh de Mes-David ^ and two other knights, who were 
arrested at the same time as Eobert. 

Ch. XLV. Peace restored — Henry* s interview with the 
count of Anjou — And with Lewis, king of France — Sup- 
presses an insurrection and takes Villerai. 

The French and Normans and their neighbours made a 
truce for some time, and soon afterwards having inter- 
changed friendly messages, mutually agreed on a lasting 
peace. In consequence Fulkof Anjou went into the country 
of Alen9on the first week in Lent, and had an interview 
with King Henry at Pierre-Percee,* and swearing fealty to him 
and doing homage, received the country of Maine from the 
king, to whose son, "William the Etheling, he betrothed his 
daughter. At the same time, Henry restored the county 
of Evreux to Count William, who had been an exile for four- 
teen months in Anjou. He also graciously pardoned Amauri 
de Monfort and William Crespin^ their offences against him. 
The exiles who had been expelled by the impious Eobert 
de Belesme, were recalled and mercifully reinstated in 
their paternal lands. Peace and joy were restored to the 

* It should be Adam le Sor, that is, Adam with the red hair. We find 
(vol. ii. p. 196,) William le Sor granting the chuich of Radon to St. 
Evroult, It was, therefore, an hereditary name which this family appears 
to have left to Mont-Sor, a suburb of Alenfon, on the left bank of the 
Sarthe. Perhaps they were descendants of the Soreng, of whom William 
de Jumieges has traced a revolting picture. Historia Normannorum, 1. 
vi. c. xiii. and xiv. 

2 M^davi, in the canton of Mortree, two leagues and a half from 
Alenfon. 

' The first week in Lent in the year 1113 commenced on the 23rd of 
February. 

* Petram-Peculatam. The historian of Alenfon fixes the site at Hertr6, 
near that city, for the sole reason that vast quarries of granite are found there. 
There is a place called Pierre-Pouquelee, but it is at some distance, near 
Fert^-Fresnel, at which there stood a dolmen, which is now destroyed. 
Probably the interview took place near some other druidical monument in 
the neighbourhood of Alen9on. M. Dubois finds it at Pont-Peree, one 
ie-'gue from that place on the road to Brittany. 

' William Crespin, castellan of Dangu. 



444 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XI. CH.XLV. 

churclies of God at St. Evroult, Seez, and Troarn, which had 
long groaned under the grievous oppression of a cruel lord, 
and their seizin of the churches, tithes and other posses- 
sions of which they had been unjustly deprived, were renewed. 
Among the rest St. Evroult recovered the thirty pence of 
money of Maine,^ which earl Eoger, with the consent of his 
son Eobert, had given to St. Evroult for lights in the church, 
payable yearly out of the rents of Alen^on at the beginning 
of Lent, together with all the other possessions which the 
same earl had granted by his charter, but his iniquitous heir 
had unjustly invaded. 

At length. King Lewis, having proved in various ways the 
magnanimity as well as the great ability and valour of King 
Henry, abandoning the counsels of traitors who preferred 
revolt to peace, resolved to have a conference with him, and 
make a durable treaty to the advantage of holy church. The 
two Idngs therefore met at Gisors, in the sixth indiction, 
and the last week in March,^ and peace having been sworn 
to on both sides, embraced each other in the bonds of friend- 
ship to the general joy. Then Lewis granted to Henry the 
lordship of Belesme and county of Maine, and the whole of 
Brittany, Eergan the prince of the Britons, having already 
done homage to the king of England as his vassal; and the 
king had betrothed one of his daughters to Conan, Eergan's 
son.* 

Meanwhile, Aimeric de Yillerai* and other lords of Be- 
lesme, to whom William Talvac, Bobert's son, had committed 
the custody of the castle while he was absent in defence of 
his county of Ponthieu, trusting in the great strength of the 
fortress, and the> number of their retainers, prepared to resist 
with vigour any one who should venture to assault it. Upon 

* According to M. Leopold Delisle, each of these sous of Manceaux 
was worth about 3 franks 40 cents of present value in French money, so 
that the thirty sous are equivalent to 102 franks. 

* This meeting took place in the last week of March, 1114, in the field, 
still remaining, of Ormeteau-Ferr6, on the territory of Gisors, on the 
further side of the Epte. 

^ We suppose Conan III., duke of Brittany, Alan Fergan's father, had 
already abdicated the government of the duchy to retire to the abbey of 
Redon,' where he ended his days. Fergan's marriage with Matilda, a 
natural daughter of Henry I., did not turn out well, as the Breton was 
compelled to repudiate the sole male issue of the union. 

* He must have been the son of Aimeric de Villerai, whose tragic end 
is related, vol. ii. p. 110. 



A.D. 1114.] CASTLE OF BELESME DESTROYED. 445 

this, King Henry, assembling the Tvhole military force of 
Normandy, laid siege to Belesme, on the calends [the 1st] of 
May, and was more successful than he hoped. For Theobald 
count de Blois, Fulk of Anjou, Eotrou of Mortain,^ and 
other distinguished nobles marched to the aid of the Nor- 
mans, and investing the place with their troops, entered it 
victoriously three days afterwards. It happened to be the 
feast of the Invocation of the Holy Cross, and the king had 
issued orders to the whole of his army to suspend the attack 
and not to engage in any military enterprise. However, the 
troops of count Theobald and Eotrou, not having heard of 
the kings's command, appeared in arms; upon which some 
knights of the garrison issued forth from the castle to engage 
in single combat The besiegers charging them impetuously, 
they wheeled their horses round and made a hasty retreat to 
the western gate; but at its entrance they were overtaken 
and beaten down by their pursuers, and the doors were pre- 
vented from being closed by the number of lances, so that 
they remained wide open. The royal army forthwith 
marched in with loud shouts, and made themselves masters of 
the greater part of the place. Then, as those who guarded 
the citadel made a vigorous resistance, they set it on fire, 
and this noble edifice, which Eobert had for a long period 
enriched and fortified, w^ burnt to the ground. 

Henry, thus victorious, having established peace with all 
his neighbours, returned to England, and during five years,^ 
governed his kingdom over the sea, as well as his duchy on 
this side the channel, in great tranquillity ; his faithful ad- 
herents ofiering devout thanksgivings to the Lord Grod ot 
Sabaoth, who disposes all wants with power and mercy. 
Amen. 

^ Rotrou, second of that name, count of Perche. 

* Our author is not more exact than usual in his chronological calcula- 
tions. The king, indeed, passed part of this year in England, but he again 
visited Normandy before Michaelmas, and did not return till the month of 
July, 1115. He was again in Normandy in the month of August, 1116", 
and the archbishop of Canterbury found him at Rouen in September. It 
appears certain from Florence of Worcester and Brompton that he returned 
there by Easter, 1117, and that the king of France and the earl of Flan- 
ders having made an expedition into Normandy in the course of that year, 
only ventured to pass one night there from apprehension of being surprised 
bv Henrv. The profound tranquillity which Ordericus makes him enjoy- 
in the bosom of his kingdom for five years, must be reduced to a few 
months. 



44:6 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.I. 

BOOK XII. 

Ch. I. Pope Gelasius II. — War between Henry and Lewis 
in Normandy — A legend of Brittany — Death of Queen 
Matilda and the earl of Mellent — And of the count of 
Evreux—^The succession to that county. 

1^ the year of our Lord, 1118, tlie eleventh iiidictiou\ on 
Christmas eve, a violent tempest overthrew many buildings 
and trees in the western parts. 

On the death of Pope Paschal, John of Gaieta, formerly 
chancellor and master of requests in the Roman Church, was 
elected pope, and ccntrary to the emperor's wishes, was 
canonically consecrated by the clergy of Kome.^ At the same 
time Bourdin, archbishop of Prag^ue, who received from his 
adherents the name of Gregory YIII, was by the emperor's 
intrigues intruded into the church of God,^ In consequence, 
a grievous schism was made, and a cruel persecution ensued 
to the great injury of the catholics. 

At that time there was a serious misunderstanding 
between Lewis, king of Prance, and Henry, king of Eng- 
land, and the hostilities of those powerful monarchs frequently 
devastated their respective territories. King Lewis rendered 
aid to the exiled William for the recovery of his inheritance, 
and a great number of the Normans espoused his cause with 
all their might. Meanwhile, Henry surprised the castle of 
St. Clair,* and holding possession of it for a long time 
against Osmond^ and other freebooters in that neighbour- 
hood, he inflicted from thence great losses on the French. On 
his part, King Lewis surreptitiously entered Pord-Nicaise,*^ 

^ We believe that it should be 1117, the tenth indiction. 

' John of Gaieta, a monk of Monte-Cassino, elected pope the 15th of 
January, 1118, by the name of Gelasius II.; ordained priest the 9th of 
March, and consecrated at Gaieta the next day. 

• ^ Maurice Bourdin, archbishop of Prague, was elected pope at Rome 
the 9th of March following 

'* Saint Clair-sur-Epti. 

^ Osmond de Chaumont, first of that name, surnamed the Klder. He is 
mentioned before, vol. i. p. 472. It appears that he was lord of St. Clair, 
and married the heiress of Quitri. 

^ See note, vol. i. p. 131. The modern name of this place is Gane. In 
the ninth century it was a priory dependent on the abbey of St. Ouen at 
Jluuen, whose relics were deposited in it in Ki2. 



A.D. 1118.] HENRY AND LEWIS AT WAll. 447 

commonly called Yani, in the disguise of a monk, he and hiy 
knights being muffled in black cowls; and, fortifying the 
cell of tlie monks of St. Ouen which stands there, shame- 
fully made the house of God, set apart for divine offices, a 
den of thieves. The king of England hearing of this, flew to 
the spot with his troops, and built two forts, to which the 
enemy in derision gave foul names, calling one of them 
Malassis, and the other Gete-a-Lievres.^ This war, furiously 
raging for nearly four years, devastated the states of both 
princes with fire, rapine, and cruel slaughter. 

Pope Gelasius was a prelate of great erudition, and having 
been chancellor of the holy see nearly forty years, had great 
experience in afihirs and was an able politician. But his 
government of the Uoman church did not last quite two 
years. His avarice was so excessive, that, paying a visit to 
France, he oppressed the churches in those parts to supply 
the inordinate expenditure of the Eoman court, but he passed 
away like the morning dew at the breath of God. 

At that time, in Brittany, the devil appeared to a woman 
who was confined by childbirth, in the shape of her husband, 
and on her asking for food he gave it her. The woman, de- 
by the guise he assumed, ate of it, and having finished the 
meal, the devil vanished. Shortly afterwards her husband 
came in, and hearing what had happened, was greatly terri- 
fied, and told it to the priest. The priest having invoked 
God's name, touched the woman, sprinkled her with holv 
water, and instructed her what to say if the deceiver should 
appear again. On Satan's return, she put the questions 
to him with which she had been furnished. "What," she 
said, " did the violent wind which roared so terribly before 
Christmas, and caused us great alarm, portend ? Houses and 
churches were unroofed, the pinnacles of towers blown down, 
and numberless oaks levelled in the woods." The devil 
replied, " God had resolved that great part of mankind 
should perish, but the efficacious prayers of the saints 
procured pardon for the race of man, and the storm fell on 

^ Trulla Leporis ; its site is not known. The ruins of Malassis form an 
er, closure on a farm to the south of Gani, on the road to Vernon. The 
fosse is about a yard deep. 

^ Pope Gelasius died at Cluni the 29th of January, 1119, so that lie waa 
p(;pe only one year and fourteen days. 



448 OHDERICUS TITALIS. [e.XII. CH.T. 

the trees. Notwithstanding, within three years, there will 
be grievous tribulation in the world, and several persons of 
exalted rank will perish." At these words the woman 
sprinkled holy water, and the devil vanished. 

About the same time a prodigy was seen in England. 
A rustic having bought a pregnant cow at Ely, he killed and 
opened it by order of Hervey the Breton, bishop of that 
diocese.^ Strange to say, instead of a calf, three little pigs 
were- found in it. A certain pilgrim from Jerusalem,^ 
who chanced to meet the countryman driving the cow home 
from market, told him, and afterwards repeated to the bishop 
and other by-standers, that three great persons in the domi- 
nions of King Henry would die that year, and many severe 
calamities would follow. The pilgrim's prophecy was justified 
by events which occurred in the time specified.^ 

In fact, William count of Evreux died on the fourteenth 
of the calends of May, [18th April], and was interred at 
Fontenelles, in the abbey of St. Wandrille, by the side of his 
father Richard.^ Soon afterwards. Queen Matilda, whose 
baptismal name was Edith, died on the calends [the 1st] 
of May, and lies buried in the church of St. Peter, at "West- 
minster,^ likewise, Eobert, earl of Mellent, expired on the 

' Hervey, the Breton, at first bishop of Bangor, and translated to Ely in 
1 109, died the 30th of August. Respecting his attempt to obtain the see of 
Lisieux, see before, p. 416. 

^ Quidam lerosolymitanus, a surname often adopted or attributed to 
those who had taken part in the crusades, and not meaning, as it would 
sound, a native of Jerusalem. Our author applies it here to a simple 
pilgrim, returned from the Holy Land. But in general they were desig- 
nated as palmers, on account of the palm branch which they were in the 
habit of carrying. 

' Without attaching to this episode more importance than it deserves, 
we may be allowed to remark that the paragraph, as well as the opening of 
the present book, has reference to somewhere about the period of Christ- 
mas, 1117 ; but our author, reckoning the beginning of the year from that 
least, has naturally placed these occurrences in 1118. 

* The counts of Evreux were neighbours of St. Wandrille in their 
domain of Trait. Richard, William's father, had died the 13th of Decem- 
ber, 1067. 

^ Queen Matilda, whose monastic ideas did not accord with her husband's 
irregular life, retired to the monastery of Westminster after having given 
birth to two children. In posterum et parere et partire destitit, says a 
cotemporary historian. She wore haircloth even under the royal mantle, 
and during Lent trod the pavement of the churches with naked feet. 



A.D. 1118.] CLAIMS TO COUNTY OF EVEEUX. dlO 

nones [the 5th] of June, and reposes with his fiither and 
brother in the chapter of the monks, at Preaux.^ After the 
death of these distiuguished persons, there were great troubles 
in Normandy. 

Amauri de Montfort, son of Simon and Agnes, Count 
William's nephew by his sister, laid claim to the country of 
Evreux, but the king gave him a prompt denial, by the advice 
of Ouen, bishop of that city. In consequence, Amauri 
flew to arms with all his force, and nearly the whole of 
France espoused his cause against King Henry. He was 
warlike and powerful, possessing fortified castles with strong 
garrisons; and his kindred abounding in wealth and re- 
sources, he held a high rank among the French nobility. 

The same year, in the month of October, William Poin- 
ted put him in possession of the citadel of Evreux, so that 

Having quitted the gay and busy court of England, she resumed her 
habits of g-athering about her the sick, suifering under the most disgusting 
disorders, whom she nursed, and clerks skilled in church music, whom she 
encouraged by a lavish use of her revenues. It was not at Westminster, 
as our author says, but at Winchester, that her remains were interred, i?t 
vetere coenobio. Afterwards, King Henry transferred them, with the bones 
of Queen Frytheswyde, to The Holy Hole. Ordericus makes an important 
remark on Queen Matilda's name, which is probably applicable to other 
persons of the middle ages. It is, that the name she bore in the world was 
not that of her baptism, 

1 Robert, earl of Mellent (comte de Meulan in Normandy), terminated 
very unhappily a long career surrouiided by all the edat^ power, and 
wealth that great talents and unbounded ambition and avarice could com- 
mand. His wife betrayed E,nd deserted him, the powerful faculties of his 
mind became clouded, and in his last momenta the clergy who attended 
him, even the archbishop of Rouen himself, who hastened to his deathbed, 
failed of obtaining from him any restitution to those he had wronged, or 
any sign of repentance. See his character noticed before, p. 358, and in 
that interesting tract by Henry of Huntingdon, in which he gives an 
account of the most eminent persons of the age in the shape of a Letter to 
Walter {Bohn's Antiq. Lib. p. 309), where fuller details are given of his 
last moments than those supplied by Ordericus. 

' Piinctelliis ; there is a commune of this name in the canton of Briouse, 
and we are furnished with the names of two persons, one called Mansellus 
de Pnnctello, the other Willelmus de Pointel, who are mentioned in a 
charter of William de Briouse in favour of St. Florence at Saumur. Here, 
however, Punctellus is evidently a surname. A Tedricus Pointel appears 
in Domesday-book as tenant in capile. William Pointel is twice 
named as one of the justiciaries of Amauri, count d'Evreux, in a judicial 
proceeding at Gaillon. He is the same person who is mentioned here. 
We shall find afterwards that he was a nephew of Ralph de Vitot (near 

YOL. III. G G 



450 OilDEIlICUS TITALTS. [e.XII. ClI.IlJ 

the whole place was exposed to pillage. All the bishopric 
was also ravaged, and bishop Ouen, with hia clergy and 
attendants, compelled to seek safety in flight. Then Hugli 
de Gournai, Stephen, Count d'Aumale, Eustace de Breteuil, 
E,icher de Laigle, Robert du Neubourg,^ and several others, 
revolted against King Henry, and iised every effort to 
restore William the exile, Duke Robert's son, to his father's 
rank and states. 

Ch, II. Baldwin VII., earl of Flanders, dies from a wound 
received in Normandy — His cousin, Charles of Denmarl^, 
succeeds him. 
Baldwin the younger, the intrepid earl of Flanders,^ took 
arms against King Henry with his w^hole force, to re- 
establish his cousin William in his paternal inheritance, 
Henry, Count d'Eu,^ was among the first to aid the rebels 
by joining their league, but the wary king, discovering this, 
arrested him at Rouen with Hugh de Gournai, and threw 
him into prison till he surrendered his fortresses. Upon 
this Baldwin, at the head of a large body of Flemings, made 
an eruption into Normandy as far as Arques, and burnt 
the villages in the Talou in Henry's sight, who, with his 
Norman followers, witnessed the flames. The king, in Ids 
moderation, contented himself with fortifying Bures,* and, 
suspecting the fidelity of most of the Normans, threw into 
it a garrison of Bretons and English, whom he took into his 
pay, and provided with abundant supplies. Baldwin's daring 
courage often led him there to provoke the Bretons to feats 
of arms. At last he was wounded by one Hugh Boterel,^ 

Neubourg), who must have been grandson of Robert de Vitot, one of the 
assassins of Gilbert, count de Brionne. See vol. i. p. 450. This family 
was always devoted to the counts of Evreux. 

* Robert, lord of Neubourg, third son of Henry, earl of Warwick, and 
Margaret du Perche. 

'^ Baldwin a la Hache, earl of Flanders, 1111 — June 17, 1119. 

' Henry, count d'Eu, was son of William, count d'Eu, and Heliscnde 
d'Avranches, sister of Hugii, earl of Chester. His wife, Margaret de SuUi, 
was great niece of Henry I. 

* Bures en Brai, in the valley of the Bethune, about four leagues from 
Arques. It formed part of Queen Matilda's dowry. 

' This family was established in England in the county of Warwick. 
Several persons of the name of Boterel are mentioned in the Monnslicnn 
Anglicaniim, but none with the Christian name of this Hugh, who does not 



A.D. 1119.] DEATH OF BALDWITT VII., EARL OF FLAKDERS. 451 

and being on excellent terras with Count Stephen and the 
Countess Havise/ lie withdrew to Aumale, where, it is 
reported, the night following he supped on meat which was 
too young, drank mulled wine, and slept with a woman. 
These indulgences, when suffering from his wound, brought 
on a mortal disease, which ended in death, after he had 
languished in great pain from the month of September to 
the June following.^ All who founded hopes on him might 
thus learn, that we must not trust in man but in the Lord. 
On Baldwin's death Charles dMncre, his cousin,^ the 
issue of one of the daughters of Robert the Frisian, suc- 
ceeded to his estates, and being occupied with his own 
affairs, made peace with the king of England and his other 
neighbours. 

Ch. III. Insurrection in the Talou and Caux, in toliich Jltigli 
de Gournai takes tlie lead, and is joined by many of his 
barons, freebooters in Normandy. 

Hugh, son of G-erard de Gournai,* had been brought up by 

appear to have been a person of any note. Henry I. gave one moiety of 
Aicester to William Boterei, who married Alice Corbet, and was a bene- 
factor to that abbey. 

' This name is spelt Advise in the charter of foundation of the abbey of 
St. Victor, in Caux, where it designates the wife of Roger de Mortemer, 
grandmother of Avise de Mortemer, daughter of Ralpli de Mortemer and 
countess of Aumale. 

'^ His illness lasted till June 17, 1119. He did not expire at Aumale, 
but at a place called Rosselar, now Roulers, south-west of Bruges, being 
then twenty-six yenrs old. Others say that he died at St. Bertin itself, 
after having taken the cowl, and spent the last two months of his life in 
monastic habits. His body was interred in that abbey. We give in the 
original another account, which confirms that of our author: Crebis ictibus 
galea quassata, cerebrum violafus. Cavssam ferunt morbi augmentali 
quod ea die allium cum aucd prtssumpserit, nee node Venere abstinuerit. 

^ Charles, son of Canute, king of Denmark, and of Adela of Flanders ; 
consequently cousin-german to Baldwin. The surname given him by cur 
author was derived from a castle granted him by his cousin as long before 
as 1115. This domain of Ancre is now called Albert, since it belonged to 
the Constable Albert de Lugnes, after being confiscated in 1617 by the 
forfeiture of Concini, the famous Marshal d'Ancre. 

Charles of Denmark also assumed the title of count d'Amiens after his 
marriage, about the year 1 118, with Margaret, daughter of Reynold, count 
de Clermont, and Adelaide, or Alice de Vermandois. 

* Hugh de Gournai, second of that name, son of Gerard de Gournai, and 
aon-in-law of Dreux de ISIonchi-le-Chatel in the Beauvoisis. 
G G 2 



452 OBDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XIT. Cn.III. 

the king as his own son ; he had knighted him when he was 
of age to bear arms, placed him among his highest nobles 
by restoring to him his father's lordships, which had been 
for some time administered by his father-in-law, Dreux, and, 
from the king's misplaced confidence, he took possession as a 
friend of the fortresses entrusted to his custody. Hugh, 
however, did not repay the favours of his munificent patron 
with the gratitude he owed him ; for he allied himself with 
traitors, and presumed to rebel against his lord and foster- 
father. 

In the month of June he consulted with the king respect- 
ing his sister Grundrede, and by his advice betrothed her to 
Nigel d'Aubigni, a powerful nobleman. After the espousals, 
while the bridegroom and bride were celebrating their mar- 
riage, Hugh and his friends suddenly retired, and took arms 
the same day against the king. Coming unexpectedly to 
the castle of Plessis, he slew on the spot Bertrand, sur- 
named Rumex, who had faithfully guarded it for the king 
and himself,^ and entrusted its custody to Hugh Talbot, his 
nephew.^ However, the king recovered the place soon after- 

^ All this paragraph is very obscure. The situation of the castle of 
Plessis, of which Bertrand Rumex had the custody, for the king and Hugh 
at once, cannot be fixed with any certainty, but it was probibly at St. 
Martin-du- Plessis, on the confines of Brai and the Rumois. Nor can the 
exact signification be given of Bertram's strange surname. 

' Hugh Talbot was a vassal of the lords of Gournai. The first member 
of this family who bore the name of Hugh appears to have been Hugo 
Gognomine Taleboth, who was probably father of the Hugh of whom we 
are speaking, and Avho made a charter in favour of La Trinitd-du-Mont. 
Among the witnesses to it we find a person named Guilbert d'Eu ; and 
there is reason to believe that the family of Talbot derived its origin from 
that county. Then come Richard rnd Geoffrey Talbot, appearing as 
mesne-tenants in Domesday-book. Richard was witness to a grant by 
Walter Giffard in the time of the Conqueror. The English genealogists 
make his wife to have been a daughter of Gerard Gournai, and Hugh 
Talbot to be the offspring of this marriage, being thus nephew of Hugh 
Gournai, son of Gerard. But this opinion is scarcely borne out by the 
present passage of Ordericus, and the words nepoti ejus, are susceptible of 
another interpretation. However that may be, the person mentioned by 
our author is undoubtedly the same as the Hugo Talebot who subscribed a 
charter to the abbey of Savigni in the time of 'i'urgis, bishop of Avranches. 
He held twenty knights' fees in England in the time of Henry I., and prob- 
ably married a sister of Geoffrey de Mandeville, earl of Essex, in the time of 
King Stephen. This family made several giants to the abbey of Beaubec, 



A.D. 1119.] HUGH DE OOURNAI llEYOLTS. 453 

wards, and having strongly fortified it, stationed there 
Eobert and William, sons of Amauri, with a gallant band 
of knights for the protection of the country. 

Meanwhile Hugh obstinately persisted in his rebellion, 
collecting arms and troops in his castles of Gournai, la 
Eerte,and G-aillefontaine,^ and laying waste the whole country 
between the Seine and the sea with fire and pillage. 
Eobert, surnamed Hachet,^ Gerard de Fecamp,^ Enguer- 
rand de Vasceuil,'^ Anselm and Gilbert de Cressi,^ and 
other greedy freebooters, became his partisans, and waged a 
cruel war in the Talou and the district of Caux. Making 
incursions during the long winter nights, they carried otf 

to which also Hugh, son of Gerant de Gournai was a benefactor, and where 
he assumed the monastic habit. 

The name of Talbot, befoie it was adopted by a family, was that of a 
place on the river which gave its name to the Talou, the Tale, or Tele. 
The termination bot or body signifies a domain. Talbot may be inter- 
preted " a habitation in the valley," and would then be synonymous with 
Daubeuf. 

^ Gournai-la-Fertd, in Brai. Gaillefontaine ; a charter during the 
minority takes for its date the foundation of this place : Frimo anno con- 
siructionis castri quod Goidenfontana dicitur . . . 

^ This name appears to have been originally spelt Haget. Geoffrey 
Haget is mentioned in the great charter of Beaiibec as having given to that 
abbey possessions in Beaubec itself. The family became established in 
Yorkshire, where it was long settled, and in Gloucestershire, See the Monas- 
iicon Anglicanum. Walter Hageth was the first we find in Normandy, 
who was witness to a charter made to the Trinite-du-Mont. 

^ Gerard de Fecamp undoubtedly belonged to the family of William de 
Fecamp, the founder of Beaubec, and a great proprietor of lands between 
that place and la Rosiere. The sijjnatures of Robert and Richard de 
Fecamp appear on the great charter of Beaubec ; probably sons of William 
de Fecamp. They must have been persons of distinction, as their signa- 
tures immediately follow that of the suzerain. There is also in Domesday- 
book a William de Fecamp among the mesne-tenants in Hampshire. 

* Enguerrand de VasccEuil was still living in 114.9, at which time, by 
order of Geoffrey Plantagenet, he submitted to a judgment in court in 
favour of the monks of Preaux, who complained of wrongs he had done 
them. 

5 Anselm and Gilbert de Cressi did not belong to the district of Brai, 
but to the central part of the Talou. They were vassals of the earls 
Warrenne. Several persons of this family are mentioned in Norman and 
English charters; among others Hugh de Cressi, under Henry II., and 
Roger de Cressi in Normandy. They were also barons by tenure i>f 
English domains. But the Noiman Roger de Cressi lived long before one 
of the same name in England, It appears certain that he was cotemporary 
with William de Warrenne, earl of Surrey, who died in 1135, 



454 OIIDEEICL'S YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.1V. 

botli knights and farmers, with tlieir wives and even infants 
in the cradle, and throwing them into their dungeons ex- 
acted enormous ransoms. They had many accomplices in 
those districts who gave them an asylum, and even con- 
cealed them for a long time when it was necessary. Re- 
freshed by this hospitality the robbers sallied forth on their 
criminal enterprises, and committed great havoc among the 
farmers. It was thus that the people of Brai ravaged the 
whole of the Roumois, and threatened it with worse evils, 
harassing their neighbours by the aid of numbers who 
joined them from France and Normandy. 

There was no one who opposed them except William de 
P-oumare, castellan of Neuf-Marche, and his companions in 
arms. Those who lived near the rich meadows, on the 
banks of the Epte, frequently drove to their home-steads 
the cattle which they had carried off from a great distance. 

At that time treason chilled and numbed the hearts of 
eighteen of the noble castellans of JNormandy, whose power 
and renown surpassed all the rest, so that, favouring the side 
of the exile William, they rejoiced to find the royal cause 
weakened. 

Ch. IY. Hostilities of FulJc count of Anjou — Heiny cedes a 
frontier district of Normandy to him — Irruption of Lewis 
of France into the duchy — Henry's expedition to Laigle 
and recall to Rouen. 

At that time Fulk, count of Anjou, being called in by 
Hobert Giroie,^ who was defending the castle of !St. Ceneri 
against the royal forces, marched to his aid at the head 
of five hundred troops, and laying siege to La Motte- 
Gautier,^ which the king had garrisoned, and pressing it 
with great vigour, assaulted it for eight days with increasing 
forces, in the end of July. When news of this reached 
King Henry he hastened to Alen9on, and despatching 
heralds called out the warlike array of the M'hole of Nor- 
mandy. Meanwhile the Angevius harassed the Normans 
by frequent assaults, and shattered the fortifications with 
the enormous stones they hurled against them. Thus the 

1 Respecting Robert Giroie, see before, pp. 26 — 28. 
"^ At Clinchamp, commune of Chemilli, department of the Orne. Tl)e 
place was razed to the ground the 1st of August following. 



Ills.] HENilT CEDES ALEN9ON TO THEOBALD DE ELOiS. 155 

garrison, consisting of one hundred and forty knights and 
men-at-arms, were forced to surrender, on the terms that 
they should not undergo mutilation, and should keep their 
arms. Their leaders, Roger de Saint-Jean, and John his 
brother, were selected by the king. On the calends [the 
1st] of August, the Angevins, having razed the fortress to 
the ground, returned triumphant to their own territory. 
The garrison retired to Alen9on in great distress, and much 
ashamed of their surrender, at which the king was very 
indignant. However they excused themselves with great 
show of reason, alleging that they had frequently sent mes- 
sengers to demand relief, which, though long expected, did 
not arrive in time, v.hile they were continually exposed to 
the violent assaults of the besiegers. 

Then Henry granted Seez, Alen^on, and all the domains 
of Eobert de Belesme in that country to Count Theobald^ 
and the count, with the king's licence, gave that fief to his 
brother Stephen in lieu of his portion of his father's inherit- 
ance which lay inFrance. The young Stephen, therefore, took 
possession of Seez, Alen9on, Merle-sur-Sarthe, Almeneches, 
and La Eoche d'Ige, and arming and garrisoning the castles 
with his own troops, oppressed the inhabitants of the 
country by his outrages and exactions, and, changing their 
customary payments and services under the king, made 
himself odious, and the vassals disloyal. 

In those days the sons of iniquity sat in the chair of con- 
tagious evil, and were guilty of many crimes throughout the 
world. Eicher de Laigle claimed his father's lands in 
England,^ but the king gave him a positive refusal, saying, 
that his brothers Greoftrey and Eugenulf served in his 
army, and confidently depended on obtaining those domains 
by hereditary right. The young Eicher frequently urging 
his claim with great insolence, the king who was much 

1 Theobald, count de Blois, surnamed the Great, for what reason we 
cannot discover. It was certainly not for his loyalty to his sovereign. 

The concession of this frontier of Normandy was a humiliating avowal of 
weakness on the part of so powerful a monarch as Henry I. It appears 
from it that he did not feel himself in a position to defend it against the 
invasions of the count of x\.njou. By suffering it to be made over to 
Stephen, he placed almost insurmountable obstacles in the way of hia 
direct heirs. 

* They lay in the counties of Surrey and Norfolk. 



456 OEDERicrs yitalis. [b.xii. cH.ir. 

engaged, altogether rejected his suit, adding some words of 
contempt. In consequence the haughty young lord left the 
court of Normandy in a rage, and shortly afterwards made 
an agreement with the king of France, that unless his 
paternal inheritance was restored to him, he would desert 
from the king of England. King Lewis promised Eicher 
that if he came over to his side he would constantly main- 
tain sixty soldiers, and Amauri ^ fifty, in the castle of Laigle. 
After this assurance, Eicher returned to the English 
court, and again required of the king to restore him his 
inheritance ; but he obtained no redress, and retired sorrow- 
ful. The next day, his uncle, Count Eotrou, spoke to the 
king on the subject, and tendered him good advice to pre- 
vent the revolt from spreading. The king accepted his 
counsels, and gave him a message to Eicher that he would 
grant him what he asked. Being greatly delighted at this, 
he hastened to meet King Lewis, who was already on the 
march with a large body of troops. " I, my lord" he said, 
lately made an agreement with you which I am unable to 
keep : for the king of England, my own sovereign, has 
restored to me all that I demanded, and it is but just that 
I should perfectly maintain my fealty to him." King Lewis 
replied : " Be gone ! I shall effect all that is in my power." 
Upon this, Eicher returned home, and Lewis following in 
his steps, with his whole force, appeared before the gates of 
Laigle. As the garrison were determined to resist, the king 
commenced the assault, and some one, it is not known who, 
having set fire to the place, it was so fiinned by a strong 
wind that the flames spread, and the whole of it was reduced 
to ashes. Eicher was compelled by this disaster to resort to 
the king, and having confirmed the former compact, he sur- 
rendered the fortress to the French on the third of the nones 
[the 3rd} of September. The king of France and his troops 
remained there three days in great want, and, retiring on 
the fourth, committed the custody of the castle to Count 
Amauri, William Crispin, and Hugh de Chateau-Neuf.^ 
Then William de Eai, with Sancho,^ William de Fontenil, 

^ Amauri de Montfort. 

* Hugh 11., lord of Chateau-IVeuf in Thimerais, son of Gervase and son- 
in-law of the earl of Mellent, who appears to have been already in possession 
of his father's estates, although the latter did not die till 1140. 

5 Sancho ; we need not wonder to find a Spanish name in this country. 



A.D. 1118.] nE:ffIlT's ABOETIYE EXPEDITION. 457 

and Isn:ird d'Ecublei,^ observing their fealty to Henry, drew 
off to Pont Echantre, and, abandoning all that they held 
under the disturber of the peace, attached themselves to 
Ealph-the-Eed in opposing the king's enemies.^ The 
Prench, finding that the whole place was burnt to the 
ground, were not frightened like timid hares ; but, bold as 
lions, established themselves among the ruins of the houses, 
where they pitched their tents, and ransacked the country 
for provisions with arms in their hands. 

This state of affairs becoming known, King Henry made 
a forced march to Laigle the next day, and lost no time in 
laying siege to the place, although it was in ruins, to the 
terror of all who were in it. But his plans were frustrated 
by the adverse news brought by AYilliam de Tankerville, 
which the king too easily credited. This person met the 
king at a village called Livet,^ and said to him : " My lord, 
king, where are you going ? The Cauchois have commis- 
sioned me to entreat you to return with your troops into 
their country. Hugh de Gournai, and Stephen d'Aumale, 
with their adherents, have taken possession of the hill above 
Eouen,^ and are employed in building a fort in the abbey of 
the Holy Trinity, expecting your nephew's coming, with a 
great body of French, to take possession of the place which 
the citizens are ready to betray to him." As soon as tlie 
king heard this he retraced his steps ; and the garrison of 
Laigle pursued his army as it retreated by different roads. 

when we recollect that Rotrou IT., count of Perche, was nephew of Sancho 
Ramirez, king of Navarre and Arragon. 

^ He was son of Reynold de St. Martin Ecublei, son of Solomon and 
Adelaide Giroie, according to an annotator. 

^ These persons met Ralph-the-Red at Pont-Echanfre, now Notre- 
Dame-du-Hamel, a commune intersected by the Charenton. The church 
is on the left bank, but the site of the castle on the right. Ralph-the-Red 
was the devoted servant and confidential agent of Henry I. in this part of 
Normandy. 

^ This name appears to signify a marshy place, where rushes grow. 
There are several communes in Normandy so called. M. Le Prevost 
thinks that the place here mentioned lies between Laigle and St. Evroult, 
but that there are probabilities in favour of Livet in Ouche; which is M. 
Dubois's opinion. 

•• Mount St. Catherine. The abbey of La Trinite-du-Mont. 

One does not see how this expedition to Rouen from the east could 
have materially affected the Cauchois, whose territory was not violated. 



458 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. Cn.Y. 

The rrencli took nearly forty of the people of Moulins/ and, 
having strengthened their position by the booty which they 
collected from all quarters, restored the fortifications of 
Laigle, and held it stoutly for a whole year. 

King Henry reached Eouen with the utmost despatch, 
but did not find the enemies he had been led to expect, 
when his chamberlain, deceiving him, recalled him from 
Laigle. "William de Tankerville thus rendered a great 
service to the French who, in their exposed situation, were 
trembling with cold and fear, by drawing oft* the royal 
army to another point on a false pretext and to no purpose. 

Ch. V. King Henry attacks tJie castles of La Ferte and 
Neubourg — Loses all confidence in the JV^ornians — Dis- 
turbed state of the duchy. 

Then the king undertook an expedition with a thousand troops 
into Brai, and laid siege to Hugh's castle of La Fertc,^ but 
violent rains came on which caused great inundations. At 
length having completely devastated the country, he marched 
from thence to Neubourg^ against E-obert who had rebelled, 
and assaulting the place, burnt it to the ground. This 
Robert was son of Count Henry and Margaret,^ and was 
engaged in a lawsuit against his uncle Robert, earl of Mel- 
lent, son of Count E-obert. However, as the king's autho- 
rity was employed to protect his cousin, he could not pursue 
his plea as he wished. He was therefore inveigled by the 
public enemy to take arms against the king ; but although 
he incurred great losses by his domains being ravaged and 
given to the flames, he failed of recovering what he cdaimed. 
Although he possesses the gift of eloquence, he is slow in 
action, and is more successful with his tongue than with his 
lance.^ 

* The inhabitants of Moulins-la-Marche. 

^ La Fert^ en Brai, which stands on an isolated summit near Forges. 

' The territory of Neubourg was an extension of the vast domain oi 
Beaumont-Ie-Ro^er, which was wrested by the lords of Pontaudemer from 
the abbey of Beniai, but it originally formed no part of their property. ]t 
is, however, certain that Roger de Beaumont possessed it, and that it was 
dismembered from the rest of his estates as the share of his second son, the 
good and loyal earl of Warwick, Robert de Neubourg 's father. 

* iVhirgaret, sister of Rotrou, count du Perclie. 

* Our author speaks of Robert de Neubourg as a person still living, and 



A.D. 1118.] A COUJs'CIL AT EOUEN. 459 

At this time King Hemy was un\villing to engage in any 
long siege, for in the disruption of all ties which generally 
attends family quarrels, he put no confidence in those he 
employed. Even those who ate at his table favoured his 
nephew and other enemies, and bj betraying his secrets 
rendered them essential service. It was worse than a civiJ 
war; brothers, friends, and kinsmen were leagued against 
each other on different sides, from which they did all they 
could for each other's injury. Many of the JN^ormans theii 
followed the example of Ahithophel, Shimei, and other rebels, 
imitating those who, deserting the king anointed by Samuel, 
joined the parricide Absalom.^ Such was the conduct of 
numbers who revolted from the peaceful king chosen 
and consecrated by the bishops, and, forfeiting the fealty 
which they owed him as their lord, voluntarily and without 
any just cause, went over to a beardless count,^ bent on 
doing mischief. 

Ch. VI. King Henry holds a council at Rouen, which is 
attended hy the legate of Po])e Gelasius IT, 

In the eleventh indiction, on the nones [the 7th] of 
October,^ a council was held at Rouen, in which the king 
took order for the peace of his states with Ealph, archbishop 
of Canterbury, and the other barons he had summoned. At 
this meeting Greoffrey, archbishop of Eouen, represented the 
condition of the church of God, with four of his suffragans, 
Eichard of Bayeux, John of Lisieux, Turgis of Avranches, 
and Eoger of Coutances, besides many abbots. For there 
were present Eoger abbot of Fecamp, Urso of Jumieges, 
AVilliam of Eec, Odo of Caen, Eichard of Preaux, iVndrevv 
of Troarn, William of la Croix,'^ and Osberne of Treport, 
with many others I need not name. 

At this council, the legate of Pope Grelasius, a Eoman 
clerk named Conraci, made an eloquent discourse, having 

in point of fact he survived Ordericus, not having died till the 30th of 
August, 1 158, after having enjoyed the entire confidence of Henry II., who 
conferred upon him the offices of steward and justiciary of Normandy. 

^ See "2 Samuel xv — xix. 

'^ William, the Pretender; " Clito," as our author generally calls him. 

3 The 7th of October, 1118. 

* La Croix-Saint-Leutroi, in the department of the Eure. 



460 ORDETIICTJS TITALIS. [b.XII.CH.TII. 

from his youth imbibed Latinity from its pure fountain, 
complaining of the emperor Charles/ the irreligious destoyer 
of the good works and buildings of Pope Paschal, and cruel 
persecutor of the catholics. He added a protest against 
the anti-pope Burdin, the intruder into the apostolical see, 
and described the many tribulations to which the church 
was exposed in various parts of Italy. He mentioned the 
exile of Pope Grelasius, who bending before the storm had 
taken refuge on this side the Alps, and implored the church 
of Normandy to aid him with its prayers, and still more with 
its money. 

Serlo, bishop of Seez, was not present at this council, but 
his representative accounted for his absence by alleging his 
age and infirmities. 

Ouen, bishop of Evreux, sent word by his delegate that 
he could not attend, because he was engaged in the defence 
of the country against the common enemy. But, "unless 
the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh in vain:" the 
same day the citadel of Evreux was given up to Amauri.^ 

Ch. yil. Evreux seized for Amaiiri cle Montfort — The 
hishop's residence plundered — He escapes. 

William Pointel, nephew of Ralph de Guitot, who was 
entrusted by the king with the custody of the castle of 
Evreux, remembering his former friendship with Amauri at 
the court of Duke William, and considering that according 
to his ideas, this distinguished man had been unjustly 
deprived of the inheritance of his ancestors, introduced by 
surprise a band of his faithful followers into the citadel, and 
regardless of the general peace that prevailed deserted the 
king's service, and espoused the cause of Amauri. He was 
quickly joined by Elinance d'AuteuiP and several others, 

1 Charles Henry, commonly known as Henry V., who married the 
Princess Matilda of England. 

2 The 7th of October, 1I1<S. 

^ Elinance d'Auteuil, near La Croix-Saint-Leufroi, son of Ansketil 
d'Auteuil, one of the benefactors of the abbey of St. Saviour at Evreux at 
the period of its foundation. This commune is on the right bank of the 
Eure, not far from Evreux. 

The name of Elinance is foreign to Normandy, where we find only a 
single instance of it in the family of Toeni, almost a century before. It has 
been already remarked that this family waa not of Scandinavian origin, 



A.D. 1118.] THEOBALD DE BLOIS SEIZES ALENCOTf. 4G1 

and a wide- spread insurrection disturbed the whole neigh- 
bourhood. The party which had seized the citadel took 
possession of the episcopal residence and the town, plunder- 
ing the bishop's furniture, library, and ornaments ; and 
reduced the whole of the adjacent district to submission by 
force of arms. 

Bishop Ouen was compelled to flee with his servants for 
the safety of their lives, and wandered about for twelve 
months in exile. He left his beard unshaved,^ and exhibited 
in the disorder of his dress his grief for the desolation of 
the church. Such was the tribulation into which Evreux 
was plunged, that the clergy being driven away the divine 
office was discontinued during a whole year. 

Ch. YIII. Theobald, count of Anjou, obtains possession of 
Alengon, afer a battle under tJie walls, in which Henry s 
troops were defeated. 

In the second week of November, King Henry approached 
Laigle with a strong body of cavalry and infantry, and 
ravaged all the country round. Upon this, the garrison of 
the citadel, who boasted their prowess, sallied forth and 
were not slack in engaging the royal troops. Count 
Theobald^ having been thrown from his horse was taken 
prisoner, but the King and Count Stephen pursued them 
with a band of brave knights and nobly snatched the captive 
count from the hands of his enemies. The engagement 
then became general, and so sharp that the king himself 
was struck on the head with a stone ; but his brazen helmet 
warded off the blow without its wounding him. 

At this time the burgesses of Aleu9on revolted against 
King Henry. I will relate the cause of their giving the king 
so great offence. Stephen, earl of Morton, their present 
lord, was a very young man and had not the regard for the 
burgesses which he ought, nor did he treat them with due 

whatever the Continuator of William de Jumi^ges may have said of it. 
The introduction of the name into the house of Auteuil may indicate some 
ancient connection with their powerful neighbours, whose principal strong- 
hold, Acquigni, was not more than three leagues distant from their own 
residence. 

' This was a marR of deep mourning in a man of Ouon's profession, 
which had a great horror of long beards. 
Theobald, count de Blois. 



432 OrvDEEICUS yitalis. [b.xii. ck.tiii. 

respect. Like anotlier Eelioboam be listened to the flatteries 
of his parasites rather than the counsels of the elders, and 
imagined that the people of Alen9on were disloyal to himself 
and the king. In consequence he oppressed them with 
injuries and unusual exactions, little foreseeing what the 
consequences would be. At last, he summoned a general 
assembly and required them to deliver to him their sons as 
hostages for their good behaviour. Obeying this command 
reluctantly and by compulsion, they waited their time of 
vengeance full of ill-will. At first, they dissembled their 
resentment, but it was not long before they took open 
measures for their redress. 

The count received the hostages, but did not give them 
honourable treatment. He caused the wife of a worthy 
townsman, who was daughter of Paganus de Cacei,^ a gallant 
knight, to be imprisoned in the citadel, where, much to her 
sorrow, she was in the hands of debauched guards. Her 
husband Amiot,^ being much incensed, and feeling the 
disgrace of this affront, m.ade a secret association with 
several others who had similar causes of complaint. They 
imprudently shrunk from appealing to the king who was a 
lover of justice, from apprehension that he would turn a deaf 
ear to their charges against his nephew. Under these 
circumstances they had recourse to Arnulph de Montgomery, 
E/obert de Belesme's brother, through whom they sent a 
requisition to Tulk, count of Anjou, to take possession of 
Aleu9on, M-hich they were ready to give up to him, upon his 
securing the free rights of the townsmen and expelling the 
count's garrison from the citadel. The count of Anjou was 
well pleased at the proposal, and assembling his knights, 
archers, and foot soldiers, marched to Alen9on, and his forces 
being admitted into the place in the night, he invested the 
fortress and vigorously assaulted the garrison. Report, 
than which there is nothing swifter, spread the news far and 
wide, and it quickly came to the king's ears while he was 
deeply anxious about the state of afi'airs. 

As soon as the undaunted king had ascertained the accu- 
racy of the report, he assembled by his royal authority the 

1 Paganus de Cliasse, a commune in the arrondissemeut of Mamers, on 
the left hank of the Sarthc, o['posite Hautrive. 

• Amiot is a name still very common in all this part of Normandy. 



A. D. 1118.] henry's TROOPS UEIEATED BEFORE ALENCOX. 463 

Ennlish and Norman levioa and many other troops, sumnion- 
ino^ also to his aid Theobald count of Chartres, w ith Ids vas- 
sals. At last, in the month of December, they met in great 
nuiiibers near Alen9on for the purpose of affording effectual 
relief to the besieged. The gallant brothers, Theobald and 
Stephen, had preceded the king's arm^^, and attempted to 
throw a convoy of provisions into the place under a guard, 
but without success. The count of Anjou marched out 
against them, and disposing his troops in battle array, 
encountered them boldly. Some were slain, more made 
prisoners, and the rest being routed, the count returned to 
the town with much booty .^ Thenceforth he pressed the 
siege with more security, and cut off the supply of water 
by subterranean works, secretly carried on ; for the inhabit- 
ants were well acquainted with the conduit by which the 
founders of this citadel introduced the water of the Sarthe 
into the place. The troops shut up in the fortress finding 
their provisions fail, and that no relief arrived from any 
quarter, submitted, and surrendering the citadel, marched 
out under safe conduct with all their baggage. These dis- 
asters gave occasion to much pillage, and the season of our 
Lord's Advent was little observed. Thus evils grew on all 
quarters, and Normandy was polluted in every direction bv 
blood, robbery and fire, so that as the scorpions' brood 
tear open their mothers' entrails by prematurely emerging 
to life,^ so the Normans violated the peace of their country 
before the period of William's legitimate succession to l^ie 
duchy ^, and miserably wasted it by their cruel enterprises. 
While the faithful were celebrating the feast of the 

' It was an actual and very serious battle, which ended triumphantly for 
the count of Anjou, but as it afforded little honour to Henry 1., the hero 
for whom our author has so much sympathy, he has done all he can to 
lessen its importance. It appears to have been foupht under the walls of 
Alenfon, at a place still called Le Champs de Baiaille, between the castle 
of Alen^on and Hertre. See the Histoire WAleufon by Od(,lant Desnos, 
t. i. p. 173. 

' An allusion to the opinion then prevailing, that the scorpion was 
viviparous, and that the young brood tore their mother's entrails at their 
birth. 

3 In this passage our author appears to acknowledge the legitimacy of 
Prince William's claims; an admission which he has suffered to escape from 
him, contrary to his general tone on this subject. 



464 OEDEBICUS YITAL13. [b.XII. CH.IX. 

Apostle Thomap/ a violent wind occasioned great damage, 
portending future disturbances among men and revolutions 
of states, »Soon afterwards the world was afflicted with severe 
tribulations, many exalted persons falling from the summit of 
power, while by the Providence of God, who lifteth the poor 
out of the dust, others were raised to great honours. 

Ch. IX. Death of Pope Gelasius II. — He is succeeded hy 
Callistus II, 

In" the year of our Lord, 1118, the twelfth indiction, Pope 
Gelasius II. died at Cluni, where he was buried, on tiie fourth 
of the calends of February [24th January].^ Gruy, arch- 
bishop of Vienne, was elected pope on the fourth of the 
nones [the 1st] of February, by the name of Callistus. 
There were present on this occasion Lambert, bishop of 
Ostia, Boso, bishop of Porto, Conon, bishop of Praeneste, with 
John of Crema,^ and several other clerks belonging to tlie 
Itoman senate, who enjoyed the special privilege of electing 
and consecrating the popes. Guy thus enthroned, had from 
his youth upwards been continent, devout, charitable, zea- 
lous in God's service, and endowed with many virtues. He 
was son of William Tete-Hardie, duke of Burgundy, whose 
father was Duke Eeynold, and his mother Adeliza, daughter 
of Eichard II., Duke of Normandy.'' This Guy was the 
nephew of that cruel Guy, who attempted to seize the 
duchy of Normandy, and fought at Valesdunes against 
William the Bastard and Henry, king of France, and stoutly 
defended Vernon and Brionne against them during three 
years.^ Thus, sprung from the blood royal, the brother of 

^ The 21st of December. 

» See before, p. 446, note 2. 

^ John of Crema was not a bishop: we shall have future occasion to 
speak of him. Our author has omitted to mention the Cardinal, Peter de 
Leon, who so powerfully contributed to promote this election, and after- 
wards, through the influence of his father, Peter II. of Leon, to secure its 
acceptance by the members of the sacred college residing at Rome. 

* Callistus II. appears, as it is here stated, to have been the son of 
William Tete-Hardi, but the latter was not the son, but the grandson of 
Keynold, count (not duke) of Burgundy, and Adeliza of Normandy. 

* Guy of Burgundy, son of Reynold I., count of Burgundy, was great 
uncle of the new pope, and not his uncle. Our author here confirms what 
he has said in his eighth book, of the three years this nobleman made head 
against the duke, in his castles of Brionne and Vernon, after the battle of 
Valesdunes fought in 1047. 



A.D. 1118.] CRUEL TREATMENT OF HOSTAGES. 465 

dukes, and cousin of kings and emperors, as well as eminent 
for his great virtues, he was advanced to the papacy, which 
he administered worthily during five years, making many 
excellent decrees, and doing much for the trood of the church 
of God.' 

Ch. X. Cruel treatment of liostages — King Henry besieges 
his own daughter, wife of Eustace de Breteuil, in that -place. 

In the course of the same year, Eustace de Breteuil,^ Henry's 
son-in-law, was frequently advised 'by his countrymen and 
kinsmen, to break with the king, unless he restored to him 
the castle of Ivri, which belonged to his predecessors. Henry 
deferred for a time granting his demand, but promised it 
at some future period, and, satisfying him by gracious words, 
retained his allegiance. He was unwilling to quarrel with 
Eustace, who was one of the most powerful of the Norman 
nobles, was supported by numerous friends and vassals, and 
possessed strongly fortitied castles; in order, therefore, to 
secure his fidelity, he delivered to him as an hostage, the 
son of Halph-Harenc,^ who had the custody of the fortress, 
and in turn took as hostages Eustace's two daughters, who 
were his own grand-daughters. 

Eustace shamefully treated the hostages he received, for 
at the instigation of Amauri de Montfort, who used every 
artifice that malice could sugo:est to renew the quarrel, 
and made many promises to Eustace on oath which he 
never performed, he put out the boy's eyes, and in this 
state sent him back to his father, a most worthy knight. 
Upon this the father went to the king in a rage, and made 
known to him the cruel treatment his son had received. 
Henry, receiving the intelligence with lively grief, delivered 
up his two granddaughters, that the father might imme- 
diately wreak his vengeance on them. Accordingly, Ealph 
Harenc, with the permission of the incensed monarch, seized 

This pope died the 12th or 13th of December, 1124, after governing 
the church five years, ten months, and twelve days. 

2 Eustace, a natural son of William II., lord of Breteuil. See what is 
said respecting him before, book xi. p. 344. 

3 There were several families of this name in Normandy. This one was 
■rom the district ot Evreux,and held the domains of Gauville-la-Campayne 
We find in 1203, Radulfus Harenc, probably a descendant of this person, 
and father of Roger Harenc, dominus de Gauvilla. 

VOL. III. H H 



466 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.X. 

Eustace's daughters, and savagely tore out their eyes and 
cut off the tips of their noses, in retaliation for the cruelty 
shown to his son.^ Thus, alas! these innocent children suf- 
fered the penalty of their father's ill deeds, and on both sides 
parental regard had to mourn the injury and mutilation of 
their offspring. Ealph, consoled by the king, and honoured 
with presents, returned to the castle of Ivri, and announced 
to Eustace the revenge which the royal severity had ex- 
acted from the persons of his daughters. On learning their 
calamity, the father and mother were overwhelmed with grief, 
and the count placed his castles of Lire, Glos, Pont-Saint- 
Pierre and Paci in a state of defence, that neither the king 
or his partizans might obtained admittance into th^m. He 
sent his wife Juliana, the king's daughter by a concubine, 
to Breteuil, attended by a sufficient body of troops to guard 
the place. 

The burgesses,^ who were faithful to the king and un- 
willing to give him any offence, comprehending that Juliana's 
arrival would be the ruin of a number of people, sent a 
message to Henry, begging him to lose no time in coming 
to Breteuil. That prudent monarch, recollecting what was 
said by the audacious Curio to Csesar, relative to military 
enterprises — 

" Delays are dangerous when your plans are laid," ^ 

having listened to the envoys of the burgesses, came in all 
haste to Breteuil, and the gates being readily opened to him, 
passed into the place. He returned thanks to the loyal in- 
habitants for their loyalty to him, and, prohibiting his soldiers 
from laying hands on their property, laid siege to the citadel 
in which his contumacious daughter had shut herself up. 
Juliana was now involved in anxieties, not knowing where 
to turn, and feeling sure that her father was deeply 

1 We shudder at such atrocities, and wonder that they could be perpe- 
trated with the sanction of a prince who made great pretensions to piety 
and justice. 

* It appears that the municipalities in France were rising to some 
importance, for we hear continually in this part of our author's history ol 
the burgesses of towns in Normandy taking measures for their own security, 
among the cnnflicting interests of the king and the various parties oi 
factious nol)les in these troublesome times. 

' Lucan Phars. i. 281. 



A.D. 1119.] HENRT BESIEGES BRETEUIL. 4G7 

exasperated against her, and would never retire from the 
castle he had invested, but as a victor. At length, as 
Solomon says, "There is no wickedness like that of a woman, "^ 
she determined on lifting her hands against the Lord's 
anointed. In consequence, she treacherously sought a con- 
ference with her ftither, and the king who suspected no such 
fraudulent design in a woman, giving her the- meeting, his 
unhappy daughter attempted his life. Drawing a crossbow 
she launched a bolt at him, but through Grod's protection 
he escaped unharmed. Thereupon the king ordered the 
drawbridge of the castle to be broken down, so that no one 
could either enter or come out. 

Juliana now finding herself blockaded on all points and 
that there was no one to succour her, surrendered the castle 
to the king; but he would on no account consent to allow 
her to depart freely : so that the king's orders compelled her to 
let herself down from the summit of the walls without sup- 
port, and as there was no bridge she descended into the foss 
indecently, with naked legs. This took place in the beginning 
of Lent, the third week of February,^ when the castle-ditch 
was full of snow-water which, being half frozen, her tender 
limbs of course suffered in her fall from the severity of the 
cold. The unfortunate heroine, getting out of it how she 
could and covered with shame, joined her husband who was 
then at Paci, and gave him a faithful account of the sad 
occurrence. Meanwhile the king assembled the burgesses, 
commended them for maintaining their allegiance, honoured 
them with promises and benefits, and by their advice placed 
the castle of Breteuil in the custody of William, son of 
Ealph. 

Shortly afterwards. King Henry restored to Ealph de 
G uader, ^ a brave warrior, because he was William de Bre- 
teuil' s nephew by his sister, all the lordships of his ancestors, 
except Paci which Eustace held. Ealph kept vigilant 

^ Ecclesiasticus xxv. 26. As we have already had several occasions to 
observe, the text quoted by our author is not precisely what we find in the 
Vulgate, which begins with these words: '^ Brevis omnis malitia.'^ . . 

2 Between the 15lh and 22nd of February. Lent began the 4th of the 
same month. 

3 Ralph de Guader, second of that name, and nephen' of William II. 
de Breteuil. 

H H 2 



468 OEDERICUS VITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XI. 

gu.ard of the castle the king had given him ; and, faithful to 
the king under all circumstances, was distinguished by his 
eminent services, and valiantly resisted the public enemy 
in all quarters. 

Ch. XI. Fresh disturhances in the southern districts of Nor- 
mandy — King Henry quells them in person. 

At the same time the people of Exmes meditated revolt, for 
those who held Courci,^ and other strong places in the 
neighbourhood, hearing that almost all the Normans had 
deserted from the king and espoused the cause of his nephew, 
resolved to adopt a similar resolution. In the first instance 
Reynold de BailoP w^ent to Talaise, and withdrawing his 
fealty to the king, insolently rejected his demand for the sur- 
render of his mansion house at Eenouard.^ The king then 
said to him : " As you are come to my court, I will not have 
you arrested ; but you will repent of your evil designs against 
me." Shortly after his departure, Henry assembled his 
troops, and appeared before E-eynold's castle in the evening, 
almost as soon as he returned to it himself. The knight, 
fiDding that he was not equal to the burden he had taken 
on himself, came out in the morning, and imploring the 
royal clemency surrendered his fortress. The king immedi- 
ately set fire to the mansion which was built of stone, with 
the stores of provisions, and all that it contained. On hear- 
ing this news the garrison of Courci, Grantmesnil, and Mont- 
Pincon,* who had proposed to revolt, remained quiet, and 
forthwith abandoning their malicious designs from appre- 
hension of suffering like disasters, did not again venture to 
lift up their horns against their lord the king. 

1 Courci sur Dive, in the arrondissement of Falaise. 

^ Reynold de Bailleul, in Gouffern, near Argentan. We have already 
seen a person of this name, probably the father of the one here mentioned, 
among the parties or witnesses to Roger de Montgomery's eliarter in favour 
of St. Evroult in 1082. By his mother, Aimerie, Reynold II. de Baillent 
was great nephew of Earl Roger. It appears that th s lady had contracted 
a first marriage with Warren-the-Bald, castellan of Shrewsbury. 

^ Renouard, in the canton of Vimoutier. 

* The two last places are in the arrondissement of Lisieux. 



A.B. 1119.] CAPTURE OF ANDELTS. 469 

Ch. XII. Lewis, tlie French Icing, seizes Andelelys on tht, 

Seiiie — In consequence King Ilenrg fortifies Noyon. 
Geoffrey, archbishop of Eoiien, continually harassed Asce- 
line, son of Andrew/ with lawsuits, and much aggravated him 
by depriving him of his property, unjustly as it was thought 
by some persons. In consequence, in the bitterness of his 
resentment he went to the king' at Pontoise, and promised 
to deliver Andelis to him if he would come and take it with 
an armed force. The French were highly delighted at the 
proposal, and advised the king to suffer no delay. An 
agreement having been concluded on both sides, Asceline took 
with him a select band of soldiers whom he introduced into 
his barn by night and concealed under the straw ; while 
Lewis followed him closely with a body of troops. The next 
morning, at sight of the king, the people raised loud shouts, 
the inhabitants being thrown into a state of great tumult by 
so unexpected an occurrence. The party who were hidden 
under the straw now rushed forth, and joining the people in 
shouting the royal cry of the English,^ made directly for the 
citadel. But changing their note as soon as they were ad- 
mitted, they shouted Mon-joie,* the war-cry of the French. 
Having driven out the natives of the country who were in 
possession, the French established themselves in the interior 
of the fortress,^ and the king's troops took possession of the 
town by forcing their way through the gates. Eichard the 
king's son and others belonging to the garrison were sur- 
prised by this sudden attack, and abandoning all hope of 
maintaining either the interior or exterior defences, sought 
for sanctuary in the church of St. Mary the Virgin.® In the 
end, Lewis, being master of the citadel as well as of the whole 

1 This person lived in the Andelis, now Andelys, on the Seine. They 
were part of the domains of the archbishops of Rouen. 
^ The king of France. 
^ Regale signum Anglorum. It does not exactly appear what this was. 

* Menm Gaudium ; this ancient war-cry of the French is incorrectly 
translated by Ordericus, who is the first of the Norman writers who men- 
tions it. According to his derivation, it should be Ma joie, but every one 
knows that the cry really was Montjoie St. Denis. The first French 
author who nr-tices it is William Guiart, in describing the siege of Antioch in 
1191, seventy-two years after the afi^air of Andelis, which occurred in 1119. 

5 A citadel connected with the town is plainly meant;' which must not 
be confounded with the Chateau Gaillard, or the castle de I'Isle, opposite 
Little Andelis, erected at a much later period by Richard Coeur-de-Leon. ^ 

* The church of Notre-Dame in Great-Andelis. 



470 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [e.XII. CH.XIII. 

burgh, gave licence to Bichard and his comrades to have a 
free passage to any place they wished, out of reverence for 
the mother of our Saviour, always a virgin, whose church he 
devoutly visited, to implore her succour. On the king's 
departure the French kept vigilant guard in the fortress 
they had taken in the heart of the country, and subjected 
the whole neighbouring district on the banks of the Seine 
to their dominion. Godfrey de Serans,^ Enguerrand de 
Trie,^ Alberic de Bouri,^ and Baldric de Brai,* and other gal- 
lant French knights remained there, and although they were 
excommunicated by the archbishop for usurping the domains 
of the church, they obstinately held their ground for some 
time encouraged by the state of affairs and the continuance of 
the war. Meanwhile, King Henry put the castle of Noyou^ 
into a state of defence against the French, and stationed in 
it a hundred soldiers under command of William, son of 
Theodoric,^ general of his army. 

Ch. XIII. Bicliard Fresnel, of La Ferte near St Fvroult, 

takes arms — He is opiwsed hy Ralph of Pont-Fchanfre — 

The king in person quells the revolt — Richard Fresnel dies 

at the abbey. 

RiCHAED Fresnel,^ who boasted of no less than eight sons, 

* Godfrey de Seraiis-le-Bouteiller. 

! 2 Enugerrand de Trie, eldest brother of William Aiguillon. 

^ Alberic de Bouri, son of Eustace, founder of the priory of Bouri. 

* Baudri de Brai-sous-Baudemont. 

* Now called Charleval. Respecting this dowiain of the counts of 
Evreux, recently confiscated by Henry I., see before, p. 419. 

^ We have no information respecting this person. Judging from his 
father's name, he was neither Norman nor English, and may rather be 
considered a Fleming. 

' Richard Fresnel, founder of La Ferte- Fresnel, a near neighbour of the 
monks of St. Evroult, and a vassal of the lords of Breteuil. The fief of 
La Fert^-Fresnel was held under them fur the service of five knights 
completely armed. The first person we know of this ancient family is 
Thorolf, father of Ralph Fresnel, who appears to have been lord-paramount 
of St. EvrouIt-de-Montfort and St. Evroult proper, between the years 
1030 and 1050. See vol. ii. p. 314. The name Thorolf smacks of its 
Scandinavian origin. 

Ralph Fresnel had two sons, William and Robert (vol. ii. p. 399), who 
sold to Theodoric, abbot of St. Evroult, the church of Notre-Dame-du-Bods 
in 1060. The Richard Fresnel mentioned in this chapter must have been 
the son of one of them. 

A Richard Fresnel, lord of Balbec, appears on a charter of the 
year 1064; relating to the grant of the priory of Balbec to the abbey of 
Bernai, but it should seem that he belonged to another family. 



A.D. 1119.] EGBERT FEESNEL EEYOLTS. 471 

when near his end became so infatuated by the injudicious 
counsels of his wife that, in conjunction with them, he took 
measures against the welfare of the community. He caused 
a fort to be built with the king's money on the territory of 
Anciens,^ and following Eustace his lord employed himself in 
ravaging the lauds of his neighbours, so that, old as he was, 
he had no shame at being ranked among the public enemies. 

At this period, the observance of Lent was damnably vio- 
lated by the sons of men. 

Eobert, son of Asceline Goel,'^ the first of the king's ene- 
mies who repented, being sorry for the rebellion into which 
he had plunged, implored the prince's favour ; which being 
extended to him, he retained faithfully and advantageously 
to the end of his days, which was not far distant. Several 
others wisely followed his example. 

The king also invited Amauri to make peace w-ith him, 
promising that if he would surrender the citadel, he should 
occupy the w^hole county of Evreux without molestation. 
The count, being a turbulent man, absurdly rejected the 
offers voluntarily made him by the royal grace ; and, having 
weighty grounds for hostilities in the loss of the inheritance 
of his ancestors, he hurried in breathless haste from one 
castle to another by night, keeping every one in continual 
commotion by his restless activity, encouraging his con- 
federates, and warning them carefully to guard their for- 
tresses, to be on the watch against crafty spies, and, making 
irruptions throughout the neighbourhood with prudence and 
activity, pillage everything but the churches, and put down 
by force of arms all opposition. Such were the hostilities 
which he indefatigably urged for the recovery of the county 
to which he was heir,' but of which the king had deprived 
him. Ealph-the-Eed ^ w-as generally his most formidable 
opponent, and the greatest obstacle to the success of his 
enterprises. He was a brave knight, experienced in the art 
of war, and had rendered himself illustrious for his courage 
and daring. 

' Aiiceins, a very small commune near St. Evroult. Herbert d'Anceins 
sold the church and site to the monks at the same period just mentioned 
(vol. ii. 399). It would nppear from what our author here states that la 
Ferte-Fresnel was built on the dismemberment of the domsiin of Anceins. 

'^ Robert d'lvri, eldest son of Asceline Goel, lord of Ivri and Breval. 

» Ralph-the-Red, lord of Pont-Echanfrd. 



472 OEDEETCFS VITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XIII. 

On one occasion, when Lewis's army had made an irrup- 
tion into the Yexin, and, as is the case in war, the French, 
being the strongest, put their enemies to flight, the horse 
of Richard, the king's son,^ was killed under him, and the 
young prince was on the point of being made prisoner. 
!Balph, perceiving this, sprang from his horse without a 
moment's delay, and said to the king's son : " Mount 
instantly and flee, or you will be taken." The prince was 
scarcely gone when Ralph fell into the enemy's hands, but 
he was exchanged fifteen days afterwards for Wallon de 
Trie.- That knight was brother of Eiiguerrand de Trie, 
who, having been taken prisoner a short time before, lan- 
guished and groaned in the strict confinement of the king's 
dungeons, and soon afterwards died of his wounds and the 
suff"erings to which he had been exposed.^ Ralph, who 
preserved his fealty, was honoured by the king, and thence- 
forth esteemed one of his principal and intimate friends, 
who promised him high promotion if he lived. 

On another occasion, three lords of castles, Eustace,* 
Richer,^ and William de la Eerte,^ in Perch e, assembled 
their forces and made an irruption into ]N^ormandy for 
the sake of plunder as far as the source of the Ternant,^ 
setting fire to the houses in the village of Yerneuces, on the 
domains of St. Evroult. Ralph, seeing the smoke from 
Pont Echanfre, where he then was, immediately collected 
troops from all quarters, and hastened to give the enemy 
battle, for the king had stationed thirty men-at-arms at 
Sap,^ with as many at Orbec, to check the inroads of the 
freebooters, who assembled from all parts to pillage the 
country. Ralph, having drawn these together, attacked with 
this small band three hundred cavalry at the ford of the 
Charenton,^ and, recovering the vast booty which they were 

^ Richard, the second of Kina; Henry ""s natural sons, who was drowned 
in the wreck of the Blanche-Nef. 

"^ Wallon de Trie, Enguerrand's eldest brother. 

^ Another instance of Henry's inhumanity. See the note, p. 426. 

* Eustace de Breteuil. ^ Richer de Laigle. 

* William Fresnel was the eldest son of Richard, who was too old to 
engage in this expedition. 

' Fontem Ternanli. The Ternant gives its name to a hamlet a little 
below the church, and soon falls into the GuieL 

® A vilU'.ge near St. Evroult, the birthplace of one of the abbots. 

" We suppose that Ralph-the-Red, marching from his castle at Pont- 
Echanfr^, waited for the band of pillagers at the ford of Anciens. ^ 



A.D. 1119.] THE REVOLT QUELLED. 473 

carrying off, and taking some prisoners, pursued them as 
far as La Terte Fresnel ; and, unless this castle had offered 
them a near asylum, they would have suffered greater loss. 

Not long afterwards, this same brave knight made an 
amicable appeal to the king, humbly representing the 
advantages of his only showing himself before Fresnel, the 
garrison of which were as cowardly as they were trouble- 
some. In consequence, the king, at last, after Whitsuntide,^ 
gave way to the earnest entreaties of Hugh, and was induced 
to appear before the fortress from which the devastations of 
the territory of St. Evroult were carried on. On the king's 
arrival the people of Fresnel were struck with panic, and 
in their alarm consulted together what was to be done ; 
but Ealph-the-Eed, of Pont-Echanfre, having vigorously as- 
saulted the place, they laid the keys of the fortress at the 
king's feet, and, having submitted to his judgment on their 
rebellion, returned to their allegiance. 

About the end of June, the old Eichard came to St. 
Evroult, and, being ill, assumed the monastic habit. He 
died shortly afterwards in the beginning of July, and was 
buried in the monks' chapter-house, having given to the 
abbey one portion of the church of La Gonfriere "^ and the 
moiety of his tithes, and obtained from William, his eldest 
son, and his other children, the confirmation of his gift. 

Ch. XIV. The fortresses in Normandy garrisoned hy King 

Senry — The Norman lords who adhered to him. 
While these numerous and violent storms were fiercely 
raging. King Henry stoutly maintained his regal authority, 
and strictly guarded all his own fortresses, carefully selecting 
trusty garrisons to whom he committed the custody, so that 
no hostile manoeuvres might gain an entrance into them. 
Thus Eoueu, the metropolis, Bayeux, Coutances, Avranches, 
Seez, Arques, Nonancourt, Illiers, Caen, Ealaise, Exmes, 
Eechamp, Lillebonne, Yernon, Argentan, and other places 
under his dominion, were not subject to be wrested from 
him by insidious counsels. The loyal nobles, such as 
Eichard, earl of Chester, Eanulph de Bricasard, his cousin 
and successor, Ealph de Conches, AYilliam de Warrenne, 
William de Eoumare, William de Tankerville, Ealph de 

^ Whitsuntide fell that year on the 17th of May. , 
2 Between Fert^-Fresnel and St. Evroult.^ 



474 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XT. 

8aint-yictor,^ Walter Giffard, Nigel d'Aubigni, and William 
his brother, with other great lords, adhered to the king both 
in prosperity and adversity, disdaining the distinctions to 
be acquired by treason and perjury. Waleran and E-obert, 
the young sons of the earl of Mellent, were also faithful to 
their allegiance, and their vassals in their well-fortified 
castles obeyed all the royal commands, and stoutly resisted 
the incursions of his adversaries. Thus Pont-Audemer, 
Beaumont, Brionne, and Yatteville^ remained true to the 
king, and their lords, with their dependants, served him 
faithfully in the wars with all their forces. 

Ch. XY. Marriage of Willia7n, King Henry's eldest son, to 

the daughter of the count of Anjou — Henry does some acts 

of grace — Calls a council at Rouen, and hums a number of 

castles. 
In the month of May, William {he Etheling,^ the king's 
son, crossed the sea from England to Normandy, and the 
king, rejoiced at seeing him, presently made known what he 
had already determined in his own mind. Sending envoys 
to propose peace to the count of Anjou, he made a treaty of 
amity with him on favourable terms, and graciously invited 
him to his court. 

In the course of June, William the Etheling was married 
to the daughter of the count of Anjou at Lisieux. This 
illustrious union gave universal joy to all who were 
sighing for tranquillity ; and, although the young prince's 
thread of life was soon broken in the depths of the sea, the 
marriage for the time gave needful repose to hostile nations. 
Then, at the count's request, Henry admitted to his favour 
William Talvas, son of Eobert de ]3elesme, and restored to 
him the whole of his father's lands in Normandy. He 
granted to him Alen9on, Almeneches, and Yignats, except 
the citadels,^ which he reserved for garrisons of his own. 

1 Ralph de Saint- Victor must have belonged to the family of Mortimer. 
He was probably son of Ralph, and eldest brother of Hugh de Mortimer, 
the chief benefactor to the abbey of St. Victor. 

"^ Vattevile is on the left bank of the Seine, opposite Caudebec, and on 
the verge of the forest of Brotonne. 

3 We have often had occasion to observe that this Anglo-Saxon title of 
the heir to the throne was adopted by the Normans. 

* Dangiones, the donjons : a word sometimes adopted by English 
writers to describe the interior defences, the keep as it is also called, of a 
Norman castle. 



A.D. 1119.] PHENOMENA IN THE HEAYENS. 475 

Henry also, on the prayer of his son's futher-in-law, par- 
doned his cousin,' liobert de St. Ceneri, for having lately 
revolted and gone over to the enemy, restoring to him Mon- 
treuil and Echaufour.- 

The king called a meeting of the bishops and barons at 
Lisieux, and, informing them of the sudden death of Bald- 
win, earl of Flanders,^ gave orders to the clergy that the 
bells should toll, and prayers be offered, for the absolution 
and repose of his soul. One party in Normandy rejoiced, 
and the other lamented, that the earl of Flanders, the king's 
bitterest enemy, v^^as dead, and the count of Anjou, the lord 
of three cities,* had allied himself to the powerful monarch. 

During tlie summer, after waiting long and using every 
means to persuade the traitors to repent of their perjury, 
King Henry made a terrible expedition through Normandy, 
and set fire to Pont Saint-Pierre^ and other castles and 
vills of his enemies, taking severe revenge on them and 
their accomplices. 

Ch. XYI. An .account of some extraordinary natural 

phenomena. 

In the midst of these events Almighty Grod made known his 
wonders on the earth, that he might touch the hearts of 
those who witnessed them and correct their iniquities. In 
the preceding winter there had been deluges of rain, so that 
the rivers overflowed and the inundations rose in the houses 
to an unusual height. In consequence the inhabitants of 
Houen, Paris, and other cities, as well as of the country 
villages, beheld the waters of the Seine in flood inundating 
their houses and damaging the corn in their homesteads. 

The following Lent, a strong wind blew over the Seine 
and dried it up for a time,** so that any one might cross it 

* By his wife Adelaide. See vol. i. p. 426. 

"^ Montreuil-rArgiliier, and Echaufouf, near St. Evroult. 
^ The earl died on the 7th of June (see before p. 430), the council was, 
therefore, assembled about the end of that month. 

* Probably Angers, Saumur, and Tours. 

* It stood in the valley of the Andelle, and belonged to the lords of 
BreteuiU To account for its destruction by Henry I., we must suppose 
that it was still held by Eustace, but according to Ordericus (p. 467) Faci 
was the only castle he retained of all his paternal inheritance. 

•* The way in which Ordericus proposes to account for this phenomenon 
is very unsatisfactory. May it not rather be attributed to the level of the 
country having been raised by some internal convulsion, such as that whicli 



476 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.XTI. CH.XTII. 

from one bank to the other, if he had the courage to venture 
on so unusual a road. Paris was witness to this phenomenon, 
and was justly terrified by it. 

In the month of August, the moon, in its first quarter, ap- 
peared in the evening red as blood, and its disc looked like 
the bottom of a large cask to people in France. Afterwards 
it was cut in two by a streak the colour of sapphire, and 
spectators beheld between the two equal moieties a space 
such as, if a similar occurrence took place on the earth, would 
be considered a human path. After the space of an hour, 
the moon again appeared entire, and, the ruddy hue gradually 
fading, her young crescent shone as it usually does. 

At the same time a brilliant red light was observed 
shooting from Poissy by Mantes into JSTormandy, and during 
three nights this spectacle in the heavens was visible to 
many of the French. Those who witnessed it offered various 
interpretations, giving the turn that suited their own wishes 
to such as listened to their observations. The froward, in 
their folly, boasted of the future as well as the past, boldly 
affirming that King Lewis, who was then at Andelis with 
the French, would consume the Normans, like a flame, and 
reduce all Normandy to submission with his sharp-edged 
sword. The presumption of these arrogant men led them 
to interpret the prodigy with an insolence conformable to 
their own desires ; but the event was very different from 
what they expected. Leaving this, I now proceed with the 
thread of my narrative. 

Ch. XVII. Siege of Evreux hy Henry I. — St. Saviour's 
ahhey and the cathedral burnt down — The citadel sur- 
renders — On hearing it, King Lewis hreaJcs up the siege of 
Chateau-Neuf 

King Henry, determining to give no further indulgence 
to the rebels, entered the territory of Evreux and laid siege 
to that city at the head of a powerful army; but the garrison 
of the castle, joined by the citizens, making a stout resistance, 
he could not force an entrance. There were with him his 
son liichard, his nephew count Stephen, Ealph de Guader 

on the 10th of October, 1144, dried most of the streams in the south of 
England, and even extended ten miles into the sea. These phenomena 
are worthy the consideration of geolo,ij,i>ls. I'he last is mentioned by several 
cotemporar} historians, particularly Florence of Worcester and Brompton. 



A.D. 1119.] THE CATHEDEAL OF EVREUX BUKNT. 477 

and a great force of Normans. The king having called 
them all togetlier, thus addressed bishop Ouen : " You see, 
lord bishop, that we have been repulsed by the enemy, and 
there are no means of reducing them but by fire. But if 
we set the place on fire, the churches W'ill be burnt and 
much injury be done to the innocent. Now therefore, as 
the pastor of this church, after careful consideration, tell 
US wisely what is best to be done. If, by Grod's help, the 
fire secures our success, by bis aid we will repair the 
damages the church may receive, freely defraying the cost 
out of our own treasury, so that the house of Grod will, I 
think, be rebuilt, even better than it now is. " 

The pi'elate hesitated how he should reply in a case of so 
much difiiculty. He was at a loss what to decide as most 
conformable to the divine will, and doubted what was best for 
him to desire and propose. At length, after consulting men 
of prudence, he gave permission for firebrands to be thrown in 
and the city given to the flames, in order that it might be 
delivered from excommunicated traitors and restored to its 
rightful owners. In consequence, Ealph de Gruader set it 
on fire, on the north side first, and the flames spreading 
without obstacle in every quarter, as it was the dry season 
of autumn, caught all the buildings. The abbey of St. 
Saviour's, which belonged to nuns, was burnt to the ground, 
as well as the celebrated church of St. Mary, the glorious 
mother and Virgin, in which the bishop and clergy officiated 
and where the episcopal court of the diocese was held. Tlie 
king and all his nobles humbly gave the bishop pledges, in 
consequence of the destruction of the churches by fire, pro- 
mising him distinctly ample contributions from their wealth 
for the restoration of the buildings. 

The prudent king had made peace with Eobert Goel, as 
we have seen before, giving him the custody of the castle of 
Ivri to secure his fidelity, and receiving his brothers as hos- 
tages for his good behaviour. Ralph-the-Eed was the service- 
able mediator of this pacific agreement, being the knight's 
brother-in-law, and thus bound to him by the strictest ties. 
Before his expedition to Evreux, the king had given orders 
to Goel to attack Amauri and his countrymen in arms, and 
manoeuvre along the course of the Eure, near Ivri. He 
fixed an appointed day on M'hich these operations should be 
commenced. Ealph obeyed the king's commands in every 



478 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XYIIT. 

particular, and the affair turned out according to Henry's 
wishes. At length, seeing the city entirely in flames, he 
despatched a messenger to Eoger Goel with the intelligence 
of the event. Thereupon Robert shouted in the thick of the 
fight : " My lord Amauri, listen to the news I will tell you, 
which will bring you nothing but grief The king has burnt 
to-day the city of Evreux, and the garrison of the citadel 
are in fear of instant death." On hearing this, Amauri 
collected his troops, and returned home sorrowing for the 
ruin of his city. 

Philip and Florus,^ sons of Philip, king of France, and 
Amauri 's nephews by his sister Bertrade, William Pointel, 
Eichard of Evreux, son of Fulk the provost, and several 
other brave knights, defended the citadel. After the city 
was burnt their resistance was more secure and bold, for 
since the citizens had fled there was less to protect. The 
inhabitants of the ruined city dispersed themselves in all 
quarters, and having lost all they possessed, were forced to 
wander in wretchedness among the cottages of strangers. 
The king, with his usual moderation, sent word to the garri- 
son that if they would surrender the citadel he would par- 
don all their transgressions, adding many other promises ; 
and as they accepted his terms he hastened to take in hand 
other state affairs. However, he returned shortly afterwards 
in the night, at the head of a strong body of troops, and 
before dawn, with lighted torches, began to fortify his camp, 
and having completed the works he entrusted it to some 
brave warriors. Ralph-the-Eed and Simon de Molines^ were 
appointed to the command, with Gilbert d'Exmes and several 
others of approved valour. The king placed great confidence 
in them, employing them to check the enemy's irruptions 
and recover the country M'hich had been taken from him. 

Amauri,^ Eustace,* Odo de Gometz,^ Guy de Malvoisin,^ 
and other valiant knights, were stationed there and paid 

' Philip, count de Mantes, and Fleuri, who married the heiress of Bangis, 
were nt-phews of Amauri de Montfort as sons of his sister Bertrade. 

^ Simon, lord of Moulins-hi-Marche, after his brother Robert, was son 
of William de Moulins, by his second wife Duda, daughter of Robert earl 
of Melltnt. 

' Amauri de Montfort. * Eustace de Breteuil. 

* Odo dc Gometz, probably Gometz-Ie-Cbatel. 

^ Guy Mauvoisiii, lord of Boissi-Mauvoisin, deserved his name, for he 
was indeed a very bad neighbour. 



A.D. 1119.] THE STEOE OF THE CITADEL. 470 

visits to their brethren in arms with great daring and cou- 
rage, encouraging them by their presence, and frequently 
disturbing the royal camp by sharp attacks. The king's 
troops were never taken by surprise, always anticipating tlie 
manoeuvres of their insidious foe and meeting their adversa- 
ries, fierce as lions, ready armed with coats of mail and hel- 
mets, and exchanging blows gallantly with sword and spear. 
A^o one would yield to his antagonist, but each burned to 
distinguish himself; so that many fell in these daily encoun- 
ters. There the knight, named "William, son of Eoger de St. 
Lawrence, was slain, and his body was interred in the 
church of St. Victor the Martyr.^ He was of a noble house 
of the most illustrious barons of the district of Caux, and his 
bravery was often extolled among the greatest warriors of 
the Talou. In this manner much blood was shed in these 
constant feats of arms, and the cruel loss of life among the 
flower of the Norman youth was the cause of deep sorrow to 
numbers. 

King Lewis laid siege to the castle of Dangu, and Trench 
volour closely straitened the governor Eobert.^ At last, by 
the advice of some friends among the besiegers, he set the 
place on fire, and marching out left the enemy nothing but 
its ashes. The same week, putting himself at the head of 
the troops of G-isors,^ he made a sudden attack on the Erench, 
and carried ofi* much booty from Chaumont and the neigh- 
bouring villages. The king of France, greatly elated at the 
burning of Dangu, sat down before Chateau- JSTeuf,* a castle 
which William Rufus built at Fuscelmont on the river Epte, 
but he did not obtain the success he desired. Walter E-ib- 
lard made a vigorous resistance with the troops of King 
Henry, severely wounding the assailants with discharges of 

^ In the charter of Hugh de Mortemer in favour of tlie abbey of St. 
Victor, we find the njftnes of Adam de St. Lawrence, his mother Mabel, 
and his two sons William and Roger, both as benefactors and witnesses. 

St. Victor-en-Caux, in the airondissement of Dieppe. It w^as coiiverKnl 
from a priory to an abbey in 1 074. 

* It is not supposed that he was one of the family of Crispin, but a 
commandant appointed by the king. 

* Gisors, a strong frontier fortress of Normandy on the Epte belo^v St. 
Clair and Dan^u. Our author is right in stating that it was built by Wil- 
liam Rufus, although Du Plessis, in his Description de la Haute A'o/- 
mandie, attributes it to Henry II. 

* Chateauneuf-sur-Epte, near St. Clair on the same river, but on the 
right bank. 



4S0 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH. XVIII. 

arrows. At the end of fifteen days Amauri despatched a 
messenger to King Lewis informing liiin that Evreux had 
been reduced to ashes, and that he had suffered other 
disasters ; and earnestly demanding instant succour. On 
receiving this intelligence the king withdrew from the siege, 
burning his soldiers' huts, to the great joy of the enemy. 
Then Enguerrand de Trie, a very brave knight, was wounded 
in the brow, and some days afterwards, having lost his 
reason, died miserably. 

Ch. XYIII. The battle of Bremule, or Noyon, hetween Henry 
of England and Lewis of France — ^oon after Ids defeat 
Lewis makes a second imiption into Normandy^ hut retreats 
at the approach of Henry's army. 

Meanwhile King Lewis effected his retreat into Erance 
Avith the utmost expedition, but quickly counter-marched 
from Etampes into Normandy, attended by some brave 
knights. On the twentieth day of the month of August, 
King Henry having heard mass at Noyon marched out with 
his principal nobles on an expedition against the French, not 
knowing that the king of Erance had arrived at Andeli.^ 
The king of England rode at the head of a gallant troop of 
men-at-arms, and caused the harvest in the fields- about 
Etrepagni to be reaped by his rapacious soldiery, giving 
orders that great sheaves of corn should be carried on the 
backs of their horses to the castle of Lions. Four knights 
were stationed by the king on the top of Yerclive,^ to keep 
watch against any opposition that might be offered to his 
enterprise. These sentinels, observing the helmets and 
standards of troops moving towards Noyon, gave immediate 
notice to King Henry. 

^ Henry did not put himself in marching order until he heard that 
Lewis had retired. As long as he thought that LeAvis-le-Gros was in the 
Vexin, he prudently shut himself up at Rouen, although fire and pillage 
were carried within four miles of his capital city. The king of France, 
notwithstanding his corpulence, for which he is jeered by the Norman 
writers, was become very active. 

2 It may be thought strange that on the 20th of August the corn should 
be still standing on the plains of the Vexin; but it rr-ust be recollected that 
there, as well as elsewbere during the middle ages, it principally consisted 
of late crops, barley and oats. 

^ This place standing on an isolated hill, near ificouis, commands the 
whole plain of the iSorman Vexin to a vast distance. 



A.D. 1119.] MARCH OF HENRY AND LEWIS. 481 

The same day King Lewis marched from An deli with the 
French army, making frequent complaints to his attendants 
that they could not meet with the king of England in an 
open field, not knowing that the king was close at hand. 
Lewis rode in haste with his brilliant cavalry towards 
IS'oyon, expecting that the castle would be given up to him 
the same day, by a concerted treason, but the affair turned 
out very differently. Victory did not favour those who were 
swelling with pride and eager for the fight, but routed and 
put them to flight when they w^ere exulting in the prospect 
of triumph. Burchard de Montmoreuci,^ and some other 
prudent men, dissuaded Lewis from fighting in Normandy, 
but the people of Chaumont urged him furiously to give 
battle. William the chamberlain^ also tried to prevent Henry 
from enagging in the conflict, but AVilliam de Warrenne ^ 
and Roger de Bienfaite* gave him great encouragement. 

At last, it was generally understood, by the exchange of 
messengers, and by rumours which spread the intelligence far 
and wide, that both kings were in presence at the head of 
their armies, and, if they wished, battle might be joined. 
The Erench had by this time reached the neighbourhood of 
Noyon, and had set fire to a granary belonging to the monks 
of Boucheron,^ the smoke of which was visible to the 
English as it rose in the air. Near Mount Verclive there 
is an open ground and vast plain, called by the inhabitants 
of the country Bremule.® King Henry descended to it 
with five hundred cavalry, the warlike hero having put on 
his armour and skilfully disposed his mailed troops. He 

* Bouchard III. de Montmorenci. He was still living in the year 1124. 

* William de Tankerville (the Normans spelt the name Tancarville), the 
same person who the year before stopped Henry's expedition against 
Laigle by a false alarm. 

' William de Warrenne, second of that name, earl of Surrey. 

* Roger de Bienfaite, lord of Hommet, which he received in exchange 
for Brionne. 

* The ioundation of this priory, which was a cell of St. Evroult, is men- 
tioned before, p. 419. Our author here speaks of a grange which stood on 
the plain. 

* This plain belongs to the commune of Gaillard bols. and is traversed 
by the pulilic road fiom Rouen to Paris. To the south of this road lies 
the farm of Bidinule which appears to have bteii the central point of the 
battle, and vave it its name, at least in the French accounts; some 
English historians, calling it the ba tie of Noyon, Henrv'a head quarters, 

VOL. III. I I 



482 ORDElilCUS VITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XTIII. 

had with him his two sons, E-obert and Kichard, illustrious 
knights, and three counts, Henry d' Eu, William de 
Warrenne, and Walter Giffard. The king was also supported 
by E-oger, son of E-oger, and Walter d'Aufay, his own 
cousins,^ as well as by William de Tankerville, AVilliam de 
Eoumare, Nigel d'Aubigni, and several others who may 
be compared to the Scipios, the Mariuses, and the Catos, the 
Eoman censors, for their civil virtues and knightly valour, 
as the result proved. Edward of Salisbury^ carried the 
standard, whose approved intrepidity was in high renown, 
and never failed him even when fighting to the death. 

Lewis having come in sight of what he had long desired, 
called up four hundred knights, who were ready close at hand, 
and exhorted them to do battle valiantly in defence of justice 
and the liberty of the kingdom, and not to suffer the glory of 
the French arms to be tarnished by their cowardice. There, 
William Clito, the son of Eobert, duke of Normandy, armed 
himself for the liberation of his father from his long 
imprisonment, and the recovery of the dominions of his 
ancestors. There also, Matthew, count de Beaumont,^ Guy 
de Clermont,* Osmund de Chaumont,^ William de Garlande, 
seneschal of Erance,^ Peter de Maule,' Philip de Mont-Brai," 

three leagues distant. Duchesne's text calls the place Brenneville, but the 
orio;inal MS. gives the right name Brenmula. 

Near it, in the commune of Verclive, is a spot called Le Coupe-Gueule, 
from some incident in the engagement. 

^ Walter d'Aufay was Henry's cousin in two ways; by his great grand- 
mother Papia, sister of Duke Robert I., and by his mother Beatrix, cousin 
of Queen Matilda. Walter was probably the third son of the Walter 
, d'Aufay and Avicia, some account of whom, with their epitaphs, is given 
in vol. ii. pp. 268—270. 

■■' This person had large possessions at Salisbury and in that neighbour- 
hood. His daughter Matilda, by order of William Rufus, married Hum- 
phrey de Bohun, who had in her right part of their vast domains. The 
rest were inherited by Edward's son, Walter of Salisbury. 

* Matthew I., count of Beaumont-sur-Oise, chamberlain of France. 

•• Guy de Clermont, second son of Hugh I., count de Clermont. 

' Osmond de Chaumont, husband of the heiress of Quitri. 

^ William de Garlande, second of that name, seneschal of France. 

' Peter de Maule, second of that name, who married the daughter of 
Manasses, count de Guines. See vol. ii. p. 233. 

" For Philip de Montbrai, the reading should be Paganus de Monfjai. It 
is the more singular that our author should have mistaken the name of this 
person in the present instance, as he has properly named him not long 
before (b. x. c. iv. p. 211). His chief seat, as befnre remarked was at 
Montjai, near Villevaude, and his real name was Alberic or Aubrey, but ha 



A.D. AUGUST, 1119.] BATTLE OF NOYON. 483 

and Burchard de MontmorencI, prepared themselves for the 
battle. Of the Normans, there were Baldric de Brai,' 
Wiih'am Crispin,^ and some others in the ranks of the 
French army. All these assembled at Bremule, swelling 
with pride and ready to encounter the Normans. 

In this battle the first charge was made hj the French 
with great gallantry, but as they advanced without order, 
they were soon overpowered and turned to flight. Eichard 
the king's son, and a hundred horse were drawn out in 
battle array, but the rest with the king held the field on 
foot. William Crispin with eighty knights, who rode in 
the van, made the first attack on the Normans, but their 
horses being soon killed, they were all surrounded and held 
in check. Then Godfrey de Perans, with the troops of 
the Yexin, made a resolute assault, which caused the English 
army to stagger and fall back a little, but those veteran 
warriors soon recovered their courage and strength, and 
Burchard, Osmond, and Alberic de Mareuil,^ and several 
others, being thrown from their horses, were taken prisoners. 
The French perceiving this, said to the king: "Eighty of our 
knights, who were in the van of the army, are nowhere to 
be seen. The enemy is more than our match in numbers 
and strength. Burchard, Osmond, and some others of our 
best knights, are already taken; our troops are generally 
giving way, and their ranks are thinned. Eetreat, my lord, 
w^e pray, ere we are exposed to irreparable ruin." 

At these words Lewis consented to retire, and himself fled 
at a gallop vnih Baudri-du-Bois.* The victors took one 

appears under that of Paganus de Mont-Gaio in the chartulary of the 
priory of Long-Pont. He was taken prisoner by the IVormans, as we have 
already seen, in 1097, and he formed an alliance with Count Theobald, 
against Lewis-le-Gros, in 1112, but reaped nothing from that war but the 
loss of his castle of Livri, near Melucn, which, we are told, caused him 
much regret. He died before the year 1127, and Henry de Chatillon, the 
wife of his daughter Ermengarde, assumed the title of lord of Montjai, 
which his posterity preserved for a long period. 

* Baudri de Bray has been already noticed. This place, situate on an 
inland in the Epte, made part of Normandy and the department of the 
Euretill 1812 or 1813. 

' William Crispin, or Crespin, was lord of Etrepagni. 
' Probably Alberic de Rouci, viscount of Mareuil-sur-Marne, nephew of 
Beatrix de Rouci, countess of Mortagne. 

* Probably the same person Ordericus has just called Baudri de Brai. 

I I 2 



484 OEDEMCTJS VITALIS. [e,XII. Cn.XTIII. 

hundred and forty prisoners, and pursued the rest to the 
very gates of Andeli. The French troops, who had advanced 
with pomp by the high road, now fled in confusion by various 
by-ways. "William Crispin who, with his followers, had been 
surrounded as before mentioned, having caught sight of King 
Henry whom he mortally hated, charged at him through the 
throng of combatants and struck him fiercely on the head 
Avith his sword, but the chevet of the illustrious prince's 
hauberk warded off the blow. Koger,^ Richard's son, instantly 
bore the bold assailant to the earth, and throwing himself 
upon him protected him from the king's friends who would 
have killed him on the spot in revenge for the insult. But 
so many thronged upon Richard that he had great difficulty 
in saving his fallen adversary. It was a criminal and au- 
dacious act to raise the hand and strike with the sword 
the head which had been anointed by the ministry of the 
bishop with the holy chrism, and on which the royal crown 
had been placed amidst the acclamations of the people, 
lauding and giving thanks to the Lord God ^ 

In the battle between the two kings, in which nearly nine 
hundred knights were engaged, I have ascertained that three 
only were slain. This arose from their being entirely 
covered with steel armour, and mutually sparing each other 
for the fear of God and out of regard for the fraternity of 
arms, and aimed less at killing the fugitives than making 
them prisoners. Christian warriors, they did not thirst for 
their brothers' blood, but exulted in the victory which God 
gave them for the good of holy church and the security of 
the faithful. The brave Guy, Osmond, Burchard, and 
William Crispin, with several others, were taken on the field, 
as I have said before, and conducted to Noyon, where the 
English army retired the same day. Noyon is three leagues 
from Andeli, and at that time the whole country was a 
desert in consequence of the wars which raged so furiously. 
It was in the plain between the two places that the princes 
suddenly met, and the combatants shouted their war-cries, and 
the clash of arms was heard, and noble barons bit the dust. 
There was a fief called du Bos, or du Bosc, in the commune of Baude- 
mont, and the lords of Brai often assumed that name. 

1 Roger de Bienfaite. 

^ Henry of Huntingdon's account of this battle for the most part corre- 
sponds with our author's, but it supplies some additional details. See 
Bohn's Antiq. Lib. pp. 247, 248. 



A.D.AUGTTST, 1119.] EESTJLTS OF THE BATTLE. 485 

The king of France in his solitary flight ^ost his way in 
a wood/ but he lighted by chance on a peasant to whom his 
person was unknown. The king earnestly entreated him, 
adding many promises to which he pledged himself on his 
oath, to show him the nearest road to Andeli, or to be his 
guide to the town, for a great reward. Sure of being M'ell 
recompensed, the peasant consented to conduct the trembling 
prince, who feared as much meeting some traveller who 
might betray him, as being overtaken by the pursuing 
enemy, who would make him prisoner. At last the peasant, 
seeing the royal guard respectfully coming from Andeli to 
meet the prince, making light of the reward he obtained, was 
much grieved at finding what a vast recompense he had lost 
from his ignorance of the rank of the person he saved. 

King Henry purchased the standard of King Lewis from 
the soldier who took it for twenty silver marks,^ and kept it 
as a memorial of the victory Heaven had granted him. The 
next day he sent back Lewis's charger, with the saddle and 
bridle and all the equipments, as became a king. "William 
the Etheling also returned his palfrey to William Clito his 
cousin, and at the instance of his prudent father added 
other presents serviceable to an exile. The king dispersed 
his prisoners, sending them for custody to different castles; 
Burchard, Hervey de Gisors,^ and some others who were 
vassals of both kings, he did not reserve for ransom, but 
liberated at once. The illustrious Guy of Chaumont fell sick 
at Eouen, where he died, to the king's grief who had kept 
the gallant warrior in prison. Osmond, the wicked old 
knight, was conducted to Arques,* and, bound in chains and 
fetters as he deserved, was closely confined till peace was 
restored between the sovereigns. His infamy in protecting 
thieves and robbers, to give greater scope to their iniquities, 
reached the ears of people in Illyrium. He even did not 

' Probably in the woods of Musegros. 

- According to M. Delisle's calculation, before referredito, the silver mark 
being worth fifty-two francs, the sum paid was equivalent to 1040 francs. 

^ Hervey de Gisors was son of Theobald Paganus, to whom Robert 
Curthose restored the castle of Gisors, which was taken from him by Henry 
I. It may be conceived that the king of England might consider him ;is 
half-Norman, half-French, but the same observation is inapplicable to 
Bouchard de Montmorenci, who held nothing, as far as we know, under 
Henry. 

* The castle of Arques. 



<i8G OEDEllICUS YITALIS, [b.XII. CH.XIX* 

scruple to strip pilgrims, paupers, widows, and defenceless 
monks and clerks, tormenting them without remorse in 
various ways. 

Peter de Maule and other fugitives threw away their 
cognizances^ to escape recognition, and adroitly mixing with 
their pursuers joined in their cries of triumph, and sounded 
the praises of King Henry and his troops with pretended 
satisfaction. Eobert de Courci, the younger,' followed up tlie 
French into the heart of the burgh, where he was seized in 
the throng of fugitives, mistaking them for his own party. 
He was the only Norman taken ; and that, not in escaping 
like a coward, but, alone in the enemy's town, he was sur- 
rounded by numbers and thrust into prison. 

The news of the disaster which had befallen the Erench 
in Normandy spread far and wide, and the intelligence was 
received in all the provinces on this side the Alps either 
with sorrow or joy. Those who had exalted themselves 
were covered with shame, and the combatants present in the 
battle sought various pretexts in reply to the scorn which 
was heaped upon them, and forged different falsehoods, 
according to circumstances in excuse of their disgrace. 

Ch. XIX. The French mahe a fresh irruptio7i into Normandy 
— King Lewis, foiled before Breteuil, returns to France. 

King Lewis returned to Paris sorrowing for the loss of the 
one hundred and forty knights he had gaily led to Noyon 
and who were now captives. Amauri,^ who was not present 
in the battle, went to comfort him, and when the king 
lamented the rout and imprisonment of his soldiers, and 
gave a full account of the affair, Amauri said: " Let not my 
lord afflict himself for this disaster, as such are the chances 
of war, and they have often been the lot of the most 
celebrated generals. Fortune is like a revolving wheel ; it 
overturns in a moment those whom it has suddenly raised, 
and on the other hand frequently lifts higher those it has 
jDrostrated and rolled in the dust. Now, therefore, taking 
into your consideration the resources of France, collect an 

^ Cogniliones. This passage bears on the disputed question of the period 
at which armorial ensigns came into use as personal distinctions. It looks 
very like their having been borne in this battle. 

^ Robert, second of that name, lord of Courci, near Croissanville. 

2 Amauri de Montfort. 



A.D. 1119.] TEENCn LEVY EN MASSE. 487 

immense force from all quarters, profit by the sound advice 
J give you to exert yourself to repair the losses inflicted on 
our reputation and power. Let the bishops and counts 
and other lords of the realm be rallied round you, and the 
priests with the whole body of their parishioners marcli 
under your standard, that an army of the commons may 
avenge our wrongs on the common enemy. Por my part, 
although I did not take any part in your late expedition, I 
will join you with all my vassals and render you counsel 
and aid, with safe guidance. 

" I have fortified a house at Cintrai,^ where "Walkeliu de 
TanneP and other faithful friends expect my arrival, and 
defend the neighbouring country on my behalf against the 
garrison of Breteuil. We can assemble there in security, 
and from thence an attack may be made on Breteuil, which 
is in the heart of Normandy. If we can reduce that fortress, 
we will restore Eustace, who was disinherited for having 
espoused our cause ; and my nephew, Ealph de Conches, will 
be on our side with all his vassals and fortresses. He is in 
possession of the strong castles of Conches, Toeni, Portes,^ 
and Acquigni, and well-tried barons hold under him, who 
alone will greatly augment our force. Ealph is now shut 
up in Breteuil, and does not at present render us any 
assistance, because he is afraid that by so doing he may 
expose his territories to devastation." Encouraged by this 
discourse the king resolved to act according to the advice 
given him by the lord of whom we are speaking. Accord- 
ingly, he despatched messengers in all haste to convey his 
summons to the bishops. They cheerfully obeyed the royal 
commands, and issued sentences of excommunication against 
all the priests in their dioceses, and their parishioners, who 
should not hasten to join the king's expedition on the day 
appointed, and use all their efibrts to crush the refractory 
Normans. 

' Citrai, nearBreteuil. 

2 There are a number of places in Normandy bearing the name of Tan- 
nei, particularly four between Orbec and Broglie, and four hamlets near 
St. Evroulr. Our author mentions in his thirteenth book, under the date 
of 1138, a person named Alan de Taneto, who had lands at Cisai, in the 
latter district, as well as, it would appear, near Pont-Audemer in the 
former, and it is conjectured that he was the father of the Walkelin de 
Tannei here mentioned. 

3 Portes near Conclics. The other places have been already mentioned. 



48S OEDEKICUS YITALIS. [b.XII CH.XIX. 

In consequence, the people of Burgundy, Berri, Auvergne ^ 
and Champagne, with those of the territory of Paris, and 
Orleans, the Vermandois, the Beauvoisis, Laon, the Gatinois, 
and many others, flew to arms with eagerness, like wolves to 
their prey, and had scarcely left their homes when they 
began to pillage all that they could lay hands on in their 
own country. The disorderly multitude was so bent on 
rapine, that they profanely robbed the churches on their 
road, and treated the monks and clergy, who were their own 
countrymen, as if they had been enemies. The royal autho- 
rity was of no avail in executing justice on these marauders ; 
episcopal censure was benumbed, and every one did what 
he would, as chance suggested, with impunity. The bishops 
of Noyon, Laon, and several others, were present at this 
expedition, but such was their hatred of the Normans that 
they permitted their people to commit every sort of outrage. 
They even allowed consecrated places to be violated, under 
the colour of their divine authority, that this licence might 
increase the number of their followers, and that by winking 
at their proceedings, good or bad, they might be encouraged 
against the enemy. 

Under these circumstances. King Lewis assembled at 
BreteuiP vast bodies of men from Peronne, Nesle, Noyon, 
Lille, Tournai, Arras, Grournai, Clermont,^ and all the pro- 
vinces of France and Flanders, prepared to restore to 
Eustace all he had lost, and to reinstate in their former 
possessions the other banished lords who were adherents of 
William the exile. Balph the Breton'' with his troops boldly 
opposed the march of the enemy, engaging them with vigour, 
and causing them lamentable losses by the fierce blows dealt 
on them with lance and sword. He caused all the gates of 
the castle to be thrown open at their approach, but no 
one ventured to force his way through the open doors, the 
astonishing courage of their opponents sufficiently repelling 
them. The battle raged furiously outside the three gates, 
and brave warriors fell in great numbers on both sides. 

^ This levy en masse was tumultuous enough without the people of 
Burgund)^ Berri, and Auvergne, who must be erased from the list. 

- We shall find that this siege commenced on the 17th of September. 

^ It will be observed that the only forces specified are those from places 
subject to the king, or Flemings engaged in the cause of the Pretender. 

'^ Ralph de Guader, here called Ralph the Breton, because he was a 
native of Gael or Guader in Brittanv. 



^^■JII. A.D. 1119.] THE FRENCH EETEEAT FEOM BRETEUIL. 



'er»iie' 
-<■ and 

II taej 

-it on 
■ tlieir 
if m 

lUtllO. 



480 



^ The kmg of England, receiving intelligence of this fresh 
inroad of the French into Normandy, despatched his son 
Richard with two hundred knights to the relief of Ealph de 
Guader, giving directions to the bold and active knights, 
Kalph-the-Eed and Rualod d'Avranches,^ to conduct their 
march. The royal troops arrived while the fight was hottest, 
and, upon their being observed, the French who were al- 
ready exhausted, began to give way. The gallant Ealph flew 
from gate to gate, frequently changing his armour that he 
niight not be recognized. He bore down that day several 
distinguished warriors, and having dismounted them, be- 
stowed their horses on such of his comrades as needed them, 
thus gaining glory through all ages, among the bravest 
soldiers, by his prowess in arms. 

A Fleming, remarkable for his fine person and gallant 
bearing, struck to the ground Ealph-the-Eed, Luke de Barre,- 
and other valiant knights, exulting with much arrogance in 
taking their horses, but he was not wise enough to foresee 
the melancholy fate which speedly awaited him. He at- 
tacked the intrepid Breton without the usual precaution, 
mistaking him for a common soldier, but it was not long 
before Ealph gave him a mortal wound which brought him 
to the ground, and being made prisoner in the presence of 
many spectators, he was thrown into the dungeon at Bre- 
teuil, where he died fifteen days afterwards. 

The king of England, with a great body of troops, followed 
his son Eichard and the others he had despatched in advance, 
prepared to fight another battle against the many thousands 
in the French army, if he found them on his territories. 
They had expected to reduce the fortress by the length of 
their siege, but the hopes they entertained were frustrated 
the same day they marched to the place full of arrogance, and 
they were forced to retreat into France, repulsed with shame 

Rualod seems to be a Breton form of the name Roland. This person, 
son of William d'Avranches, acquired by his marriage with Matilda de 
Mandeville the lordship of Folkstone in Kent, and, according to our 
English genealogists, was living in 1147. A charter of his wife Matild.i 
and another of his son William, are given in the Monasticon A?igUcanum. 
The family did not become extinct in England till a late period of the 
thirteenth century. 

2 Luke, lord of la Barre in Ouche. We shall presently find King Henry 
putting out the eyes of this troubadour knight for having treated him 
satirically in his poetical compositions. 



490 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [e.XII. CK.XIX. 

and loss. By God's just judgment, the priests returned inglo- 
rious, and overwhelmed with fears, losses, sorrow, and confu- 
sion, because they had suffered the consecrated places, which 
they ought to have protected by ecclesiastical censures, to 
be defiled and indecently violated by greedy robbers. 

Then William de Chaumont, the king's son-in-law,^ and 
several aspiring youths, irritated at having gained nothing 
at Breteuil, made an incursion, to the number of two hun- 
dred, towards the castle of Tillieres, to obtain for them- 
selves either profit or glory. However Gilbert, the castellan 
of Tillieres,^ lay in ambush with his people in a place of 
concealment, watching all the roads that his farms might not 
be pillaged by these freebooters. When the French came 
up he suddently burst upon them from his ambuscade, and 
made William, the king's son-in-law, his prisoner ; for whose 
ransom he received two hundred silver marks. He also 
took some of his comrades, and put the rest shamefully to 
flight. 

France was in great distress when she found the pride of 
her sons humbled, and reckoned her losses, the shame of 
future generations, recently sustained in Normandy. King 
Henry, however, the lover of peace, was crowned with glory, 
God having graciously listened to the prayers of the church on 
his behalf, and given him repeated victories over his enemies. 
Eestored prosperity favoured him with her smiles, while she 
struck the cruel robbers with alarm, and caused the public 
enemies bitter repentance for their fruitless revolt. 

' This royal alliance of William de Chaumont, which was long consi- 
dered doubtful, has been fully confirmed by a document in the chartulary 
of St. Peter at Chartres, lately published by M. Gu6rard (t. ii. p. 640). 
It is dated the 9th of April preceding (1119), and it appears from it that 
the marriage took place late in 1117. 

It is clear that the lady must have been a natural daughter of Lewis-le- 
Gros, as that prince only married Adelaide de Maurienne in 1115, and his 
former marriage with Lucienne was dissolved without having been consum- 
mated. 

In the chartulary of St. Wandrille there is a charter, unaappily without 
date, from which it appears that Osmond II. of Chaumont had two sons, 
William and Osmond III., who were grandsons of Nicholai de Quetre. 
The Norman writers, with Ordericus, spell the name improperly, Otmnnd. 

^ Gilbert Crispin, castellan of Tillieres. Ordericus always spells this 
name Crespin, and is followed by his French editors; but it is better known 
to the English reader under the form adopted in this translation. 



A.D. 1119.] HEVERENCE TOR A CROSS. 491 

Ch. XX. A freebooter'' s reverence for a luay-side cross — King 

Henry restores order in the district of Ouche. 
Higher de Laigle carried off Odo from Cisai/ with all the 
booty he found there, on the fifteenth of the calends of Octo- 
ber [17th September], the day on which the king appeared 
before Breteuil with so many thousands troops, and reaped 
nothing but dishonour and wounds. That young soldier 
performed an action in this expedition which is worthy of 
being handed down to future ages. While the inhabitants 
of Grace and the neighbouring villages were in pursuit of 
the robbers, considering by what means they might regain 
their cattle, either by force or ransom, the bold troopers, 
facing about, charged them, and soon putting them to the 
rout, pursued them in turn. The peasants having no 
means of defending themselves against an armed band, nor 
any strong place in which they could take refuge, and 
seeing a wooden cross by the side of the road, all prostrated 
themselves together before it. Richer, perceiving this, 
struck with the fear of Grod, and touched with tender love 
for his Saviour, piously reverenced his cross. He therefore 
commanded his party to permit these trembling creatures 
to remain safe ; while, in order that they might suffer no 
injury, his own troops continued their march. Thus, from 
fear of his Creator, the noble youth spared nearly a hundred 
peasants, from whom he might have exacted a considerable 
ransom if he had recklessly ventured to seize them. The 
same week he was reconciled with the king, through the 
mediation of his uncle Rotrou,^ and recovered all his father's 
lands both in England and Normandy. 

Then the king, at the head of his troops, visited the district 
of Ouche, and marched against his enemies who held Glos 
and Lire. At that time Roger, son of William, who was son 
of Barnon,^ commanded at Glos, and Arnold du Bois* was 

^ Cisai, near Gace, mentioned in a preceding note. 
^ Rotrou II. count de Perche. 

* Respecting William de Glos, son of Barnon, see vol. ii. p. 516 ; where 
a not very flattering portrait is drawn of this servant of the house of Bre- 
teuil. Our auth(tr there mentions his wife Beatrix and his son Roger, the 
person here referred to. 

* This family, which has left its name to the commune du Bois-Arnaud 
in the canton of Rugles, was one of the oldest attached to the loids of 
Breteuil. As early as the charter of foundation of Lire by William Fitz- 
Osberne, we find these Arnolds holding the rank of their iitewards. Four 



492 ORDEEiciJS yiTALis. [b.xii. en. XX. 

castellan of Lire. These men, perceiving that the king's 
power crushed all who resisted him, and that every hope of 
success from Eustace and Amauri failed, conferred with 
Ralph,^ who was their neighbour, and, having obtained 
favourable terms from the king through his intervention, 
surrendered the castles they had so long faithfully guarded. 
The king restored them to Ealph de Guader, and the 
country about Ouche being thus restored to tranquillity, he 
returned to Rouen where he offered thanks to God. 

Meanwhile, Ralph de Guader, who had his suspicions of 
Ealph de Conches, and could not visit his own domains on 
the other side of the Seine without crossing Guader's 
territories, granted him Pont-St. -Pierre and the valley of 
Pitres," under fealty to himself, and an engagement to 
defend the state against the public enemy with all his forces. 
The king also gave the rents of Glos to Ealph-the-Red, 
having found his services useful on many occasions, and cal- 
culating that he might rely on them in time to come. 

generations of this family are included among the benefactors to the colle- 
giate church of Leicester, founded in 1107 for regular canons by Robert 
earl of Mellent. 

^ The same Ralph-the-Red, lord of Echaufre, so often mentioned. His 
castle was about three leagues from Lire, but only two from Glos. 

* On the left bank of the Seine, near its junction with the Andelle. 



END OF YOL. III. 



3. HADDON AND SON, PRINTERS, CASTLE STREET, FINSEt'RT. 





DATE DUE 




■IPC * j ■ 


mr 






mra ^- - 


' --wt^U 






HOV 1 


m 






























































































































GAVkORO 






rniNTCOINU.ft.A. 










3 5002 00234 9228 



?S^ecdls:^s?!ca, h,story of England an 



BR 252 .07 1853 3 

Ordericus Vitalis, 1075- 
11437 

The ecclesiastical history 
of England and Horwandy 



Op^ 116519 



