BOHK'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



tethe's Works, "ranslated into Eng- 
lish. In 6 vol8. 

Vols. 1. and 2. Autobiography, 13 Books ; 
and Travels In Italy, Krance, and 
Switzerland. Portrait. 

Vol. 3. Faust, Iphigenta, Torqnato 
Tasso, Egtnont, &c., by Miss SWAN- 
wics ; and Gb'tz von Berlichir.geH, by 
Sir WALTER SOOTT. Fronts-wee. 

Vol. 4. Novels and Tales. 

Vol. 5. Wilhelm Meister'r Apprentice- 
ship. 

egory's (Dr.) Evidences, Doctrines, 

d Duties of the Christian Religion. 

lizot's Representative Governmeut. 

I'ransLited by A. R. SCOBLK. 

History of the English Revo- 

ution of 1640. Translated by WILLIAM 
-LAZUTT. Portrait. 

History of Civilization. Trans- 
ated by WILLIAM HAZLITT. In 3 vols. 
'ortrait. 

alitt's Table Talk. A New Edition 
a one volume. 

Lectures on the Comic 

Vriters, and ou the English Poets. 

Lectures on the Literature 

f the Age of Elizabeth, and on Characters 
f Shakespear's Plays. 

Plain Speaker. 5s. 

ill's dtev. Robert) Miscellaneous 

Vorks and Remains, with Memoir by 
)r. GHFXSOBT, and an Essay on his Cha- 
acter by JOHN FOSTEK. Portrait. 

ine's Poems, complete, from the 
jet-man, by E. A. BOWRING, 5*. 

angary: its History and Revolu- 

ions; with a Memoir of Kossuth from 
aw and authentic sources. Portrait. 

atchir.son (Colonel), Memoirs of, 
with the Siege of Latbam House. 

ones's (G. P. R.) Richard Coeur-de- 

> ing of England. I'ortraits. 2 vols. 
* Louis XIV. Portraits. 2 vols. 

mius's Letters, with Notes, Ad- 
ditions, and an Index. In 2 vols. 

Amartine's History of the Girond- 

isw. Portraits. In 3 vols. 

Restoration of the Monarchy, 

with Index. Portraits. In 4 vols. 

-- French Revolution of 1848, 

witli a fine frontispiece. 

jimb's (Charles) Elia and Eliana. 

Complete Kditlon. 

aai'a History of Painting. Trai.s- 
<3 lioscoE. Portraits. In 3 vois. 



Locke's Philosophical Works, con- 
taining an Essay ou the Human Under- 
standing, &c., wilh Notes and Index by 
J. A. St. JOHN. 1'vrtro.it. In 2 vols. 

Life and Letters, with Ex- 
tracts from his Common-Place Books, by 
Lord KING. 

Luther's Table Talk. Translated by 
WIUJAM HAZLITT. Portrait. 

Machiavelli's History of Florence, 

The t'rince, and other Works. Portrait. 

Menzel's History of Germany, Por- 
traits. In 3 vols. 

Michelet's Life of Luther. Translate** 
by WILLIAM HAZLITT. 

Roman Republic. Translated 

by WILLIAM HAZLrer. 

French Revolution, with In- 



dex, frontispiece. 
Mignet's French Revolution from 

1789 to 1814. Portrait. 

Milton's Prose Works, with Index. 

Portraits. In 5 vols. 

Mitford's (Miss) Our Village. Im- 
proved Ed., complete. Illustrated. 2 vols. 

Neander's Church History. Trans- 
lated : with General Index. In 10 vols. 

Life of Christ. Translated. 

First Planting of Christi- 
anity, and Antignostikus. Translated. In 
2 vols. 



History of Christian Dogmas. 



Translated. In 2 vols. 



Christian Life in the Early 

and Middle Ages, including his ' Light in 
Dark Places.' Translated. 

Ockley's History of the Saracens. 

Revised and completed. Portrait. 

Pearson on the Creed. New Edition. 
With Analysis and Notes. Double Vol. 5s. 

Ranke's History of the Popes. Trans- 
lated by K FoaTEs. In 3 vols. 

Servia and the Servian Re- 
volution. 
Reynolds' (Sir Joshua) literary 

Works. Portrait. In 2 vols. 

Roseoe's Life and Pontificate of 

Leo X., with the Copyright Notes, aud an 
Index. Portraits. In 2 vols. 

Life of Lorenzo de Medici, 

with the Copyright Notes, &c. Portrait. 

Russia, History of, by WALTER K. 
KKU.T. Portraits. In 2 vols. 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Schiller's Works. Translated into 
English. In 4 vote. 

Vol.. 1. Thirty Years' War, and Revolt 
of the Netherlands. 

Vol. 2. Continuation of the Revolt 
of the Netherlands; Wallenstein's 
Camp ; the Piccolomini ; the Deatn 
of Wallensteln; and William Tell. 

Vol. 3. Don Carlos, Mary Stuart, Maid 
of Orleans, and Bride of Messina. 

Vol. 4. The Robbers, Flesco, Love and 
Intrigue, and the Ghost-Seer. 

Schlegel's Philosophy of Life and 

of Language, translated by A. J. W. MOB- 



History of Literature, An- 
cient and Modern. Now first completely 
translated, with General Index. 

Philosophy of History. 

Translated by J. B. ROBEKTSOK. Por- 
trait.- 

Dramatic Literature. Trans- 
lated. Portrait. 

Modern History. 

.Esthetic and Miscellaneous 



Works. 

Sheridan's Dramatic Works and 
Life. Portrait. 



Sismondi's Literature of the South 

of Europe. Translated by Roscoe. Por- 
traits. In 2 vols. 
Smith's (Adam) Theory of the Moral 

Sentiments; with his Essay on the First 
Formation of Languages. 

Smyth's (Professor) Lectures on 

Modern History. In 2 vols. 

r~ Lectures on the French Re- 
volution. In 2 vols. 

Sturm's Mooning Communings with 
God, or tts^otioual Meditations lor Every 
Day in the Year. 

Taylor's (Bishop Jeremy) Holy Living 

and Dying. Portrait. 

Thierry's Conquest of England by 

the Normans. Translated by WILUAW 
HAZLITT. Portrait. In 2 vols. 

Tiers Etat, or Third Estate, 

in France. Translated by F. B. WELLS. 
2 vols. In one. 5s. 

Vasari's Lives of the Painters, 

Sculptors, and Architects. Translated by 
Mrs. FOSTER, i vols. 
Wesley's (John) Life. By ROBERT 

SouTHEr. New and Complete Edition. 
Double volume. 5s. 

Wheatley on the Book of Common 
Prayer. Frontispiece. 



II. 



Uniform with Bonn's Standard Library. 



Bailey's (P. J.) Festus. A Poem. 
Seventh Edition, revised and enlarged. 
5s. 

British Poets, from Milton to Eirke 
WHITE. Cabinet Edition. In 4 vols. 
14s. 

Gary's Translation of Dante's Hea- 
ven, Hill, and Purgatory. 7*. Gd. 

Chilling worth s Eeligion of Pro- 
testants, 3*. 6d. 

Classic Tales. Comprising in One 
volume the most esteemed works of the 
imagination. 3*. Cd. 

Demosthenes and JEschines, the 
Orations of. Translated by LELAND. 3s. 

Dickson and Howbray on Poultry. 

Edited by lira. LOUDON. Illustrations by 
Harvey. St. 

Guizot's Monk and His Contem- 
poraries. 3*. 6d. 

Hawthorne's Tales. In 2 vols., 

3s. 6d. each. 

Vol. 1. Twice Told Tales, and the 

Snow Image. 
Vol. 2. Scarlet Letter, and the House 

with the Seven Gablea. 

4 



Henry's (Matthew) Commentary oa 

the Psalms. Numerout Illustrations. 
U.M. 

Hofland's British Angler's Manual. 

Improved and enlarged, by EDWARD JESSE, 
Esq. illustrated with 60 Engravingi. 
It. 6d. 

Horace's Odes and Epodes. Trans- 
lated by the Rev. W. SEWKLL. 3s. 6<1 

Irving's (Washington) Complete 
Works. In 10 vols. 3s. 6<t each. 

Vol. 1. Salmagundi and Knickerbocker. 
Portrait of the Author. 

Vol. Z Sketch Book and Life of Gold- 
smith. 

Vol. 3. Bracebridge Hall and Abbots- 
ford and Newstead. 

VoL 4. Tales of a Traveller and tho 
Alhambra. 

Vol. 5. Conquest of Granada and Con- 
quest of Spam. 

Vols. 6 and 7. Life of Columbus and 
Companions of Columbus, with a new 
Index. Pine rm-tra.it. 

Vol. 8. Astoria and Tour in the Prairies. 

Vol. 9. Mahomet and his Successors. 

Vol. 10. Conquest of Florida and Ad- 
ventures of Captain Bonneville, 



JROHN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



Irving's (Washington) Life of Wash- 
ington. Portrait. In 4 vols. 3*. 6d. each. 

. (Washington) Life and Let- 

ters. By his Nephew, PIKBIIE E. IUV::;G. 
In 2 vols. 3*. 6d. each. 
for separate Works, tee Cheap Seriet, 
p. 20. 

Joyce's Introduction to the Arts and 
Sciences. With Examination Questions. 
3s. &d. 

Lawrence's Lectures on Compara- 
tive Anatomy, Physiology, Zoology, and the 
Natural History of Man. Illustrated. 5s. 

Lilly's Introduction to Astrology. 
With numerous Emendations, by ZADKIEL. 
6s. 

Miller's (Professor) History Philoso- 
phically considered. In 4 vols. 3*. 6d. 
each. 



Elementary Chemistry. 
In 4 vols. 



Parkes's 

3S. 6d. 

Political Cyclopaedia. 

3s. 6d. each. 



Also bound 
leather backs. 155. 



in 2 vols. with 



Shakespeare's Works, with Life, 
by CHALMERS. In diamond type. 3*. 6d. 

or, with 40 Engravings. 5s. 

Uncle Tom's Cabin. With Introduc- 
tory Remarks by the Rev. J. SHEKMAK. 
Printed in a large clear type. Illustra- 
tions. 3s. 6d. 

Wide, Wide World. By ELIZABETH 
WETHEBALL. lUustrattd with 10 highly- 
finished Steel Engravings. 3s. 6d. 



m. 



Bohn's Historical Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME. 



Evelyn's Diary and Correspondence. 

Illustrated with numerous Portraits, Sec. 
In 4 vols. 

Pepys' Diary and Correspondence. 
Edited by Lord Braybrooke. With Im- 
portant Additions, including numerous 
Letters. Illustrated with many Portraits. 
In 4 vols. 

Jesse's Memoirs of the Reign of the 
Stuarts, including the Protectorate. With 
General Index. Upwards of 40 Portraits. 
In 3 vols. 



Jesse's Memoirs of the Pretender? 

aud their Adherents. 6 Portraits. 

Nugent's (Lord) Memorials of 

Hampden, his Party, and Times. 12 
Portraits. 

Strickland's (Agnes) Lives of tho 
Queens of England, from the Norman 
Conquest. From official records and 
authentic documents, private and public. 
Revised Edition. In 6 vols. 



rv. 



Bohn's Library of French Memoirs. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 3s. Qd. PER VOLUME. 



Memoirs of Philip de Commines, 
containing the Histories of Louis XI. and 
Charles VIII.. and of Charles the Bold, 
Duke of Burgundy. To which is added, 
Tee Scandalous Chronicle, or Secret 



History of Louis XL Portraits. In 
2 vols. 

Memoirs of the Duke of Sully, Prime 
Minister to Henry the Great. Portrait*. 
In 4 vols. 



V. 



Bohn's School and College Series. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY. 



Bans' s Complete Greek and English 
Lexicon to the New Testament. 2s. 6d. 

New Testament (The) in Greek. 

Griesbach's Text, with the various read- 
ings of Mill and Scholz at foot of page, and 



Parallel References in the margin ; also 
Critical Introduction and Chronological 
Tables. Tmofac-similes of Greek Manu- 
scripts. (650 pages.) 3*. 6cf. ; or with the 
Lexicon, 6s. 



A CATALOGUE OF 



VI. 



Bohn's Philological and Philosophical Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE (STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME 
(EXCEPTING THOSE MARKED OTHERWISE). 



Hegel's Lectures on the Philosophy 

ol History. Translated by J. SIBREE, M .A. 

Herodotus, Turner's (Dawson W.) 
Notes to. With Map, &c. 

Wheeler's Analysis and 

Summary of. 

Kant's Critique of Pure Season. 
Translated by J. M. 1>. MEIKLEJOHN. 

Logic ; or, the Science of Inference. 

A Popular Manual. By J. DEVET. 

Lowndes' Bibliographer's Manual of 

English Literature. New Edition, en- 
larged, by H. G. BOHX Parts I. to X. (A 



to Z). 3*. 6d. each. Part XL (the Ap- 
pendix Volume). 6*. Or the 11 parts in 
4 vols., half morocco, 21. 2*. 

Smith's (Archdeacon) Complete Col- 
lection of Synonyms and Antonyms. 

Tennemann's Manual of the History 

r"" ''osophy. Continued by J. R. MORELL. 

Th,..ydides, Wheeler's Analysis of. 
Wheeler's (M.A.) W. A., Dictionary 

pf Names of Fictitious Persons and Places. 

Wright's (T.) Dictionary of Obsolete 
and Provincial English. In 3 vols. 6s. 
each ; or half-bound in 1 vol., 10*. 6d. 



vn. 
Bohn's British Classics. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 3s. 6d. PER VOLUME. 



Addison's Works. With the Notes 
of Bishop KURD, much additional matter, 
and upwards of 100 Unpublished Letters. 
Edited by H. G. BOHX. J'ortrait and 8 
Engravings on Steel. In 6 vols. 
Burke's Works. In 6 Volumes. 

Vol. 1. Vindication of Natural Society, 
On the Sublime and Beautiful, and 
Political Miscellanies. 
Vol. 2. French Revolution, &c. 
Vol. 3. Appeal from the New to the 
Old Whigs ; the Catholic Claims, &c. 
Vol. 4. On the Affairs of India, and 

Charge against Warren Hastings. 
VoL 6. Conclusion of Charge against 

Hastings ; on a Regicide Peace, &c. 
Vol. 6. Miscellaneous Speeches, ftc. 
With a General Index. 



Burke's Speeches on Warren Hast- 
ings; and Letters. With Index. In 
2 vols. (forming vols. 7 and 8 of the 
works). 

Life. By PRIOR. New and 

revised Edition. Portrait. 

Defoe's Works. Edited by Sir WAL- 
TEB SCOTT. In 1 vols. 

Gibbon's Roman Empire. Complete 
and Unabridged, with Notes; Including, 
in addition to the Author's own, those of 
Guizot, Wenck, Niebuhr, Hugo, Neander, 
and other foreign scholars; and an ela- 
borate Index. Edited by an English 
Churchman. In 7 vols. 



vm. 



Bohn's Ecclesiastical Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME. 



Eusebius' Ecclesiastical History. 

With Notes. 

Philo Judaeus, Works of ; the con- 
temporary of Josephua. Translated by 
C. D. Yonge. In 4 volg. 

Socrates' Ecclesiastical History, in 

continuation of Eusebius. With the Notes 
of Valesiiu. 
6 



Sozomen's Ecclesiastical History, 

from A.D. 324-44(1 : and the Ecclesiastical 
History of Philostorgius. 

Theodoret and Evagrius. Ecclesias- 
tical Histories, from A.D. 332 to A.D. 42T. 
and from A.D. 431 to AJ>. 844. 



BONN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



Bohn's Antiquarian Library. 

tTNIFOKM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME. 



Bede's Ecclesiastical History, and 

the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. 

BoetMus's Consolation of Philoso- 
phy. In Anglo-Saxon, with th- : ''*>>-S. 
Metres, and an English Translate,-.. by 
the Rev. a Fox. 

Brand's Popular Antiquities of Eng- 
land, Scotland, and Ireland. By Sir HEXRY 
EMJS. In 3 vols. 

Browne's (Sir Thomas) Works. 
Edited by SIMON WILKIN. In 3 vols. 
Vol. 1. The Vulgar Errors. 
Vol. 2. Religlo Medici, and Garden of 

Cyrus. 

VoL 3. Urn-Burial, Tracts, and Corre- 
spondence. 

Chronicles of the Crusaders. Richard 
of Devizes, Geoffrey de Vlnsauf, Lord de 
JoinvilJe. 

Chronicles of the Tombs. A Collec- 
tion of Remarkable Epitaphs. By T. J. 
PBTTIGREW, F.BJ3, F.S.A. 

Early Travels in Palestine. Willi- 

bald, Sajwulf, Benjamin of Tudela, Man- 
deville, La Brocquiere, and Maundrell ; 
all unabridged. Edited by THOMAS 
WRIGHT. 

Ellis's Early English Metrical Ro- 
mances. Revised by J. 0. HALLTWEIX. 

Florence of Worcester's Chronicle, 

with the Two Continuations : comprising 
Annals of English History to the Reign of 
Edward I. 

fitiraldus Cambrensis' Historical 

Works : Topography of Ireland ; History 
of the Conquest of Ireland ; Itinerary 
through Wales; and Description of Wales. 
With Index. Edited by Tuos. WBIHT. 

Handbook of Proverbs. Comprising 
all Ray's English Proverbs, with additions ; 
his Foreign Proverbs ; and an Alphabetical 
Index. 

Henry of Huntingdon's History of 

the English, from the Roman Invasion to 
Henry IL ; with the Acts of King Stephen, 
Ax. 

Ingulph's Chronicle of the Abbey of 

CroyUnd, with the Continuations by Peter 
of Blois and oilier Writers. By H. T. 

RlLET. 



Zeightley's Fairy Mythology. Fron- 
tispiece by Cruikshank. 

Lamb's Dramatic Poets of the Time 
of Elizabeth ; including his Selections from 
the Garrlck Plays. 

Lepsius's Letters from Egypt, Ethio- 
pia, and the Peninsula of Sinai. 

Mallet's Northern Antiquities. By 

Bishop PERCY. With an Abstract of thie 
Eyrbiggia Saga, by Sir WALTBB SCOTT. 
Edited by J. A. BLACKWELL. 

Marco Polo's Travels. The Trans- 
lation of Marsden. Edited by THOMAS 
WRIGHT. 

Matthew Paris's Chronicle. ID 5 
vols. 

FIRST SECTION : Roger of Wendover*s 
Flowers of English History, from the 
Descent of the Saxons to A.B. 1235. 
Translated by Dr. GILES. In 2 vols. 
SECOND SECTION: From 1235 to 1273. 
With Index to the entire Work. In 
3 vols. 

Matthew of Westminster's Flowers 
of History, especially such as relate to the 
affairs of Britain ; to A.D. 1307. Translated 
by C. D. YONGB. In 2 vols. 

Ordericus Vitalis' Ecclesiastical His- 
tory of England and Normandy. Trans- 
lated with Notes, by T. FORESTER, M.A. 
In 4 vols. 

Pauli's (Dr. S.) Life of Alfred the 

Great. Translated from the German. 
Polyglot of Foreign Proverbs. With 

English Translations, and a General Index, 
bringing the whole into parallels, by H. G. 
BOHN. 

Roger De Hoveden's Annals of Eng- 
lish History ; from A.D. 732 to AJ>. 1201. 
Edited by H. T. RILET. In 2 vols. 

Six Old English Chronicles, viz. : 

Asser's Lite of Alfred, and the Chronicles 
of Ethelwerd, Glldas, Nennins, Geoffrey 
of Monmouth, and Richard of Ciren- 
cester. 

William of Malmesbnry's Chronicle 
of the Kings of England. Translated by 
SHARPE. 

Yule-Tide Stories. A Collection of 
Scandinavian Tales and Traditions. Edited 
by B. THOBPB 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Bohn's Illustrated Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBBARY, AT 5s. PEB VOLUME 
(EXCEPTING THOSE MARKED OTHERWISE). 



Allen's Battles of the British Navy. 

Revised and enlarged, Numerous Jlne 
Portrait*. In 2 vola. 

Andersen's Danish Legends and 

Fairy Tales. With many Tales not in any 
other edition. Translated by CAUOUNK 
PEACHEV. 120 Worjd Kngravings. 

Ariosto's Orlando Furioso. In Eng- 
lish Verse. By VV. S. UoeB. Twelve fine 
Engravings. In 2 vols. 

Bechstein's Cage and Chamber Birds. 

Including Sweet's Warblers. Enlarged 
edition. Numerous platet. 

%* All other editions are abridged. 

With tiie plates coloured. 7s. 6d. 

Bonomi's Nineveh and its Palaces. 
New Edition, revised and considerably 
enlarged, both in matter and Plates, in- 
cluding a Full Account of the Assyrian 
Sculptures recently added to the National 
Collection. L'pwartts of 300 Engravings. 

Butler's Hudibras. With Variorum 
Note*, a Biography, and a General Index. 
Edited by HKNXT G. BOHN. Thirty beau- 
tiful Illustrations. 

; or, further illustrated with 
62 Outline Portraits. In 2 vols. 10. 

Cattermole's Evenings at Haddon 

Hall. 24 exquifite Kngramngs on Steel, 
from, designs by himself, the Letterpress 
by the bArto.xKta DE CAKAUKLLA. 

China, Pictorial, Descriptive, and 
Historical, with some Account ot Ava and 
the Bui-mcse, Siam, and Aouru. Nearly 
100 Illustrations. 

Craik's (G. L.) Pursuit of Knowledge 
under Difficulties, illustrated by Anec- 
dotes and Memoirs. Revised Edition. 
With numerous Portraits. 

Croikshank's Three Courses and a 
Dessert. A Series of Tales, with 50 hu- 
morous niuftrations by Cruikshank. 

Dante. Translated by I. C. WRIGHT, 
M.A. New Edition, carefully revised. 
Portrait and 34 Illustrations on Steel, 
after Flaxman. 

Didron's History of Christian Art ; 
or, Christian Iconography. From the 
French. Cpu.-ards of 150 beautiful out- 
lint Engravings. Vol.1. (Mons. Pldron 
lias not yst written the second volume.) 



Flaxman's Lectures on Sculpture 
Jfumerous Illustrations. 6s. 

Gil Bias, The Adventures of. 24 

Engravings on Steel, after Smirke, aw. 
10 Etchings by George CruiksKank. (61 
pages.) 6s. 

Grimm's Gammer Grethel ; or, Ger 

man Fairy Tales and Popular Stories. 
Translated by EDGAE TAYLOR, tfurutroi 
Woodcuts by Cruikshank. 3*. 6d. 

Holbein's Dance of Death, and Bibl 

Cut*. Upwards of 160 subject!, beauti 
fully engraved in fac-nmile, with Intro 
ductiou and Descriptions by the lat 
FKAXCIS DODCE and Dr. T. F. DIBDIN 
2 vols. In 1. Is. 6d. 

Howitt's (Mary) Pictorial Calendar 

of the Seasons. Embodying the whole o 
Aiken's Calendar of .Nature. Upwards of 
100 ngravings. 

(Mary and William) Stories 

of English and Foreign Life. Twenty beau 
tiful Engravings. 

India, Pictorial, Descriptive, and 

Historical, from the Earliest Times to ta 
Present. Upwards of 100 fine Engraving 
on Wood, and a Map. 

Jesse's Anecdotes of Dogs. New Edi 

tion, with large additions. Numerous fine 

Woodcuts after Harvey, Bewick, and, others 

; or, with the addition of 3' 

highly-finished Steel Engraving!. 7s. 6d 

King's Natural History of Precious 

Stone*, and of the Precious Metals. Will 
numerous Illustrations. Price 6s. 

Kitto's Scripture Lands and Biblical 

Atlas. 24 M i-i's. 'jeautifutty engraved on 

Steel, with a Consulting Index. 

; with the maps coloured, 7s. &d 

Krummacher's Parables. Translated 

from the German, forty Illustrations by 

Clayton, engraved by Ualziel. 

Lindsay's (Lord) Letters on Egypt 

Edom, and the Holy Land. New Edition 
enlarged. Thirty-sin beautiful Engrav- 
ings, and 2 Haps. 

Lodge's Portraits of Illustrious Per- 
sonages of Great Britain, with Memoirs 
Two Hundred and Forty Portraits, beau- 
tifully engraved on Steel. 8 vols. 




ANNALS 



OF 



ROGER DE HOVEDEN. 

. ... '^ 

COMPRISING 

THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND 

AND OF 

OTHER COUNTRIES OF EUROPE 
FROM A.D. 732 TO A.D. 1201. 

TRANSLATED FROM THE LATIN WITH NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS 

BY HENRY T. RILET, ESQ., B.A. 

BABMSTEB-AT-LAW. 

IN TWO VOLUMES. 
VOL. I. 



A.D. 732 TO A.D. I ISO. 



LONDON: 

H. G. BOHN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN. 

MDCCCLin. 




2.00 



1-853 
v.l 



J. B1LUKU, rHINTKK AND BTKREOTYrER, WOK1KO, FURBEY. 



PREFACE. 



THE only printed version of this valuable Chronicle is that 
contained in the " Scrip tores postBedam" of Sir Henry Saville, 
London, 1596, and reprinted at Frankfort in 1601. The 
typographical errors and omissions in both these editions are 
almost innumerable ; so much so, that of necessity the more 
onerous duties of an Editor* devolve in a considerable degree 
upon the Translator of any of the authors contained in the 
volume. 

In the present Translation the text has been carefully exa- 
mined throughout, and the greater portion, it is believed, of 
the errors corrected ; in many instances on the safest of all 
grounds reference to the works of contemporary writers. At- 
tention is called in the Notes to the more important of these 

* * This was sensibly felt to be the case by Mr. Sharpe, in his translation 
of William of Malmesbury. Archbishop Nicolson says, in his " English 
Historical Library," p. 59, " Hoveden's History was published by Sir 
H. Saville ; but (as Sir H. Spelman observes in his Glossary, on the word 
Frithborgd) there are many errors in that foreign Edition of this, and all 
our other Historians, and, therefore, he well cautions the English reader 
attentively to consider the spelling of such words as are of our own growth, 
as very frequently mistaken by printers, that are strangers to our country 
and language." It is but just to remark that, in the present instance, the 
errors in the English edition are almost as numerous as in the foreign one. 



IV PREFACE. 

corrections, in cases where they are a matter of question. 
It has been thought advisable to retain the ancient names of 
places where they differ materially from those of the present 
day, and to add the latter in the Notes. 

Of the author of this work but little is known. He is some- 
times spoken of as a native of York, but it is more probable 
that he was born at Hoveden, now Howden, a vill in the 
East Riding of Yorkshire, which belonged to the bishops of 
Durham, and where they occasionally resided. Frequent 
mention is made of this place in the Annals, in connection 
with those powerful prelates.* It has been suggested by some 
writers that our author is the person mentioned by Robert of 
Gloucester as "Hew of Howdene."f Among the various 
offices held by him, he is said to have been a professor of 
Theology at Oxford, and to have been employed, perhaps 
at a later period of his life, by Henry II., in the capacity 
of chaplain. Like many of the more learned clergy of his 
day, uniting the study of the LawJ with that of Divinity, 

* For the first time, at p. 389 of this Volume. We learn from our author 
that Hugh de Pusaz, or Pudsey, bishop of Durham, died at Howden. 

t Mr. Hardy says, in the Introduction to the " Monumenta Britan- 
nica," p. viii., " The Burton Annals (Gale I.) mention a Hugh Hoveden, 
as does Robert of Gloucester, but Roger is certainly the person intended. 
The mistake arose probably from the practice of indicating an author's 
name by the initial letters only, and the scribe hastily inserted H instead 
of R." The lines of Robert of Gloucester alluded to are the following, (he 
is speaking of Richard I.) : 

" But who so wole of his chevalrie, know or wyte, 
Rede he in the cornycles that ben of him wryte, 
That Mayster Hew hath of Howdene ywrouzte.'' 

If in these lines he refers to our Chronicler, it is pretty clear that he is the 
same person who wrote the life of Richard I., mentioned by Bishop Tanner 
as .-aid to be among the Digby MSS. in the Bodleian Library. 

This will probably account for the vast amount of information on 
legal matters which is to be found in the latter part of the work. Tanner 
seems to think that Hoveden devoted himself to the law when in mid- 



PREFACE. V 

he acted as one of the clerks* or secretaries of that king ; and, 
probably in such capacity, was employed in visiting monas- 
teries on the death of the abbats or priors, for the purpose of 
receiving such portions of the revenues thereof as accrued to 
the crown. This fact will account for the great number of 
letters, charters, papal rescripts, bulls, and other matters relative 
to the Ecclesiastical history of his time, which are to be found in 
his work ; while his connection, through the place of his birth, 
with the sees of York and Durham, will explain why the 
affairs of those sees are so abundantly treated of. 

Hoveden has been charged by Leland with surreptitiously bor- 
rowing from Simeon of Durham, the great Chronicler of North- 
umbria ; but it is not improbable that he enjoyed opportunities 
of free access to the materials from which Simeon compiled 
his Chronicles, and, as Archbishop Nicolson remarks, f if he did 
copy anything from him, he has greatly improved his narra- 
tive by carefully identifying the chronology of many matters 
confusedly related by that author. That in some instances he 
has closely followed Simeon of Durham and other preceding 
Chroniclers, cannot, however, be questioned ; but the evident 
universality of the practice among the Annalists of his times, 
shews that the censure of Leland is misplaced, and that Ho- 
veden was actuated by no sordid motive, or wish to assume the 
credit of the labours of his predecessors. 

The exact periods of his birth and death are unknown ; but 
Tanner, following Leland, thinks that he did not commence 

life, and subsequently entered the Church. He informs us that Walter 
of Coventry states in his Annals that Hoveden was in the number of the 
domestics of Henry II. ; that he was sent to Norwich by that king, on a 
visit to the abbey there, for the purpose of auditing the expenditure of 
the monks, and of superintending the election of a new abbat ; and that 
his duties of a similar nature extended to other places. 

* Benedictus Abbas mentions him as " Unus de clericis regis." 

t Engl. Hist. Library, pp. 59, 60. 



PREFACE. 

writing his Annals till after the death of Henry II., in 1189 ; 
when probably he devoted himself entirely to literary pur- 
suits.* It is not improbable that he survived till the time of 
Henry III. 

That he was a man of considerable learning, and, for his 
time, of extensive knowledge, is evident from his work. 
We find him frequently, and in some casesf appositely, quot- 
ing Virgil, Ovid (who seems to have been his favourite 
author), Lucan, and other Latin poets; but it is a curious 
fact, that he on no occasion mentions the name of the 
author from whom he quotes, or, indeed, of any Classical 
writer whatever. Like most of the learned Ecclesiastics of 
his day, he appears to have found peculiar charms in the jingle 
of the Leonine or Latin rhyme ; a taste which had been re- 
cently introduced into this country by its Norman conquerors. 
His work also bears abundant proof that he was versed in 
the legal and theological lore of those times. 

On the other hand, it is clear, from his easy credulity, that 
his mind was not at all in advance of his age. Miracles (some 
of them of a very trifling and silly nature), portents, omens, pro- 
phecies, and astrological predictions, are readily, and as a mat- 
ter of course, copied into his pages ; while visits of the Devil in 
person would almost appear to be considered by him as every- 
day occurrences. Jews, Saracens, heretics, and Pagans are 
summarily dealt with in his pages; and amid the pious 
ejaculations which on some few occasions he utters when de- 
picting the miseries or frailties of mankind, we find not a 
word of sympathy wasted on their sufferings. 

The Annals of Hoveden are not merely a Chronicle of En- 

* We may here remark, that the passage in p. 247 of this Volume, in 
which he appears to assert that he was eye-witness to an event that hap- 
pened in 1144, is copied almost literally from Henry of Huntingdon, who 
was probably the alleged witness of the miracle. 

t See vol. ii. p. 42, where he mentions Tully. 



PREFACE. VU 

glish affairs, but (in the latter part especially) form a history of 
the events of the then known world. Scotland, France, Ger- 
many, Norway, Denmark, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Constan- 
tinople, Asia Minor, and the Holy Land, all come under his 
notice, and he sometimes treats of their affairs at consider- 
able length. On two occasions* he gives an episodical account 
of the then existing state of Geographical knowledge respect- 
ing the West and the South of Europe, which, in spite of the 
lamentably defective state of -the text, cannot fail to be read 
with interest. 

The work is divided into two Parts ; the First of which, pro- 
fessing to be a continuation of Bede's Ecclesiastical History, 
commences in 732 and concludes in 1 1 54. The Second Part com- 
mences in 1155, and breaks off" in 1201, the third year of the 
reign of king John. Why this division was made, it is impossi- 
ble with certainty to say ; but it will readily be perceptible to 
the reader that events are treated in the First Part with much 
greater conciseness than in the second. This circumstance 
would perhaps warrant the conclusion that he marked the be- 
ginning of the reign of Henry II., in 1155, as the commence- 
ment of a period the events of which had passed under his own 
personal notice. In the concluding portion of the work, from 
the year 1192, his circumstantiality is such that we might 
almost imagine ourselves reading a newspaper account of events 
which happened nearly seven hundred years ago.f 
By some writers, among whom Bishop Tanner may be men- 
tioned, his style has been considered defective, but it is never- 
theless remarkable for its simplicity and freedom from affec- 
tation. From his peculiar position there is no doubt that 

* Under the reign of Richard I. 

t As a proof of this, we may remark, that while the events of the 
period from 1155 to 1201 are compressed by Roger of Wendover and Mat- 
thew Paris into less than 250, the narrative of Hoveden, relative to the 
same period, extends to more than 800, pages. 



Vlll PREFACE . 

he was able, and from the internal evidence offered by his 
work, he clearly was desirous, to resort to the most authentic 
sources of information within his reach ; consequently, though 
his method of compilation is occasionally crude and defective 
in arrangement, much is to be found, especially in the latter 
portion of his work, which may be safely depended upon, and 
which is to be met with in no other of the Chronicles of those 
times. This high estimate of his authority appears to have 
been formed at an early period ; for we learn from Archbishop 
Nicolson,* on the authority of Pitts, that in the year 1291, 
Edward I. caused diligent search to be made in all the libraries 
of England for copies of his Annals, for the purpose, on their 
evidence, of adjusting the disputes as to the homage due to 
him from the crown of Scotland. In later times, Sir Henry 
Saville, Selden, Archbishop Nlcolson, and others of the learned, 
have concurred in bearing testimony to his diligence and 
fidelity as a historian, and, according to Leland, notwithstand- 
ing the censure in another place so undeservedly pronounced 
upon him, he is superior to all the chroniclers who preceded 
him. 

His Annals are his only work the genuineness of which is 
undisputed. Vossius, however, asserts that he was the author 
of a History of the Kings of Northumbria, and a Life of 
Thomas k Becket. In his Annals, he enters fully into the 
disputes between king Henry and k Becket, and appears, 
though in a very guarded manner, to sympathize with the 
sufferings of that prelate, while at the same time he seems 
desirous to exculpate his royal master from the crime of having 
been accessary to his base assassination. 

The remarks which he makes upon the characters of the 
illustrious personages of his times are few and cautious; 
still, the prominence which he gives to certain circumstances 

* Brit. Hist. Library, pp. 59, 60. 



PREFACE. IX 

and characteristics disclose the bias of his thoughts. It is 
evident that he considered Henry II. a great king, and he 
manifests a probably sincere sympathy for him in the nume- 
rous afflictions, caused to him by the unprincipled conduct of 
his sons, Henry, Richard, and Geoffrey. After the accession 
of Richard, Hoveden seems to hint that boundless sensu- 
ality was his great failing, and, though in words he does 
not say so, he affords sufficient grounds for the conclusion 
that treachery, meanness, and. avarice, were in his opinion 
the striking features of the character of king John. His his- 
tory does not come down to the time of the death, or " dis- 
appearance," as Roger of "Wendover thinks proper to call it, 
of Arthur, duke of Brittany. He evidently dislikes the crafty 
and unprincipled Philip Augustus, king of France ; and the 
zest with which he relates, on numerous occasions, how that 
monarch turned his back in flight before the prowess of Richard 
is highly amusing. 

We may remark, in conclusion, that among the most in- 
teresting portions of the work, may be reckoned the follow- 
ing; the account of the contests between king Henry and 
Thomas & Becket ; the first persecution of the Albigenses ; the 
Assizes of Clarendon and Northampton ; the Laws* of William 
the Conqueror, as re-enacted by Henry II. ; the Coronation of 
Richard I. ; the Journal of that king's voyage to the Holy Land, 
and of his adventures during his stay in Sicily ; the contest 
between Hugh, bishop of Coventry, supported by the other 
prelates, and the chancellor, William, bishop of Ely ; and the 
lengthened disputes between Geoffrey, archbishop of York, and 
his dean and chapter ; which latter are not yet brought to a 
conclusion, when the work somewhat abruptly ends. 

* Here the text is in such a corrupt and mutilated state that it entirely 
defies successful management. The Translation has therefore been made 
from the more correct text of the same Laws, which is found in the " Leges 
Anglo-Saxonicae" of Dr.Wilkins. London, 1721. 



X PREFACE. 

The following remarks, relative to this Chronicler, are ex- 
tracted from the Introduction to the " Monumenta Britannica," 
commenced by the late Mr. Petrie, and recently published 
under the care of Mr. Hardy : 

"Hoveden's Annals extend from A.D. 732 to A.D. 1201. 
ParsPrima: from A.D. 732 to A.D. 1154. Prom the com- 
mencement to the death of Egbert, in 837, his history is 
taken from Simeon of Durham, sometimes literally transcribed, 
at others condensed. Occasionally, however, Hoveden changes 
the collocation, and makes slight verbal alterations. He then 
returns to 751,* and takes up Henry of Huntingdon, who is 
followed, with a few verbal changes, to the death of Ethel- 
red I., in 872. Then follows a recapitulation! f the his- 
tory of the "West Saxon Kings from Cerdic, continued to 
Henry I. ; not always, however, agreeing with Huntingdon's 
History. He then returns to the year 849,^; and again tran- 
scribes or abridges Simeon of Durham to the year 1122, 
making a few insertions from other sources. From 1122 to 
1148, Huntingdon's History is again resorted to, abridged 
or transcribed, with a few additions. Prom 1148|| to 1154 
Hoveden's History is very brief and confused, and that part 
of it relating to Scotland is apparently derived from the same 
source as the Chronicle of Melrose. 

"Pars Secunda: from A.D. 1154 to A.D. 1201. From 1154 f 
to 11 64** it is of the same character: thence to 1170ff it 

* See p. 20 of this Volume, where he seems to revert to the year 749 
in taking up Henry of Huntingdon. This change of the text will account 
for the apparent oversight noticed in p. 20, n, 68. According to Simeon 
of Durham's text, Hoveden makes Eghert to reign thirty-six years and six 
months, while, following Henry of Huntingdon, he gives him a reign of 
forty years, representing him as dying in 840 or 842. 

t See p. 39 of this Volume. J See p. 40. See p. 216. 

II See p. 250. ^ See p. 253. ** See p. 259. ft See p. 325. 



PREFACE. XI 

chiefly relates to a Becket, inserting twenty-eight of his 
epistles, three of which are not found in Lupus's edition. 
From Christmas 1169 to 1192, Hoveden either abridges or 
transcribes Benedictus Abbas, or had access to the same 
materials. When he abridges, it is by compression, or by 
changing the order of the transaction, relating the events be- 
longing to the same transaction connectedly ; whereas Bene- 
dictus Abbas, by observing a stricter chronological arrange- 
ment, frequently separates them. Hoveden, however, has 
inserted entire many letters and charters which are either 
omitted or abridged by Benedictus Abbas ; and when he gives 
the journal of the expedition of Richard the First's fleet to 
Messina, he appears to have had the original document before 
him, as his account is fuller than that of Benedictus Abbas. 
He also speaks in the first person, as if he were transcribing 
the narrative of one that was present, which is not the case 
with Benedictus Abbas. Hoveden has also exclusively several 
particulars relating to Spain, Portugal, and Scotland. Under 
the year 1192 he gives an account of Richard the First's cap- 
tivity and deliverance, with a journal of his transactions from 
his return to England in March, to his landing in France in the 
following May. From that period to the conclusion, his His- 
tory is very diffuse, containing many papal bulls and letters, 
chiefly Ecclesiastical, relating, as might have been expected, to 
the province of York, or to the Northern parts of England, 
regulations for courts of law, &c. 

" *Some persons have thought that Hoveden continued his 
History to the year 1226 ; but this mistake seems grounded 
on the continuation which has been ascribed to "Walter of 
Coventry, who borrowed both from Hoveden and Benedictus 
Abbas, and yet refers to Hoveden alone. 

* This appears in the " Monumenta" as a Note to the above extracts. 



XH PREFACE. 

"It is remarkable that Benedictus Abbas should twice 
(pp. 93, 108) mention Hoveden, and that Hoveden, although 
he appears to transcribe or abridge Benedictus, should omit all 
mention of himself." 

H. T. E. 



THE ANNALS 

OF 

ROGER DE HOVEDEN. 



INTRODUCTION. 

AT the beginning of this work, I propose to trace the genea- 
logical line of the kings of Northumbria,* down to the times 
of those, who, coming after the death of the most venerable 
Bede, have not hitherto been treated of. 

Ida held the sovereignty twelve years Rafter whose death 
Glappa reigned one year. He was succeeded by Adda, whose 
reign lasted eight years ; on whose decease Ethelric became 
king, and reigned seven years. Theoderic succeeded him, and, 
after a reign of four years, lost his life and left the kingdom 
to Fridubuld. He, having reigned one year, was succeeded 
by Huscus, 2 who, after a reign of seven years, lost his kingdom 
and his life. Ethelfred, the most distinguished for valour 
among these kings, was the eighth in succession, and reigned 
for a. period of twenty-eight years. He was succeeded by 
King Edwin, who having embraced Christianity, as king and 
martyr ascended to heaven, after a reign of seventeen years. 
After him, Oswald, a most Christian king, reigned over Nor- 
thuinbria for a period of seven years. He having ascended 
to the mysterious realms of heaven, Oswy succeeded him as 
king, and held the government twenty-eight years. He being 

* It is worthy of remark, that the account here given of the Northum- 
brian kings, differs very materially from that of Bede, William of Malrnes- 
bury, and the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. 

1 V. r. Eleven years. 2 V. r. Hussus. 

VOL. I. B 



2 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 732. 

removed to the realms of bliss, Egfrid received the sovereignty, 
and after a reign of fifteen years was slain by the Picts, because 
he had unrighteously ravaged Ireland. 3 

In his room, his brother Alfred became king, and was suc- 
ceeded by his son, Osred, who being slain, Choenred ascended 
the throne, and was succeeded by Osric, whose successor was 
Ceolwulph, the brother of Choenred. It was to him that Bede, 
the historian, dedicated his history of the English. 

Having enumerated these, it is my intention to adopt the 
history of the most holy and learned Bede as the foundation 
of this work, commencing at the last sentence thereof; and, 
recording the years of our Lord, carefully reviewing in their 
order the reigns of the kings, and briefly, to the best of my 
ability, remarking upon the life and miracles of the rest of the 
faithful, it is my earnest desire, together with them, to receive 
from Christ the reward of everlasting salvation. 

Come, thou benign Spirit, who without thine own aid art 
never imparted ; bestow thy bounty on my tongue, thou who 
in thy bounty dost bestow tongues. 3 * 



THE FIRST PART. 

IN the year from the incarnation of our Lord 732, as Bede in- 
forms us, Bretwald, archbishop of Canterbury, departed this life, 
and was buried in the church of St. Peter. In this year, 
Tatwin was consecrated archbishop of Canterbury, it being the 
fifteenth year of the reign of Ethelbald, king of Mercia. In 
the same year, also, king Ceolwulph was taken prisoner, shorn, 
and sent back into his kingdom. He was imbued with a 
wonderful love for the Scriptures, as the truthful chronicler, 
Bede, states in the beginning of his Preface. In the same 
year, bishop Acca was expelled from his see, 4 and Cynebert, 
bishop of Lindesey,* died. 

In the year 733, having received his pall from the Apostolic 
See, Tatwin ordained Alwin and Sigfrid bishops. An eclipse 

3 In A.D. 684, he had sent his general, Beort, with an army to lay waste 
Ireland ; and in the following year, having himself led his troops against 
the Picts or Britons at Strath Clyde, he was slain at Drumnechtan, in the 
county of Forfar, 

*" This is said in reference to Acts ii. 3, 4. 

* Of Hexhara. * In Lincolnshire. 



A.D. 738. DEATH OF NOTHELM. 

of the sun took place on the nineteenth day before the calends 
of September, about the third hour of the day, insomuch that 
the face of the sun seemed to be almost entirely covered with 
a very black and horrible shield. 

In the year 734, on the second day before the calends of 
February, the moon was covered with a redness like blood for 
nearly a whole hour, at about the time of cock-crow ; a darkness 
then coming on, she returned to her usual brightness. In the 
same year, Tatwin, the new archbishop of Canterbury, died. The 
first bishop of this city was Augustine, that famous instructor 
of the whole kingdom, and excellent founder of the Christian 
faith and religion, to whom, in their order, succeeded Lauren- 
tius, Mellitus, Justus, Honorius, Deusdedit, the most learned 
Theodore, and Bretwald, whom Tatwin followed, as I have 
already mentioned. In the same year, Fridebert was ordained 
bishop of Hagustald. 6 

In the year 735, Nothelm was ordained archbishop of Can 
terbury, and Egbert, bishop of York, was ordained to the arch- 
bishopric of the Northumbrians, being the first who, since 
Paulinus, had received the pall 7 from the Apostolic See. In 
this year the learned Bede departed this life at Jarrow. 8 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 736, Nothelm, 
having received the pall from the pope of Rome, ordained three 
bishops, namely, Cuthbert, Eordwald, and Ethelfrid. 

In the year 737, bishop Aid win, who was also called Wor, 
departed this life, and in his room Witta 9 and Tota were con- 
secrated bishops of the Mercians 10 and the Mid- Angles. 11 In 
the same year, in place of Ceolwulph, 12 Eadbert, his uncle's 
son, received the kingdom of Northumbria. 

In the year 738, Swetbrit, 13 king of the East Saxons, died. 
In the following year, Ethelherd, king of the West Saxons, 
departed this life, on which his brother Cuthred was appointed 
king in his room. In the same year, archbishop ISothelm died, 
four years after having received the archbishopric, and Adulph, 
bishop of Rochester, departed this life. 

6 Hexham, in Northumberland. 

7 Without it he was not entitled to the title of archbishop. 

8 In Durham. 9 Or Winta. 

10 Witta was consecrated bishop of Lichfield. 

11 Tota was the first bishop of Leicester. 

12 He resigned his crown, and embraced the monastic life. 

13 Called Selred by Roger of Wendover, and others. 

B 2 



4 ANXALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEIT. A .D. 750. 

In the year 740, Ethelwald, bishop of Lindisfarne, departed 
to the Lord, and Kinewulph was appointed to that see. 
In the same year of sacred memory, bishop Acca was removed 
to the realms of the living, after having held the bishopric of 
Hagustald twenty-four years, at the east side of which church 
his body was honorably interred : afterwards, when more 
than three hundred years had elapsed from his burial, in 
consequence of a divine revelation, he was removed by a certain 
priest, and placed in a coffin within the church, with due 
honor, where to the present day he is held in great veneration ; 
as a merited proof of his sanctity before all men, the chasuble, 
tunic, and sudarium, 14 which had been deposited in the earth 
with his most hallowed corpse, preserve even unto this day, not 
only their original appearance, but even their original strength 
of texture. 

In the same year in which the holy bishop Acca departed 
to the realms of heaven, Arwin, the son of Eadulph, was slain, 
on the ninth day before the calends of January, being the sixth 
day of the week. In the same year, Cuthbert received the 
archbishopric of Canterbury, being the eleventh archbishop ; 
and, in succession to Adulph, Dun became bishop of Rochester. 

In the year 741, the monastery in the city of York was 
burnt, on the ninth day before the calends of May, being the 
first day of the week. 

In the year 744, a battle was fought between the Picts and 
the Britons ; and in the following year, fiery strokes were beheld 
in the air, such as no men of that generation had ever seen before, 
and were visible throughout almost all the night of the calends 
of January. In the same year also, according to some accounts, 
the second Wilfrid, bishop of York, departed to the Lord on the 
third day before the calends of May; but it is my opinion, that 
before Bede had completed his history, this Wilfrid had been al- 
ready translated to the realms of heaven. In these days died 
Inguald, bishop of London, and at this time flourished Saint 
Guthlac. 

In the year 749, died Elfwald, 15 king of East Anglia, upon 
which Hunbenna and Albert divided the kingdom between 
them. In the following year, that is to say, in 750, king Eadbert 

14 This may either mean a peculiar head-dress worn by the priesthood, 
or the " fanon " or " mappula," a small handkerchief, a napkin, worn 
over the left wrist. 15 Called Athelwold by Roger of Wendover. 



A.D. 757. ETHELBALD SLAIN. 5 

brought bishop Kinewulph prisoner to the city of Bebba," 
and caused the church of St. Peter, in Lindisfarne, to be be- 
sieged. 17 Offo, the son of Alfred, was unthinkingly running 
with all haste towards the relics of Saint Cuthbert, the bishop, 
when he was dragged out of the church, without his weapons, 
and almost famished with hunger. 

In the same year, bishop Allwich died, and Ardulf, a deacon, 
was ordained to the bishopric. 17 * Cuthred, the king of the 
West Saxons, rose against Ethelbald, king of Mercia. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 752, on the day 
before the calends of August, an" eclipse of the moon took place. 

In the year 753, Boniface the archbishop, who was also called 
Winfrid, with fifty-three others, was crowned with the martyr- 
dom of the Franks. In the following year, Cuthred, king of the 
West Saxons, died, the sceptre of whose kingdom was received 
by Sigebert. 

In the year 756, being the fifteenth 18 year of his reign, king 
Eadbert, with Unnust, king of the Picts, led an army to the 
cities of Alclutit, 19 and there received the Britons of that neigh- 
bourhood under their subjection, 6n the first day of August ; but, 
on the tenth day of the same month, almost the whole of the 
army which he led from Deouama, 19 * was destroyed at Niwam- 
birg, that is at the new city. In the same year Baltere, the 
anchorite, attained the life of the righteous, and departed unto 
the Lord. On the eighth day before the calends of December, 
the moon, on her fifteenth day, being about her full, appeared to 
be covered with the colour of blood, and then, the darkness 
decreasing, she returned to her usual brightness ; but, in a 
wondrous manner, a bright star followed the moon, and, pass- 
ing across her, preceded her when shining, at the same distance 
at which it had followed her before she was darkened. 

In the year 757, Ethelbald, king of Mercia, was treach- 
erously slain by his own allies. 20 In the same year a civil war 

16 Now Bamborough, in Northumberland. 

17 " Basilicam " here is probably a wrong reading for " basilic^ ;" if so, 
the meaning will be, that Eadbert ordered Kinewulph to be confined in the 
church of St. Peter, at Lindisfarne, which agrees with the account given 
by Roger of Wendover. n * Of Sidnancaster, or Lindesey. 

ls V. r. Eighteenth. 19 Supposed to be Dumbarton, in Scotland. 

19 * Holinshed calls this place Ouan. Probably the reading in his MS. 
was " De Ouania," instead of " Deouma," as in the printed copy. 

20 This is probably said in reference to Cuthred, king of the West 



6 ANNALS OF EOGEE HE HOVEDEN. A.D. 764. 

arose among the Mercians, and Beornred being put to flight, 
king OfFa was victorious. 

La the year 758, king Eadbert voluntarily resigned the king- 
dom, which he had received from God, to his son Osulph, who 
held it but one year and then lost it, having been treacherously 
slain by his own servants near Mechilwongton, on the ninth 
day before the calends of August. 

In the following year, Ethelwald, who was also called Moll, 
began to reign on the nones of August. At the beginning of 
the third year of his reign a most severe battle was fought, 
near Edwin's Cliff, on the seventh day before the ides of August, 
in which, after a fight of three days, Oswin was slain, and thus 
king Ethelwald gained the victory. This took place on the first 
day of the week. In the same year, Unnust, king of the Picts, 
departed this life. 

In the year 762 king Ethelwald took Etheldreda for his queen, 
on the calends of November, at Cataract. 21 In the third year 
from this, that is to say in 764, there was a great snow with 
intense frost, not to be compared with any in former ages. 
It covered the earth from the beginning of winter almost 
until the middle of spring, and through its rigour the trees 
and vegetables mostly withered away, and many marine 
animals were found dead. In the same year, likewise, Ceol- 
wulph, formerly king, and afterwards a servant of our Lord 
Jesus Christ and a monk, departed this life. 

It was to this king that the truthful Bede wrote the epistle 
which begins thus : "To the most glorious king, Ceolwulph, 
Bede, servant of Christ, and priest. I formerly, at your re- 
quest, most readily transmitted to you the Ecclesiastical His- 
tory of the English Nation, which I had newly published, for 
you to read and give it your approbation ; and I now send it 
again to be transcribed, and more fully considered at your 
leisure." The king himself, after renouncing the world, became 
a monk in the church of Lindisfarne, and there struggled for a 
heavenly kingdom. His body being afterwards brought to the 

Saxons, who, having made a treaty of peace with Ethelbald, attacked and 
slew him at Seekington ; or it may allude to the version of the story that 
he was slain by his own subjects, headed by the rebel Beornred. Lam- 
barde reconciles the two versions by suggesting that Cuthred, king of Wes- 
sex, invaded Mercia, and conspired with some of Ethelbald's subjects, of 
whom Beornred was chief. 21 Catterick, in Yorkshire. 



A.D. 764. DEATH OF FBITHWOLD. 7 

church at Norham, according to the accounts given by the inhabi- 
tants of that place, became famous for working many miracles. 
Through the influence of this king, after he had become a 
monk, licence was granted to the monks of the church of Lin- 
disfarne to drink wine or ale ; for before, they were in the 
habit of drinking only milk or water, according to the ancient 
rule prescribed by Saint Aidan, the first bishop of that church, 
and that of the monks who, coming with him from Scotland, 
had received there a settlement by the munificence of king 
Oswald, and rejoiced to live in great austerity, with a view to 
a future life. 

In the same year, many cities, monasteries, and towns, in 
various places, and even kingdoms, were laid waste by sudden 
conflagrations ; such, for instance, as the city of Sterburgwenta, 22 
Homunic, 23 the city of London, the city of York, and Doncaster ; 
many other places' also, the same calamity overtook. 

In the same year died Frehelm the priest and abbat, and 
Tocca, 24 bishop of the Mercians, on which Eadbert was ordained 
bishop in his room. At this period, also, Frithwold, bishop 
of Whitherne, departed from this world, and Pechtwin was 
appointed in his stead. 25 

22 This is most probably an error, the name of two places being made 
into one. Lambarde in his Dictionary, quoting from Simeon of Durham, 
mentions in place of this name, Stretbourgh and Winton, and adds, " by 
which order of speech it seemeth that he took it for a great town ; how- 
beit, I have not hitherto found it." Holinshed (whether quoting from 
Roger de Hoveden, or Simeon of Durham, does not appear,) mentions 
here Stretehu and Geivento, places, not improbably, as imaginary as the 
Sterburgwenta of our text. 

23 It is not clear what place is meant by this name. Holinshed men- 
tions it as Alnwick. 

24 V. r. Totta. 

f M In the text, " Candida Casa," or " the White House." The bishopric 
of Whitherne was also called that of the Picts, Abercorn, or Galloway. 
Its establishment is thus related by Bede, Eccles. Hist. B. iii. c. 4. 
" In year of our Lord 565, when Justin the younger, the successor of 
Justinian, had the government of the Roman empire, there came into Britain 
a famous priest and abbot, a monk by habit and life, whose name was 
Columba, to preach the word of God to the province of the northern 
Picts, who are separated from the southern parts by steep and rugged 
mountains ; for the southern Picts, who dwell on the side of those moun- 
tains, had long before, as is reported, forsaken the errors of idolatry, and 
embraced the truth, by the preaching of Ninias, a most reverend bishop 
and holy man of the British nation, who had been regularly instructed at 



8 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDE2T. A.D. 768. 

In the year 765, fiery strokes were seen in the air, such as 
formerly appeared on the night of the calends of January, as I 
have already mentioned. 2fi In the same year Ethelwald lost 27 
the kingdom of Northumbia at Wincanheale, m on the third day 
hefore the calends of November, and was succeeded in the 
kingdom by Alcred, who was a descendant, as some say, of 
king Ida. Hemeli, bishop of the Mercians, also departed this 
life. Cuthred was ordained bishop of Lichfield; and at the 
same period archbishop Bregwin died, and had Lambert for his 
successor ; bishop Aldulph also dying, Ceolwulph succeeded 
him in the diocese of Lindesey. 

In the year 766, Egbert, archbishop of York, rested in the 
peace of Christ, on the thirteenth day before the calends of 
December, it being the thirty-fourth year of his episcopate; 
and in the same year Saint Frithebert, bishop of Hagustald, ^ 
departed this life. 

In the year 767, Albert was consecrated bishop of York, and 
Alcmund bishop of Hexham, on the eighth day before the 
calends of May. In the same year Albert was ordained bishop 
of the East Saxons, and Ceolwulph was consecrated bishop of 
Lindesey. In this year also, Etha, the anchorite, died happily 
at Cric, 30 a place distant about ten miles from the city of York. 

In the year 768, being the tenth year after the abdication 
of his kingdom, Eadbert happily breathed forth his spirit, 
being a member of the priesthood, and devoted to the service 
of God. In the same year died Pepin, king of the Franks, 
and Hadwin was ordained bishop at Macuhi. 31 

Rome, in the faith and mysteries of the truth ; whose episcopal see, 
named after St. Martin the bishop, and famous for a stately church 
(wherein he and many other saints rest in the body), is still in existence 
among the British nation. The place belongs to the province of the 
Bernicians, and is generally called the ' White House,' because he there 
built a church of stone, which was not usual among the Britons." 

26 Under the year 745. 

27 This seems to imply that he was deprived of it by treachery or 
violence. Holinshed says, " After that Moll had reigned six years, he 
resigned his kingdom. But others write that he reigned eleven years, 
and was iu the end slain by treason of his successor Altred." 

28 Probably Finchale, in Durham ; though Lambarde suggests that 
Wighal, near Thorpebares, in Yorkshire, is the place here spoken of. 

29 Hexham. 3 Probably Crecca, or Crake, near York. 

31 Probably Saint Mesmin de Mici, in the province of Orleans, in France. 



A.D. 774. DESCEIPTION OF BEBBANBTJRGH. 9 

In the year 769. Cataract 31 was burnt by the tyrant Carnred, 
and by the judgment of God, he himself perished by fire in 
the same year. 

In the year 771, Offa, king of Mercia, subdued in war the 
nation of the East Angles. In the same year, Carloman, the 
king of the Franks, being attacked by a sudden disease, 
departed this life, on which his brother Charles, 32 who had 
before possessed half his father's kingdom, acquired the 
sovereignty of the whole, and afterwards, by his invincible 
bravery, obtained the chieftainship of all the peoples of the 
Franks. 

In the year 772, Charles, the king of the Franks, having 
collected a powerful army and assembled the warlike forces 
of his kingdom, invaded the nation of the Saxons, and after 
having lost many of his principal and most noble men, betook 
himself home. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 773, bishop 
Hadwin 32 * departed this life, and Leuthfrid was appointed 
bishop in his room. Wulfeth also, abbat of Beverley, died, 
and Albert, the archbishop of York, received the pall that 
had been sent to him by pope Adrian. 

In the year 774, duke Eadwulph died, and Alcred being 
deprived of the counsel and assistance of his own family and 
his chief men, exchanged the dignity of a crown for exile, and 
with a few companions of his flight, first betook himself to the 
city of Bebba, M and afterwards to the king of the Picts whose 
name was Cynoth. The city of Bebba is an extremely well 
fortified place, of no great size, but extending over the space of 
about two or three fields, having a single approach, hollowed 
out [of the rock], and in a wonderful manner raised on high and 
ascended by steps ; it has, on the summit of a hill, a church most 

beautifully built, in which is a precious shrine, wherein, wrapped 
in a pall, lies the right hand of the holy king Oswald, uncornipted, 
as Bede, the historian of this nation, relates. There is on the 

* western side, and in the highest part of the city, a fountain 



31 Catterick, in Yorkshire. 32 Known in history as Charlemagne. 

32 * The words in the original are " Episcopus Migensis." It is not 
improbable that the bishopric of Orleans is here alluded to ; probably 
the same that is mentioned under the year 768. 

3:5 Bamborough. 



10 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 780. 

hollowed out in a marvellous fashion, the water of which is 
sweet to drink, and most limpid to the sight. 

Ethelred, 34 the son of Ethelwald, reigned in his father's 
stead, and, as will appear in the sequel, held the govern- 
ment hardly five years. At the same period, Charles, the most 
invincible king of the Franks, after having harassed it with a 
siege, took Ticinum, the most noble city of the Lombards, 
together with king Desiderius himself, and gained possession 
of the whole of Italy. 

In the year 775, Cynoth, king of the Picts, departed this 
life, and duke Eadulph was fraudulently taken prisoner by 
stratagem, and after a short time slain, buried, and forgotten. 
Abbat Ebbi also died, and king Charles, as I have already 
observed, the most warlike of the Franks, being attended 
and supported by, and glorying in, the entire might of his 
army, entered the country of the Saxon in battle array, and 
accompanied by his legions. This district, raging with fire and 
sword, he laid waste by most severe conflicts ; inflamed with 
furious anger, with a mighty arm he succeeded in adding to 
his own supreme empire the cities of Sigeburg and Aresburg, M 
and the province of Bohwer, 36 which had been previously over- 
run by the Franks. 

In the year 777, Pecwin, bishop of Whitherne, departed to 
the Lord, and was succeeded by Ethelbert. 

In the year 779, Ethelred being expelled from the throne, 37 
and driven into exile, was forced to undergo great trials. On 
the expulsion of Ethelred, Elfwald, the son of Osulph, re- 
ceived the kingdom of Northumbria, and held it ten years. He 
was a pious and just king, as a future circumstance will prove. 

In the year 780, dukes Osbald and Ethelherd, having collected 
an army, burned Beam, the king's patrician, 38 at Seletune, 39 
on the ninth day before the calends of January. In the same 
year, archbishop Albert departed from this world unto Christ, 
Eanbald, while he was yet alive, having been appointed to the 

st By some called Ethelbert. 35 Probably Arensberg, in Westphalia. 

36 Probably a mistake for Roer, or Rohwer, a river of Westphalia, the 
allusion being to the province through which it flows. 

37 Of Northumbria. M See the note under year 788. 

39 Lambarde says, " I take this place to be Salton, now in Yorkshire, 
and yet the conjecture were not unreasonable to think it Salston, in 
Nottinghamshire. ' ' 



A.D. 787. LEGATES ABBIVE FEOM HOME. 11 

same see. Bishop Kinewulph 40 also, having laid aside the cares of 
the world, this year gave up the government of his church, to- 
gether with the management of all his household, 41 to Higbald. 
In the same year also, bishop Eanbald, having received the 
pall which had been sent him from the Apostolic See, was 
solemnly invested as archbishop. 

In the year 781, Alcmund, bishop of Hagustald, a man of 
remarkable piety and of great virtues, departed to Christ, in 
the third year of the reign of the glorious king Elfwald, on the 
seventh day before the ides of September ; Saint Gilbert 42 suc- 
ceeded him. 

In the year 783, being the third year of the righteous king 
Elfwald, Werburg, who had formerly been queen of the Mercians, 
but was then an abbess, departed this life, to live eternally 
with Christ. At the same period, bishop Kinewulph departed 
to the realms of heaven in the fortieth year of his episcopate. 

In the year 786, being the eighth year of king Elfwald, 
Bothwin, the venerable abbat of the church of Bipon, in the 
sight of his brethren who were present, departed to the king- 
dom of heaven, and Albert was elected in his room and or- 
dained. In the same year Aldulph was consecrated bishop by 
archbishop Eanbald, and bishops Gilbert and Higbald, at Cor- 
bridge. 43 In these days, Bictrith, who was formerly a queen, 
and afterwards an abbess, departed unto the Lord. At the same 
period, Kinewulph, king of the West Saxons, was murdered in 
a dreadful manner by the perfidious tyrant Kinebard, and the 
cruel assassin, himself, was without mercy slain by duke Osred, 
the avenger of his master ; upon which, Brithric received the 
kingdom of the "West Saxons. At this time, legates from the 
Apostolic See were sent to Britain (the venerable bishop George 
being the chief among them) by pope Adrian, to renew among 
ms the ancient ties of friendship and the catholic faith, which 
Saint Gregory the pope had taught through Saint Augustine : 
having been honorably received by the kings and archbishops 
or primates of this country, they returned home in peace, with 
great presents, as was befitting. 

In the year 787, a synod was held at Wincanheale, 44 on the 

40 Bishop of Lindisfarne. 

41 " Familiae ;" alluding probably to the community of monks at Lin- 
disfarne. Roger of Wendover says Tilbert. 

43 In Northumberland. 4 * See under the year 765. 



12 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 791. 

fourth day before the nones of September; at this period, 
Albert, abbot of Eipon, died, and Sigred succeeded him. 

In the year 788, a conspiracy having been formed, king Elf- 
wald was slain by a shocking death, by his patrician 44 * Sigga, 
the ninth day before the calends of October, at a place 
called Siltecester near the wall. 45 The body of this excellent 
king was carried by great crowds of monks to the church 
of Hagustald, attended with the chaunts of the clergy, 
and was honorably buried there, in the church of Saint 
Andrew. He was succeeded by his nephew Osred, the son of 
king AlcrQd, who reigned one year. In the place where the 
good king Elfwald was murdered, a light sent down from 
heaven, is said to have been seen by great numbers of people. 
A church was built there by the faithful of that place, and 
consecrated to the honor of God, and of the saints, Cuthbert 
the bishop, and Oswald the king and martyr. 

In the year 790, Ethelred was recalled from exile, and again, 
by the grace of Christ, seated on the throne of his king- 
dom. But king Osred, having been betrayed by the treachery 
of his nobles, was deprived of his kingdom and shorn in the 
city of York, and afterwards, compelled by necessity, went 
into exile. In the second year of his reign, duke Eardulph 
was taken prisoner, and was taken to Eipon, and there slain 
without the gate of the church by the above-named king. The 
brethren having carried his body to the church with Gregorian 
chaunts, and then placed it in a tent outside thereof, after 
midnight he was found alive within the church. 

In the same year Baldwulph was ordained bishop of Whi- 
therne, at the place which is called Hearrahaldh, which may 
be translated "the place of the lords." For in the preceding 
year, bishop Ethelbert left his own see, 47 on the death of Saint 
Gilbert, and received the bishopric of Hagustald, as his see. 

In the year 791, the sons of king Elfwald were dragged 
away by force from the city of York, and, having been enticed 
from the principal church by false promises, were shockingly 
slain by king Ethelred, at Wonwaldremere ; 48 their names were 

41 * The Patricians of the Anglo-Saxon kings were probably nobles of 
high rank, attached to the royal household. 

45 The wall of Severus is alluded to. The author of the chronicles of 
Durham and Lindisfarne calls the place Thirlwall. Perhaps Benwell, in 
Northumberland, is the place alluded to. 47 Of Whitherne. 

* 8 Said by Lambarde to beWinandermere, nearKendal, in Westmoreland. 



A.D. 793. DESCRIPTION OP LIKDISFAENE. 13 

Elf and Elfwin. In this year also, Lambert, archbishop of 
Canterbury, departed to the Lord ; Ethelherd, abbat 49 of the 
monastery of Lhuda, was elected his successor and consecrated 
archbishop. 

In the year 792, Charles, king of the Franks, sent to Britain 
a book containing articles agreed upon in a synod, which had 
been sent to him from Constantinople; in which book, oh 
shame ! there were found many things repugnant and contrary 
to the true faith, and especially that it had been unanimously 
agreed to by three hundred, or even more, of the various 
bishops of the East, that image* ought to be worshipped, a 
thing that the Church of God utterly abhors. Against this 
Albinus wrote an epistle, wonderfully confirmed by the autho- 
rity of the Holy Scriptures, and presented it with the same 
book, in the name of our bishops and princes, to the king of 
the Franks. 

In the same year also, Osred, relying upon the oath and 
fidelity of certain nobles, came secretly from Eufania, 50 the 
place of his exile ; and then, being deserted by his soldiers, 
was taken prisoner by the said king Ethelred, and by his order 
slain at a place called Dingburg, on the eighteenth day before 
the calends of October. His body was carried to Tyne- 
mouth, 81 and buried in the royal tomb, in the noble monastery 
there. In the same year king Ethelred took as his queen 
Elfleda, the daughter of Offa, king of Mercia, at Cataract, on 
the third day before the calends of October. 

In the year 793, being the fourth year of the reign of King 
Ethelred, dreadful prodigies alarmed the wretched nation of the 
English, for terrific lightnings, and dragons in the air, and strokes 
of fire were seen hovering on high and shooting to and fro ; which 
were ominous signs of the great famine and the frightful and 
Ineffable slaughter of multitudes of men which afterwards 
ensued. In the same year also, duke Sigga, who slew king 
Elfwald, died a merited death, and his body was carried to the 
island of Lindisfarne, on the ninth day before the calends of 
May. 

Lindisfarne is a large island, eight miles or thereabouts in 
circumference. In it was a noble monastery, where the illus- 

49 Roger of Wendover says, that he was previously bishop of Winchester. 

50 Probably either the Hebrides, a name of which was Evania, or the 
Isle of Man, which was called Ebonia. 51 In Northumberland. 



14 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOTEDEN. A.D. 793. 

trious bishop Cuthbert was interred, 42 together with other 
bishops who most worthily succeeded him. With respect to 
them, the words of the chaunt may be appropriately repeated 
" The bodies of the saints are buried in peace." M Lindis is 
the name of a river which, two feet in width, runs into the 
sea. When it is " Ledon," or low tide, the river can be seen ; 
but when it is "Malina," or the high tide of the sea, then the 
Lindis cannot be seen. The tide of the ocean follows the moon, 
and, as though by its inhaling, is raised to high water, and 
then, by its breathing forth, is driven back again. It seems 
to flow and to ebb twice a day, later each time by three 
quarters and 54 half an hour, as Bede testifies. Fame is the 
name of an island on which the most blessed Cuthbert passed 
the life of a hermit. It is not so large as Lindisfarne, but 
is situate out at sea, and is buffeted day and night by huge 
billows. 

In the same year, the pagans, 85 coming from the northern 
regions to Britain with a naval armament, made descents' in all 
quarters, plundering, ravaging, and slaughtering, like most 
cruel wolves, not only beasts of burthen, oxen and sheep, but 
priests and Levites as well, and multitudes of monks and nuns. 
They came, as I have observed, to the church of Lindisfarne 
and laid waste all places with dreadful havoc, trod down holy 
places with their polluted feet, undermined the altars, and 
carried off all the treasures of the holy church. Some of the 
brethren they slaughtered ; some they carried off" with them 
in chains ; a very great number, loaded with abuse, they thrust 
out naked, and some they drowned in the sea. With respect 
to them, the words maybe appropriately quoted: "Fortune 
bears hard upon the lot of the guiltless. Evil is the due punish- 
ment of wickedness. The wrong-doers are seated after their wont 
on a lofty throne, and the guilty in an unjust manner are tread- 
ing upon the necks of the righteous. Bright virtue lies concealed 
in obscure shades, and the just suffer the penalties of the wicked." 

82 " Positus erat " may either mean that they were located there during 
their lives, or that they were buried there. Probably the hitter is the 
meaning. 

53 " Corpora defunctorum in pace sepulta sunt." 

M In the original it is " et." " Aut," " or," would seem to be a more 
appropriate reading. The whole passage is involved in considerable oh- 
scurity. M The Danes. 



A.D. 796. DEATH OF ALEIC. 15 

These having retired, congratulating themselves on their booty 
and their wicked deeds, I shall recount what misfortunes the 
succeeding year brought. 

In the year 794, the pagans above mentioned having laid 
waste the harbour of king Egfrid, plundered the monastery of 
Donum. 56 But Saint Cuthbert did not permit them to depart 
without punishment ; for their chief was there slain by the 
English, and died a cruel death ; and, after the interval of a 
short time, the violence of a tempest wrecked, destroyed, and 
foundered their ships, and overwhelmed a vast number in the 
sea. TJpon this, some of them were thrown upon shore, and 
soon dispatched without mercy ; and this justly befell them, for 
they grievously injured those who had not injured them. At that 
time Ethelherd died, who was formerly a duke, but then a priest 
in the city of York. In the same year the venerable pope 
Adrian 57 departed unto the Lord on the seventh day before the 
calends of January. He held the See twenty-six years, ten 
months, and eleven days. He was buried in the church of 
Saint Peter, the prince of the Apostles, and over his tomb a 
tablet of marble, fixed against the wall, recounted his good 
works, in verses written by the command of king Charles 58 in 
letters of gold. 

In the year 795, the same most valiant king Charles, having 
laid waste their country, with a strong hand, by his arms 
subdued the nation of the Huns. Their prince having been 
put to flight, and their army worsted or cut to pieces, he car- 
ried away thence fifteen waggons filled with gold, silver, and 
precious vestments made entirely of silk, each of which was 
drawn by four oxen. All these the same king, on account of 
the victory which had been granted him by the Lord, ordered 
to be divided among the churches of Christ and the poor, re- 
turning thanks together with all those who had fought together 
with him. 

In the year 796, being the seventh year of King Ethelred, 
Alric, who was formerly a duke, but then a priest in the 
city of York, departed this life; and shortly afterwards, that is 

56 This passage is evidently corrupt. The words are " Portum Egfredi 
regis vastantes, Monasterium Doni annis prsedarerunt." The correspond- 
ing passage in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle is, " and plundered Egfert'a 
monastery at the mouth of the Wear." 

67 The' First. Charlemagne. 



16 AITNAI.S OF EOGEB DE HOVEDKN. A.D. 797. 

to say, on the fifth day before the calends of April, an eclipse 
of the moon took place between the time of cock-crow and day- 
break. In the same year, king Ethelred was slain at Cobre, 
on the fourteenth day before the calends of May. On this, 
Osbald, a patrician, was chosen king by some of the nobles of 
that nation ; and after twenty-seven days, being deserted by 
all the royal household and the nobles, and banished and ex- 
pelled from the kingdom, he retired with a few followers to 
the island of Lindisfarne, and went thence with some of the 
brethren by ship to the king of the Picts. 

Then Eardulph, whom I have previously mentioned, the son 
of Earnulph, having been recalled from exile, received the 
crown, and on the seventh day before the calends of June, 
was consecrated at York, in the church of Saint Peter, before 
the altar of Saint Paul, where that nation had first received the 
blessings of baptism. Not long after this, that is to say, on 
the seventh day before the calends of August, Offa, the most 
mighty king of the Mercians, departed this life, after having 
reigned thirty-nine years, and was succeeded in the kingdom 
by his son Egfrith, who died the same year. 

Upon this, Kenulph, the father of Kenelm, received the crown 
of the kingdom of Mercia, and gloriously held it in the invincible 
power of his might ; in the same year also Ccolwulph died at 
Lindesey, and shortly after, that is to say, on the fourth day 
before the ides of August, Archbishop Eanbald died at the 
monastery called Edete, and his body was carried, with 
a vast concourse accompanying it, to the city of York, and 
honorably buried there, in the church of Saint Peter the 
Apostle. Immediately thereupon, another Eanbald, a priest of 
the same church, was elected archbishop, and consecrated at 
Sochesburg 59 by bishops Ethelbert, Higbald, and Baldwulph. 

In the year 797, this last Eanbald, having received the pall 
from the Apostolic See, was solemnly confirmed in the arch- 
bishopric of Northumbria, on the sixth day before the ides of 
September, being the nativity of Saint Mary; with regard 
to which day, the poet says : " With honor shines the day on 
which Mary the good virgin, proceeding from the line of king 
David, was born unto the world." 

In the same year died Ethelbert, bishop of Hagustald, whom 

69 Socbnrgh, in the diocese of Durham. 



A.D. 799. DISASTEES IN IHE BB1TISH SEAS. 17 

Eadred succeeded, and was ordained by archbishop Eanbald 
and bishop Higbald at a place which is called Widford. 

In the year 798, a conspiracy having been entered into by 
the murderers of king Ethelred, "Wada, the leader in the plot, 
together with the others, fought a battle against king Erdulph, 
at a place which is called by the English Billingahon, near Wal- 
lalalege, and after many were slain on either side, earl "Wada 
with his men was put to flight, and king Erdulph bravely 
gained a victory over his foes. In the same year, London 
was destroyed by a sudden conflagration, together with a vast 
multitude of people. t 

At this period, Kenulph, king of the Mercians, with all the 
strength of his army, entered the province of Kent, and laid it 
waste with dreadful slaughter. At the same time, Eadbert, 
king of Kent, was taken prisoner, and the king of the Mercians 
ordered his eyes to be put out, and his hands to be cut off with- 
out mercy, as a punishment for their pride and treachery ; then, 
having obtained the suffrage of the Lord, he added the rule of his 
kingdom to his own sway, placing the crown upon his head and the 
sceptre in his hand. In the same year also, being the third year 
of the above-named king Kenulph, a synod was held at the place 
which is called "Wincanhele, 60 under the presidency of arch- 
bishop Eanbald, many ecclesiastics and men of princely dignity 
attending thereat. They devised many things for the benefit of 
the Holy Church of God, and of the nation of Northumbria and 
all the provinces, as to the observance of Easter, feasts, and 
judgments, both holy and secular. These enactments rendered 
those days distinguished for just kings, virtuous nobles, and 
holy bishops, and other wise men, namely, priests and monks; 
through the foresight and justice of whom, and their holy deeds, 
the state of the kingdom of Northumbria sent forth a sweet 
fragrance in those times. The lord archbishop Eanbald com- 
tianded the profession of faith in the articles of the five synods 
to be repeated, concerning which it is thus written in the 
history of the English : " We do agree to the holy and universal 
decrees of the five synods of the fathers, holy and acceptable to 
God, in such form as the text of the present book contains," &c. 

In the year 799, in the British seas a very great number of 
ships were tossed and wrecked, or dashed against each other, 
and sunk, together with a vast multitude of men. In the same 

60 Finchale, in Durham. 
VOL. I. 



18 ANNALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEU. A.D. 801. 

year, Brorda, a prince of the Mercians, who was also called 
Hyldegils, departed this life. An abbat also, whose name was 
Altilthegno, 61 was murdered by his deputy, and died a shocking 
death. At this period, Osbald, who was formerly an exile 
and a patrician, and king for a time, but afterwards an abbat, 
departed this life, and was buried in the church at York. Earl 
Aldred, the murderer of king Ethelred, was slain by earl Thor- 
mund, in revenge for his master the said king. 

In the year 800, Heardred, bishop of Hagustald, 62 died in 
the third year of his episcopate, and was succeeded by Ean- 
brith. At the same period also, on the ninth day before the 
calends of January, the day before the Nativity of our Lord, a 
mighty wind blowing either from the south or the west, by its 
indescribable force destroyed very many cities, houses, and towns 
in various places, and levelled them with the ground ; innumer- 
able trees were also torn up from the roots, and thrown to the 
ground. In the same year an inundation took place, the sea 
flowing beyond its ordinary limits. An extensive murrain also 
prevailed among the cattle in various places. 

In the year 801, Edwin, also called Eda, who had formerly 
been a duke of Northumbria, but was at that time, by the 
grace of the Saviour of the world, an abbat, being firmly 
rooted in the service of God, breathed his last, in the presence 
of his brethren, on the eighteenth day before the calends of 
February. At this time, Eardulph, king of Northumbria, 
led an army against Kenwulph, king of Mercia, because he had 
entertained his enemies ; the latter also collected an army, and 
obtained very considerable aid from other kingdoms. A long 
war having been waged between them, at length, by the advice 
of the bishops and chief men among the English on both sides, 
and through the intervention of the king of the Angles, 63 they 
agreed to a truce; and a most solemn treaty of peace was 
concluded between them, which, by oath upon the gospel of 
Christ, both kings ratified, taking God for their witness, and 
giving sureties, that all their days, so long as they should 
live and be invested with the insignia of royalty, there should 
remain between them lasting peace and true friendship, un- 
shaken and inviolate. 

In the same year Hathubert, bishop of London, departed this 
life, and shortly after a great part of the city itself was de- 

61 This passage is probably corrupt. 62 Hexham. 

63 Probably this alludes to the king of East Angha. 



A.D. 802. WICKEDXESS OF EADBUEGA. 19 

stroyed by a sudden conflagration. In this year Charles, the 
most mighty king of the Franks, was declared supreme emperor 
at Rome, by all the senate, the imperial crown being placed 
upon his head by our lord the pope. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 802, Brithric, 
the king of the West-Saxons, who had most gloriously reigned 
over that nation for seventeen years, departed this life, and 
was succeeded by Egbert. The said king Brithric had taken 
in marriage Eadburga, daughter of Offa, king of the Mercians, 
who ordered the great dyke to be made between Britain 64 and 
Mercia, that is to say, from sea. to sea. Now this Eadburga, 
being the daughter of a king and surrounded with much pomp, 
was inspired with wonderful ambition, and, after the manner 
of her father, began to live in a tyrannical manner and to 
despise all men, insomuch that she was hated not only by nobles 
and magistrates, but even by all the people. She did not cease 
uttering accusations continually against all the religious before 
the king, and by her evil speaking so wrought upon her husband 
by means of her blandishments, that those whom she accused, 
she caused to be put to death or banished the realm ; and if 
she was unable to effect this, she did not hesitate secretly to 
take them off by poison. 

There was at that time a certain illustrious youth, very 
dear to the above-named king, and greatly beloved by him, 
whom, when she wished to accuse him to the king, and could 
not accomplish it, with wicked intent she cut off by poison, 
the king in ignorance having tasted which, he expired. But she 
had not purposed to give the poison to the king, but to the 
youth, whereas the head of all the nobles partaking of it first, 
they both drank of the deadly draught, and both perished 
through the extremely bitter taste thereof. He being slain by 
f eason of this wicked deed, this most wicked poisoner was 
smitten with fear, and crossing the seas in her flight with in- 
numerable treasures, repaired to Charles, the most famous king 
of the Franks. 

As she stood before him in his chamber, and offered the 
king precious gifts, he thus addressed her ; " Choose, Eadburga, 
which of the two you would prefer, myself or my son, who is 
standing with me in the room ;" on which she, without any deli- 
beration, foolishly made answer and said ; " If the option were 
** Meaning Wales. 

c2 



20 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 749. 

given me, I would sooner choose your son than yourself, be- 
cause he seems to be the younger;" on which king Charles is 
said to. have replied : " If you had chosen me, you should 
have had my son, but inasmuch as you have chosen him, you 
shall have neither me nor him for your own." However, on 
account of her wickedness, the king conferred on her a most 
excellent monastery, in which, laying aside her secular dress, 
and hypocritically assuming the garb of the nuns, she spent a 
very few years. For as this execrable woman lived wickedly 
in her own country, so much more the miserably and wickedly 
was she discovered to have been living in a foreign land. For, a 
short space of time having elapsed, while by some she was 
supposed to be performing her appropriate duties, she was de- 
bauched by a certain low fellow of her own nation. " Let 
cloudy error give way before justice ; let it cease, in fact, to 
seem a wondrous thing, that a woman should be taken in 
adultery." There is nothing for one to wonder at ; " Nothing 
is there concealed which shall not be known." 

After this, by order of the emperor Charles the Great, she was, 
with great weariness and anguish of mind, expelled from her 
holy monastery, and, exposed to the reproaches of all, passed 
the rest of her life in poverty and misery ; attended to the last 
by one poor servant, and begging daily at houses and castles 
and in cities, she died miserably at Pavia. 65 

Brithric, the glorious king of the West-Saxons, being dead, 
king Egbert succeeded him in the rule and sway, and, spring- 
ing from the royal stock, placed the diadem of the whole king- 
dom on his head, being encircled with a most ample crown. 
For he was a most active man, and, distinguished for his 
power, he subjected many realms to his dominion. He reigned 
thirty-six years and seven months. 

To Egbert succeeded his most mighty son Etb.Qlyulph, 
who by his noble wife had four sons, whose names were Ethel- 
bald, Ethelbert, Ethelred, and Alfred, all of whom in turn 
succeeded to the kingdom. 

Cuthred, therefore, 66 the above mentioned king of Wessex, 
after having conquered the most valiant earl Edelhun, 67 as I 
have already 68 mentioned elsewhere, when, in the thirteenth 

65 Asser says that he had conversed with persons who had seen her 
begging there. K He now reverts for a period of about fifty years. 

67 Or Adhelm. 

68 This is an error, as he has not mentioned the victory over Edelhun. 



A.D. 749. BATTLE AT BBREFOBD. 21 

year of his reign, he was no longer able to endure the exactions 
and insolence of Ethelbald, king of Mercia, met him, with his 
troops ranged under their banners, at Bereford, 69 having post- 
poned all hopes of surviving to liberty. He also brought with 
him Edelhun, the above-named warlike earl, who was then 
reconciled to him, and relying on whose valour and counsel 
he was enabled to incur the hazards of war. On the other 
hand, Ethelbald, the king of kings, together with the Mercians, 
had brought the men of Kent, and the West Saxons, and 
numerous forces of the Angles. The armies, therefore, being 
drawn up in battle array, marching straight onward, were draw- 
ing close to each other, when Edelhun going before, and bearing 
the standard 70 of the king of "Wessex, which was a golden 
dragon, pierced the enemy's standard-bearer. On this, an 
outcry arising, the party of Cuthred was greatly encouraged, 
and immediately thereupon the hostile ranks closed, and 
rushed on to mutual slaughter, with dreadful blows and a 
terrific crash. 

In this battle, with all their pride, the Mercians were so 
humbled, that for a long series of succeeding years fortune ren- 
dered them subject to "Wessex. Anyone, who had just before seen 
the ranks shining with coats of mail, bristling with helmets, 
rough with lances, variegated with standards, and resplendent 
with gold, might shortly afterwards have seen them steeped in 
blood, with lances broken, scattered in ruin, bespattered with 
human brains, and frightful to look upon. With determined ob- 
stinacy, and displaying the greatest bravery, they rallied beneath 
their standards, and waged the combat with swords and battle- 
axes, and with direful intent line rushed on against line, each 
side having an assured hope of victory. There was no thinking 
of flight ; the Mercians were urged on by the swelling pride of 
their proud dominion, the men of Wessex were inflamed by the 
dread of slavery. But in every direction Edelhun, the above- 
named earl, penetrated the ranks, and a road lay open, strewed 
with ruin, while in the dreadful carnage his battle-axe was 
hewing through both bodies and armour. 

Ethelbald, the most valiant king of the Mercians, rushed on 
in every direction, and slaughtered the enemy, while to his 

69 Burford. 70 Roger of Wendover makes a mistake in representing 
Edelhun (whom he calls Athelun) as the standard bearer of Ethelbald, 
the king of the Mercians. 



22 AITNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 776. 

most unconquerable sword arms were only like garments, 
bones like flesh. "When, therefore, (just like two fires set 
in different places, which consume every thing that inter- 
venes) it came to pass that the king and the earl met face 
to face, each terribly and franticly gnashed his teeth at the 
other and shook his right hand and put himself on his guard, and 
with mighty blows they both provoked the attack. But the God 
who opposes the haughty, depressed the wonted confidence of 
mind of the haughty king. When, therefore, he could neither 
recover his spirit nor his strength, while his own men were still 
engaged, in a fit of terror he took to flight, and from that day to 
the time of his death, God granted him no prosperity whatever. 
For, four years after this, again engaging 71 at Secandune, 72 after 
a dreadful slaughter of his army, disdaining flight, he was slain, 
and was buried at Eepandun; 73 and thus this most mighty king, 
after he had reigned forty-one years, paid the penalty for his 
immoderate pride. 

From this period, the kingdom of "Wessex, being greatly 
strengthened, did not cease to increase till it had reached perfec- 
tion. In the fourteenth year of his reign, Cuthred fought against 
the Britons, 74 who, vainly opposing him who had conquered king 
Ethelbald, speedily took to flight, and deservedly suffered a very 
great slaughter, without any loss to the enemy. In the follow- 
ing year, Cuthred, the high and mighty king, illustrious for so 
many successes and victories, departed this life. 

Sigebert, a relation of the above-named king, succeeded him, 
but held the sovereignty for a short time only ; for growing 
haughty and insolent, by reason of the exploits of his prede- 
cessor, he became intolerable even to his own domestics, as he 
ill-treated them in all manner of ways, and either perverted the 
common laws of the kingdom to his own advantage, or disre- 
garded them for his own profit ; on which, Cumbra, his earl, a 
most noble man, at the entreaty of the whole people, acquainted 
the cruel king with their complaints ; but when he exhorted 
him to act with more moderation, and to treat the people with 
kindness, and laying aside his wonted inhumanity, to show him- 
self amiable to God and man, the king immediately ordered 
him to be killed by an unrighteous death, and becoming more 
cruel and more intolerable to his people, proved himself a still 

71 With Cuthred. 72 Seckington ; Lambarde, however, conjectures 
Saxwold, in Lincolnshire. Repton, in Derbyshire. 74 The Welsh. 



A.D. 757. GENEALOGY OF OFFA. 23 

greater tyrant. In the second year of his reign, having per- 
sisted in his intolerable pride and wickedness, the nobles and 
the people of the whole kingdom met together, and upon mature 
deliberation, by the universal consent of all, king Sigebert was 
expelled from the kingdom. 

On this, Kinewulph, a virtuous young man of royal descent, 
was elected king. The impious Sigebert on being banished 
by his people, fearing the death that was the due of his 
wickedness, took to flight, and concealed himself in a great 
wood which is called Andredeswald, 75 where a certain swineherd 
of earl Cumbra, who, as I have mentioned, had been iniquitously 
slain, found the king in his concealment, and recognized him 
when thus found, and becoming the avenger of his master, slew 
him when thus recognized. Behold the manifest judgments of 
God ! behold how, not only in a future world, but even in this, 
he worthily recompenses our deserts. For choosing bad kings 
for the merited chastisement of their subjects, one He permits 
to rage for long, in order that both a wicked people may long be 
harassed, and he, a still more wicked king, may suffer the greater 
torments in eternity; as, for instance, Ethelbald, the above- 
named king of Mercia. But another one He cuts short with 
a speedy end, lest his people, weighed down with excessive 
tyranny, may not be able to take breath, and by reason of the 
immoderate wickedness of the ruler, may deservedly incur the 
speedy retribution of the eternal vengeance ; as, for instance, 
this Sigebert of whom we are speaking, who in as great a degree 
as he proved himself wicked, was as disgracefully slain by a 
swineherd, and passed from one calamity to another. For 
which reason, to the eternal justice be praise and glory, now 
and for ever ! 

In the first year of king Kinewulph, Beornred succeeded 
JEthelbald, king of Mercia, in the kingdom, but only for a short 
time. For in the same year Offa expelled him, and reigned 
over Mercia thirty-nine years. Offa, a most noble youth, was the 
son of Winfred, the son of Kanwulph, the son of Osmod, the son 
of Epa, the son of Wippa, the son of Creada, the son of Kine- 
wald, the son of Cinbba, the son of Hycis, the son of Comer, 

" 5 This wood is considered by Lambarde to have been in Kent, and the 
part which is now called the Weald of Kent. The place, however, at 
which Sigebert was slain is mentioned as Privet's-flood, and is supposed to 
be the same as Privett, in Hampshire. 



24 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 763. 

the son of Ageltheu, the son of Offa, the son of "Wermund, 
the son of Widaet, the son of "Woden. 76 

Offa was a most warlike king ; for he conquered the people 
of Kent in battle, and Vanquished in war the people of Wessex 
and the Northumbrians. He also shewed himself a pious man, 
for he transferred the bones of Saint Alban to a monastery which 
he had built and greatly enriched, and gave to the pope of 
Home, the vicar of St. Peter, a fixed tribute for ever, from each 
town in his kingdom. 77 

In the third year of king Kinewulph, Eadbert, king of the 
Northumbrians, seeing the unfortunate lives and unhappy ends 
of the above-named kings, (namely, Ethelbald and Sigebert,) 
and at the same time the praiseworthy life and glorious end 
of his predecessor Ceolwulph, chose that better part which 
could not be taken away from him. For having resigned 
his kingdom, he assumed the tonsure of his head, destined to 
produce for him an everlasting crown, and put on the dark- 
coloured clothes that were to confer on him an ethereal splendour. 
He was the eighth of those kings who of their own accord gave 
up their kingdoms for Christ, or rather, to speak more truth- 
fully, exchanged them for an eternal kingdom ; which eight 
are in the everlasting enjoyment of the multiplied delights of 
unspeakable blessings, and their blessed example is worthy of 
imitation. 

He was succeeded in the kingdom by his son Osulf ; who 
after he had reigned one year, was infamously betrayed by 
his own household, and slain. 

After him, Mollethelwald 78 reigned nine years. About this 
time archbishop Cuthbert 79 died. 

In the sixth year of the reign of king Kinewulph, Ethelbert, 
king of Kent, departed this life. In the same year, Ceolwulph, 
who, having resigned his earthly kingdom, had become a 
monk, departed unto a heavenly one. In the following year, 

76 Roger of Wendover differs considerably in the names, and gives two 
more ancestors to Offa before Woden. His words are, " the son of Ware- 
mund, who was the son of Withleg, who was the son of Wagon, who was 
the son of Frethegeath, who was the son of Woden." 

7 7 This is the Rome-scot, or St. Peter's pence, which consisted of a 
penny from each house, payable on the festival of Saint Peter. According 
to some accounts, it was Ina who made the first grant of it to the Papal see. 

? 8 This is the same king whom he has already mentioned under the year 
759, by the name of Ethelwald, surnamed Moll. 
79 Of Canterbury. 



A.D.779. CONVERSION OP THE ANCIENT SAXONS. 25 

Lambert was made archbishop of Canterbury. After having 
reigned six years, Mollethelwald resigned 80 the kingdom of Nor- 
thumbria ; after him Aelred reigned eight years, in the second 
year of whose reign, Egbert, archbishop of York, departed this 
life, after having enjoyed the archbishopric for a period of 
thirty.-six years : Frithebert, bishop of Hagustald, 81 also died, 
after having been bishop thirty-four years. 

Archbishop Egbert was succeeded by Adelbert, 82 and Alc- 
mund succeeded bishop Fridebert. 

In the fourth year of king Aelred, died Pepin, king of the 
Franks, Stephen, pope of Rome, and Eadbert, 83 the son of Hecta, 
a most famous duke of [East] Anglia. 

In the year of grace 769, in the fifteenth year of king Kine- 
wulph, a wondrous mutation first began to take place. 84 For 
the Roman empire, which had for so many years continued to 
enjoy pre-eminence, became subject tp Charles the Great, king 
of the Franks. This took place after thirty years of his reign, 
which first commenced in this year, 85 and from that time for- 
ward, down to the present day, it has belonged to his successors. 

In the twentieth year of king Kinewulph, king Offa and the 
Mercians fought against the people of Kent at Ottanforde, 86 
and after a dreadful slaughter on both sides, the illustrious 
Offa was crowned with success. In the same year, the 
Northumbrians expelled their king Aelred from Eworwic, 87 in 
Easter week, and chose for their king, Ethelred, the son 
of Mollethelwald, who reigned four years. In this year were 
seen dreadful signs in the heavens after sunset, of a red color; 88 
and, to the great astonishment of people, serpents were seen in 
Sussex. 

In the second year after this, the Ancient Saxons, from whom 

S 80 He says previously, under the year 765, that this king lost his king- 
om at Wincanhele. 
81 Hexham. ffi Before called by him, Albert. 

83 The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle calls him a king, but it does not appear 
of what place. 

84 This is a paraphrase for the words in the text, " Incepit fieri muta- 
tatio dexterae excelsi ;" which literally translated, would make perfect 
nonsense. The text is evidently corrupt. 

85 This is wrong ; he has previously said that his reign began in the 
year 771. 

86 Otford, in Kent. " York. 

88 Ethel werd, in his Chronicle, says, that it was the sign of the Lord's cross. 



26 A3T3STALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 782. 

the English nation is descended, were converted to the faith, 
and in the same year,Withwin, 89 bishop of Whitherne, departed 
this life, in the twenty-fourth year 90 of his episcopate. 

In the twenty-fourth year of his reign, Kinewulph fought 
against Offa, near Benetune ; 91 being humbled by the fortune 
of war, he retreated, 92 and Offa reduced that fortified place to 
subjection. In the same year, Ethelbert was consecrated at 
Eworwic, 93 bishop of Whitherne. 

In the following year, Ethelbald and Herebert, earls of the 
king of Northumbria, rebelled against their master, and slew 
Aldulph, the son of Bose, general of the king's army, in a 
pitched battle at Kingesdiwe ; 94 and afterwards in a great battle, 
the same generals slew Kinewulph and Egga, the king's earls, 
at Hilatirn. Upon this, the above-named king Ethelred, 
having lost his generals and ,his hopes, fled from before them, 
and they elected Alfimod 95 king, who reigned for a period of 
ten years. In the following year, the nobles and high-reeves 
of Northumbria burned a certain earl and justiciary of theirs, 97 
who had shown himself more severe than was befitting. In the 
same year, archbishop Esbert" died at Cestre, 1 and was suc- 
ceeded by Enbalo. In this year, Kinebald was made bishop 
of Lindisfarne. In the same year also, a battle took place 
between the Pranks and Ancient Saxons, the Pranks being 
the conquerors. 

In the next year, Alfinild, king of Northumbria, sent to 
Rome for the pall, and gave it to archbishop Embald. 2 At 
the same period, Gilbert succeeded Alcmund, bishop of Ha- 

>9 Under the year 777, he previously calls him Pechtwiu. 
10 This is probably incorrect ; he held the bishopric but fourteen years, 
according to the Saxon Chronicle. 

"' Benson, or Benington, in Oxfordshire. 

92 The various reading, " loco secessit,"seems far preferable to that in the 
text, " jocose cessit ;" " he jokingly," or " good humouredly yielded." 

93 York. 

94 The various reading is Kingsclive. Roger of Wendover calls this 
place Cunesclive, and the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle Kings-cliff. 

ss Under the year 779, he is previously called Elfwald. A various 
reading makes the name " Alfimold." Below he is called Alfinild. 

' 7 The fate of the patrician Beam is previously related under the year 
780. 

89 Of York. He is previously called Albert. The Saxon Chronicle 
says that he died at York. l Probably Chester-le-street, in Durham. 

2 Also called Eanbald and Enbalo. 



A.D. 7S6. DEATH OF KDfEWULPH. 27 

gustald, 8 who had lately died. About this time, there was 
a synod held at Ade. 4 After Kinewulph had reigned twenty- 
six years, and, being victorious, had gained many battles against 
the Britons, 5 and subdued them on every side, 6 at length, he 
determined on banishing a certain young man, named Kineard, 
the brother of Sigebert. Upon this, he attacked the king at 
Meretune, 7 whither he had privately gone to visit a certain 
female. On finding this to be the case, the king stoutly defended 
himself at the door, until he caught sight of the youth, upon 
which he rushed out and wounded him, whereon all his con- 
federates turned upon the king, and slew him On the uproar 
being heard, the king's soldiers, who were in the town, ran 
towards the youth, and refusing gifts of lands and money 
that were offered by him, all died bravely fighting, with the 
exception of one Briton, who was severely wounded, and taken 
as a hostage. In the morning, the soldiers of the king, who 
were near at hand in waiting, 8 when the king was slain, hem- 
med in the young man and his confederates; on which he thus 
said to them ; " Your kinsmen are on my side ; I will give 
you lands and money to your hearts' content, if you will not 
fight against us ; I made the same offer to your companions, 
and refusing it they perished !" To this they made answer, 
that no money was dearer to them than their lord, and that 
they would avenge the death of their king and their com- 
rades ; and then rushing on, after a severe combat at the 
door, they slew the young man and eighty-four others who 
were with him. The only one left was a little son of the 
young man, and he received a wound. Kinewulph was buried 
at Winchester, in the thirty-first year of his reign, the young 
man at Acsminster. 9 
Brithric, who also sprang from kingCerdic so often mentioned, 

A 

Hexham. 

4 Evidently a mistake for Acle, or Aclea, or Ockley, in Surrey ; which 
is mentioned in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle as the place where the synod 
was held in 782. The Welsh. 

6 The various reading, ?' Ex omnia parte," has been adopted, as it seems 
preferable to the words of the text, " Ex Dei parte." 

7 Merton, in Surrey. 8 " In atrio," literally, " in the court." 

9 Axminster, in Devon. William of Malmesbury, and Roger of Wen- 
dover, however, agree in stating, that he was buried at Repandun, or 
Repton, in Derbyshire. Kinewulph, in reality, reigned only nine and 
twenty years. 



28 AOTTALS OF BOGEB, DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 791. 

succeeded Kinewulph, and reigned over Wessex sixteen years. 
In his second year, pope Adrian sent legates into Britain, to re- 
new the faith which Augustine had preached. Being honorably 
received by the kings and the people, they raised a fair edi- 
fice upon a firm foundation, the mercy of Christ co-operating 
with them. They held a council at Cealtide, 10 where lambert 11 
resigned a portion of his episcopate ; there also Higbert was 
elected 12 by king Offa. In the same year, Egfrid was con- 
secrated king of the province of Kent. 13 

In the following year, being the year of grace 786, there 
appeared a sign 14 upon people's clothes, which may be justly 
deemed marvellous to be mentioned and to be heard of. Whether 
this took place as a forewarning of the movement relative to 
the recovery of Jerusalem, and the assumption of the cross, 15 
which happened three hundred and eleven years after this 
period, in the time of William 16 the younger, or whether it 
was rather intended for the correction of the people, lest they 
should not view the plague of the Danes with which they 
were shortly afterwards afflicted, in the light of a chastisement, 
I will not rashly undertake to settle, but, the mysteries of God 
I leave to God. 17 

In the fourth year of his reign, Brithric took to wife Ead- 
burga, the daughter of Offa, king of Mercia. Strengthened 
on the throne by this alliance, he gave way to pride. In these 
days, the Danes came to Britain, with three ships, for the sake 
of plunder ; the king's reeve in that province, seeing this, went 
to meet them without taking due precautions, in order that, hav- 
ing captured them, he might carry them to the king's town ; 19 
for he was ignorant who they were, or for what purpose they 
had come ; but, being immediately surrounded by them, he was 
slain. He was the first person of the English nation slain by 

10 Lambarde makes this place to be Chalkhythe, but does not say in 
what county. n Archbishop of Canterbury. 

lz To be Archbishop of Lichfield, the portion of his province which 
the Archbishop of Canterbury had resigned. 

13 Which he held jointly with his father Offa. u The sign of the cross. 

15 By the Crusaders as their emblem. I6 William Rufus. 

17 The note of interrogation in the text after " relinquimus " seems 
misplaced. 

18 "Praepositus regis;" the king's bailiff or reve, or steward of the 
shire ; holding the office of the present sheriff. 

19 " Castrum;" literally, " fortified town." 



A.D. 797. DEATH OF SIGGA. 29 

the Danes, and after him many thousands of thousands were 
slaughtered by them at different periods ; these too were the 
first ships of the Danes that arrived here. 

In the following year, a synod was held in Northumbria, at 
Wincanhele. 20 

In the sixth year of king Brithric, a synod was held at 
Aclea. 21 By infamous treachery, Sigga slew Alwulph, the good 
king of Northumbria. In the same spot where this king, the 
beloved of God, was slain, a heavenly light was often beheld ; 
his body was buried in the church of Hagustald. After him, 
Osred began to reign, but in the following year was betrayed, 
and expelled from the kingdom. 

Ethelred, the son of Mollethelwald, was then restored to the 
kingdom ; and in the fourth year of his reign, having collected 
forces for the purpose, Osred was on his return, in order that he 
might expel Ethelred from the kingdom, by whom he himself 
had been expelled. On his route he was captured and put to 
death, and buried at Tynemouth. How just then his remark, 
who said, " Oh, how blind to the future is the mind of man !" 
For when the above-mentioned youth Osred, dancing and elated 
with joy, was made king, how little did he think that in the 
second year from that time, he should be deprived of his 
throne, and in the fourth, of his life ! For which reason, let 
us ever be thoughtful in prosperity, being ignorant how near 
at hand adversity may be. 

At this time, Offa, king of the Mercians, ordered the head 
of Saint Ethelbert 21 * to be cut off, and in these days, Lambert, 
archbishop of Canterbury, departed this life, and abbat Ethel- 
red was elected in his room archbishop of Canterbury. Ean- 
bald, archbishop of York, consecrated Badulph, a bishop of 
Whitherne. 

In the tenth year of king Brithric, there were seen fiery 
dragons flying through the air, which tokens were followed by 
two plagues ; first, a dreadful famine, and then the pagan na- 
tions coming from Norway and Denmark. These first ravaged 
the kingdom of Northumbria in a frightful manner, and then, 
in the district of Lindisfarne, on the ides of January, dreadfully 
destroyed the churches of Christ, together with the inhabitants ; 
at which period also, died Sigga, the perfidious duke who had 
acted the traitor towards the righteous king Elfwald. 

20 Finchale. 21 Ockley, in Surrey. 21 * King of East Anglia. 

23 A mistake for Eadulph. He was the last bishop of Whitherne. 



30 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 799. 

In the eleventh year of king Brithric, that is to say, in the 
year of grace 795, the Northumbrians slew their king, Ethel- 
red, who, in the same year in which king Osred was slain, be- 
coming elated with pride, had forsaken his own wife and 
taken a new one, little thinking that he himself was des- 
tined to be slain within two years from that time. After him 
Herdulph obtained the kingdom of Northumbria, and was 
consecrated king by archbishop Embald, 23 bishop Ethelbert 
and bishop Hingbald, and bishop Baldulph, and ascended the 
throne at York. 

In these days pope Adrian and the great king Offa, departed 
this life ; this Offa reigned with mighty sway in Mercia, during 
a period of thirty-nine years. He subdued Kenulph, king of 
Wessex, and the people of Kent and Northumbria. 

King Offa was succeeded by his son Egfrith, who reigned 
one hundred and forty-one days, and then died ; he was suc- 
ceeded by Kenulph, the father of Kenelm, a most powerful 
king. 24 In the same year, Eadbert, who also bore the name 
of Pren, obtained the kingdom of Kent. The pagan nations 
laid waste Northumbria, and sacked the monastery of Egfrid 
at Tynemouth ; they were there met by the most noble of the 
English, men extremely well inured to war, and, their chieftains 
being slain, the barbarians were overcome, and betook themselves 
to their ships. When they had reached the sea, they continued 
their flight with their ships, on which some of them were 
wrecked by a tempest, and many of them drowned ; but some 
of them coming ashore were taken, and were beheaded near 
the sea-shore. 

Not long after this, Kenwulph, king of Mercia, laid waste the 
province of Kent, and captured Pren, who was not a match 
for him in might, and had consequently concealed himself in 
hiding-places and out-of-the-way spots, and carried him back 
with him in chains. 

In the fourteenth year of king Brithric, the Romans cut 
out the tongue of pope Leo, and put out his eyes, and expelled 
him from his see ; but he, as written documents inform us, 
through the grace of Christ, was enabled again to see and to 

23 Eanbald. 

24 The word " marls " seenjs out of place here, as no definite meaning 
can be attached to it, unless it is meant to say that Keiielin was a man, 
which seems quite superfluous. 



A.D. 802. BATTLE AT KINEJIEKESFOEDE. 31 

speak, and once more became pope. Three years after this, 
king Charles was made emperor, and having been consecrated 
by the same pope Leo, condemned those to death who had ill- 
treated the pope, but afterwards, by reason of the pope's en- 
treaties, he saved their lives, and sent them into exile. 

Three years after this, Brithric, king of Wessex, also departed 
this life, after he had most gloriously reigned over that nation 
seventeen years, having in ignorance taken some poison, which his 
wifeEadburga, the daughter of king Ofla, had prepared for a cer- 
tain young man ; in consequence of which, they both died, as I 
have mentioned more at large above. At this time a great battle 
was fought in Northumbria, at Wellehare, 25 in which perished 
Alric, the son of Herbert, and many others with him. The 
extreme perplexity that would result, necessarily prevents me 
from entering into a full description of the circumstances, 
fluctuations, and results of the wars ; for the nation of the En- 
glish was naturally hardy and proud, and in consequence inces- 
santly engaged in intestine warfare. 

Egbert 25 * therefore, in the year of grace 800, or, according to 
some, 802, being the eighth in order of ten most valiant kings, 
whom I have elsewhere remarked, as pre-eminently distin- 
guished for their singular merits, on the death of Brithric 
succeeded to the throne, and reigned thirty-seven years and 
seven months over the kingdom of Wessex. At a youthful 
age, his predecessor Brithric, and Offa, king of Mercia, had 
banished him from this country. He was in exile three years 
at the court of the king of France, but behaved himself nobly 
and discreetly. On the death of the above-named king, he 
returned and gained the kingdom. On the same day, earl 
Ethelmund returned from "Wicum, 28 and, coming to Kinemeres- 
forde, 27 met earl "Wistan with the men of "Wiltshire, and 
the^re they fought, and both earls being slain, the Wiltshire 
men gained the victory. 

25 This is probably an error for Wellham, or Wylam, in Northumberland. 
Lambarde says, " In the beginning of the reign of King Egbert, one of 
the great monarchs of this realm, there was a great battle fought at a 
place in the north country, called then \Velham, which I take to be now 
called Wyllom in Coupland." 

M * He now resumes the narrative where broken off in p. 20. 

26 The country of the Wiccii, who inhabited Worcestershire and 
Gloucestershire. 

27 Kempsford. Lambarde suggests that this may be Comberford, near 
Calne. 



32 ANNALS OF BOGER BE HOVEDEN. A.D. 817. 

In the fourth year after this, died Ethelred, archbishop of 
Canterbury, and was succeeded by "Wilfred, and two years 
after, Cuthred, king of Kent, departed this life. 

In the following year, Hardulph, king of Northumbria, was 
expelled from his kingdom. 

In the fourteenth year of his reign, Egbert overran the ter- 
ritories of the Britons 28 from east to west, and there was no one 
who could even attempt to make resistance to his prowess. 

In the year after this, Charles, king of the Franks and 
emperor of the Romans, departed this life ; and in the follow- 
ing year, Saint Leo, the pope, having died, Stephen succeeded 
him, who in his turn was succeeded by Paschal. 

Shortly after this, Kenwulph, king of Mercia, departed this 
life, and was succeeded by Ceolwulph ; but in the third year 
after this, he lost his kingdom, and Beornwulph gained pos- 
session of it. 

In the fourteenth 29 year of his reign, Egbert fought a battle 
with Beornwulph, king of Mercia, at Ellendune, 30 by reason of 
which, an old saying mentions that, " The river Ellendune was 
red with gore, choked up with carnage, and stinking with putre- 
faction." After a very great slaughter there of both nations, 
Egbert was the melancholy conqueror. After this, pursuing 
his successes, he sent his son Ethelwulph, who afterwards be- 
came king, and bishop Alcstan, 31 and earl Walhard, with a great 
army, into Kent ; on which they drove Balred, the king, be- 
yond the Thames. King Egbert then received the people of 
Surrey, and Kent, and Sussex under his subjection, of whom 
his kinsman, Pren, had formerly been unjustly deprived. In 
this year also, the king of East Anglia, together with his people, 
acknowledged king Egbert as his protector ; and after this, in 
the same year, the East Angles slew Bernulph, king of the 
Mercians, who was succeeded by Ludecen. 

In the same year there was a very great battle between the 
Britons 32 and the people of Devonshire, at Gavelford, 33 where- 
many thousands of men were slain on both sides. 

In the following year, Ludecen, king of Mercia, and five 
earls, were slain. 

88 The people of North Wales. 2S> This should be " twenty-fourth." 

30 Supposed to have been near Winchester, though Highworth, in Wilt- 
shire, and Hillingdon, in Middlesex, have been suggested. 

31 Of Sherborne. The Welsh. Camelforti, in Cornwall. 



A.D. 842. DEATH OF EGBERT. S3 

In the twenty-seventh year of his reign, Egbert expelled 
Wilaf, king of Mercia, who had succeeded king Ludecen, and 
possessed himself of the kingdom. As he had now gained 
possession of all the kingdom on the south side of the Humher, 
he led an army to Dore 34 against the Northumbrians ; on which, 
submissively offering concord and obedience to the great king, 
they were peacefully reduced to subjection. 

In the following year, king Egbert led an army into North 
Wales, and subjected it by force of arms. 

In the succeeding year, Wilfred, archbishop of Canterbury, 
died, and was succeeded by Ceolnoth. 

In the thirty-eighth 35 year of king Egbert, an army of Danes 
returned to England ; and shortly after, they were vanquished 
at Danemute, 36 and put to flight. Shortly after this, they ravaged 
Sepey, 37 on which king Egbert with his forces fought against 
them, they having come thither with thirty-five very large 
vessels. In the following year he fought against them at 
Carra, 38 and there the Danes gained the victory, and two bishops, 
Herefred 39 and Wilfred, 40 with two dukes, Dudda and Osmod, 
were slain. 

In the following year, a naval force of the Danes came into 
West Wales, on which the Welsh united with the Danes and 
made an attack upon king Egbert. The king, however, en- 
joying success, gloriously repulsed them, and, valiant as they 
were, bravely routed them at Hengistendune. 41 

In the year after this, Egbert, the great king and mo- 
narch of Britain, departed this life, after having made his 
sons heirs to the kingdoms of which he was in possession, 
appointing Ethelwulph king of Wessex, and Ethelstan king of 
Kent, Sussex, and Essex. But as we have now come to the mo- 

^* Lambarde suggests, that it may possibly be Darton, or Darfield, in 
Yorkshire. * This should be " thirty-fifth." 

36 A various reading gives Donemuth. Lambarde thinks that this place 
stood at the confluence of the rivers Don and Trent, not far from the town 
of Kingston-upon-Hull. 

37 The isle of Sheppey, at the mouth of the Thames. ^ Charmouth. 

39 He appears to have been bishop of Winchester. 

40 He was bishop of either Sherburne or Selsey. 

41 Lambarde says, " I take this to be the same place that is at this 
day called Henkston Doune, in Cornwall ; for the fall is easy from Hengist- 
dune to Hengstdune, and so to Hengston ; and it is most apparent that 
it was either in Cornwall, or not far off." 

VOL. I. D 



34 ANNALS OP ROGER DE nOVEDEX. A.D. 842. 

narchies of England, and to the frightful plague which afflicted 
us in the descents of the Danes, the book may be made appro- 
priately devoted to a new subject. 

At the beginning 41 of my history, I have mentioned that 
Britain was afflicted with five plagues ; the fourth of which, 
namely, that caused by the Danes, I shall treat of in the pre- 
sent book, and the more so, as this was far more dreadful and 
caused far more bloodshed than the others. For the Romans kept 
Britain under their subjection during only a short period, and 
ruled it gloriously by the laws of the conquerors. Again, the 
Picts and the Scots made frequent irruptions into Britain on the 
northern side, but, still, they did not attack it in every quarter, 
and on being sometimes repulsed with loss, they not unfrequently 
paused in their invasions. Again, the Saxons, using all their 
endeavours, gradually gained the land by warfare : when 
gained, they kept possession of it ; when in their possession, 
they built upon it ; when built upon, they ruled it with their 
laws. The Normans also, who speedily and in a very short 
time subdued this country, granted to the conquered their lives, 
their liberty, and the ancient laws of the realm, upon which 
matters I shall enlarge at the proper time. 

On the other hand, the Danes continually and perseveringly 
harassed the land, and in their incursions shewed a desire not 
to keep possession of it, but rather to lay it waste, and to 
destroy everything, not to obtain rule. If at any time they 
were overcome, no benefit resulted therefrom, for on a sudden 
a fleet and a still greater army would make its appearance in 
another quarter ; and it was a matter for astonishment how, 
when the kings of the English would march to fight with 
them on the eastern side, before they approached the troops of 
the enemy, a messenger would come in haste and say, " 
king, whither are you going ? An innumerable fleet of the 
pagans on the southern side has taken possession of the coasts 
of England, and, depopulating cities and towns, has ravaged 
every place with fire and sword ;" on the same day another 
would come running and saying, " king, whither are you 
flying? A terrible army has landed on the western side of 
England ; if you do not quickly turn and make head against 
them, they will think that you have taken to flight, and will 

41 He has not previously made any such remark : this and some other 
passages would lead us to infer that some portion of the work is lost. 



A D. 842. AFFLICTIONS OF THE ENGLISH. 35 

pursue you with flames and carnage." On the same day or 
the succeeding one, another messenger would come running 
and out of breath, and say, "Whither, ye nobles, are you 
going? The Danes, leaving their northern regions, have 
already burnt your houses, already carried off your property, 
tossed your children on the points of their spears, and com- 
mitted violence on the wives of some, while those of others 
they have carried away with them." 

Thus then, both king and people, being distracted by so many 
evil rumours and sinister reports, were relaxed both in hands 
and heart, and pined away with consternation of mind. Con- 
sequently, not even when they were victorious, did they expe- 
rience any joy, as usually is the case, nor did they entertain any 
assured hopes of safety. The following is the reason why the 
justice of God raged so fiercely, and his wrath was so greatly 
inflamed against them. 

In the primitive church of the English, religion shone forth 
with most brilliant lustre, inasmuch as kings and queens, nobles 
and princes, as well as bishops of churches, being inflamed with 
ardent desire for a heavenly kingdom, sought either the walls 
of the monastery or voluntary exile, as I have already shown. 
But in process of time all traces of virtue waxed so faint in 
them, that they would allow no nation to be their equal for 
treachery and wickedness, a thing which is especially notorious 
in the history of the kings of Northumberland ; for just as 
their impiety has been described in my account of the actions of 
the kings, in the same way did men of every rank and station 
persist in a course of deceit and treachery, and nothing was 
esteemed disgraceful except piety, while innocence was consi- 
dered most deserving of a violent death. In consequence, the 
Lord Almighty sent down upon them, like swarms of bees, 
i*>st bloodthirsty nations, who spared neither age nor sex, 
such as the Danes and the Goths, the Norwegians and the 
Swedes, the Yandals and the Frisians ; who, from the begin- 
ing of the reign of king Ethelwulph down to the time of the 
arrival of the Normans and of king William, that is to say, for 
a period of three hundred and thirty years, dreadfully afflicted 
this country, and laid it waste with desolation far and wide. 
Sometimes also, in consequence of the nearness of Britain, as 
the avengers and scourges of God for the misdeeds of the 
people, they invaded the country of France ; but, having made 

D 2 



36 ANXALS OF ttOGEE DE HOVEDEK. A D. 817. 

these observations, it is time to return to the thread of my 
narrative. 

In the first year of his reign, Ethel wulph made head against 
these enemies in one part of his kingdom; and, as multitudes of 
the pagans increased on every side, he sent earl Wulfred, 
with apart of his army, to attack some Danes, who, with thirty- 
three ships, had effected a landing at Hampton ; 42 on there 
meeting with them, after an immense slaughter of the enemy, 
gained a glorious victory. King Ethelwulph also sent earl 
Ethelhelm, with the levies of Wessex, to attack another army 
at Port ;** an engagement taking place, after an obstinate battle 
the earl was slain, and the Danes were victorious. 

In the following year, earl Herbert fought against them at 
Merseware, 44 and the Danes being the conquerors, his own men 
were put to flight, and he was slain. In the same year, an army 
of the pagans marched through the eastern parts of England, 
namely, Lindesey, East Anglia, and Kent, and slew an innu- 
merable multitude with the sword. 

In the next year after this, coming further inland, the 
army of the Danes slew an immense number of people in the 
neighbourhood of Canterbury, Rochester, and London. 

In the fifth year of his reign, Ethelwulph, with a part of 
his army, fought against the crews of thirty-five ships at 
Carre, 45 and the Danes were victorious. For, although the 

42 Southampton. * 3 The isle of Portland. 

44 Instead of naming the place, the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says : "This 
year Herebert, the ealdorman, was slain by the heathen, and many with 
him, among the Marshmen." In Ethelwerd's Chronicle the place is called 
Merswarum, and Romney Marsh is supposed to be intended under that 
name. Lambarde has the following quaint note on this passage : " Henry 
Huntingdon, in the Fifth Book of his History, speaking of the conflicts had 
with the Danes under the reign of ^Edelwulfe, reports, amongst other 
things, that Herebert, an earl, fought with them, at a place which he called 
Marseware, and was slain. Matthew Westminster repeateth the same, 
and instead of Marseware, setteth down ' apud Marsunarum.' So that 
both these, and so many others as have followed them, take, the name 
Mersewar for a place, and not for a number of persons. In which, through 
ignorance of the Saxon tongue, they have foully erred ; for the Saxon 
books say that Herebert was slain, ' and with him many of the Mercians, 
or men of Mercia.' So that the history describeth of what country they 
were that were slain, but not in what place the slaughter was committed." 

45 Charmouth. 



A.D. 858. VICTOllIES OVER THE BASES. 37 

number of the ships was but small, still the number of men 
on board of them was considerable. 

In the fifth year after this, the venerable bishop Alstan and 
duke Ernulph with the men of Somerset, and duke Osred 
with the men of Dorset, fought against an army of Danes at 
Pendredesmuthe, 46 and by the aid of God, slew many of them, 
and obtained the glory of a triumph. 

In the sixteenth year of his reign, Ethelwulph and his son 
Ethelbald, having collected all their forces, fought with a large 
army of the barbarians, who had come with two hundred and 
fifty 47 ships to Thames-mouth, and had destroyed those cities, 
famous and renowned for ages, London and Canterbury, and put 
to flight Bretwulph, king of the Mercians, together with his 
army ; who never afterwards enjoyed success, and dying in 
the following year, was succeeded by Burrhed. After this, the 
Danes growing still bolder, all their forces were collected in 
Surrey, and they met the king's troops at Akelea/ 8 In con- 
sequence, a battle was fought between these two great armies, 
so mighty and so severely contested, that no person had ever 
before heard of such a battle being fought in England. You 
might behold warriors sweeping onward on either side, just 
like a field of standing corn, rivers of blood flowing and rolling 
along in their streams the heads and limbs of the slain ; but 
it would be an act of excessive and over-nice fastidiousness to 
attempt to describe individual exploits. In short, God granted 
the fortune of war to the faithful, and those who put their trust 
in him, but to his enemies and contemners defeat and indescri- 
bable confusion. King Ethelwulph therefore, being conqueror 
in this mighty battle, gained a glorious triumph. 

In the same year, Ethelstan, king of Kent, and duke Eal- 
red 49 fought a naval battle against the Danes at Sandwich, and 
laving made a great slaughter of the enemy, captured nine of 
their ships, on which the rest took to flight. Earl Cheorl, also, 
with the men of Devonshire, fought against the pagans at 
Wienor, 50 and having killed a great number of them, was victo- 
rious. Consequently, this year was one of good fortune to the 

46 The mouth of the river Parret, in Somersetshire. 

47 Another reading is 315 ; but the other historians make the number 
350. " Ockley. 

49 The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle and Ethelwerd's Chronicle call him 
Elchere : he is also so called in p. 42. * Wembury, near Plymouth, 



38 AJTNALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 884. 

English nation. This, however, was the first year in which 
the army of the pagans remained throughout the whole of the 
winter, which they did in the isle of Teneit. 51 

In the eighteenth year of his reign, Ethelwulph materially 
assisted Burrhed, king of the Mercians, in subjugating the people 
of North Wales, and gave him his daughter in marriage. He 
had four sons, who were all kings in succession, namely, Ethel- 
bald, Ethelbert, Ethelred, and Alfred. This Alfred his father 
sent, when he was a child five years old, in the year above- 
mentioned, to Rome, to the court of pope Leo ; the same pope 
afterwards pronounced his blessing on him as king, and treated 
him as his own son. This year, duke Ealhere, with the men of 
Kent, and Huda, with the men of Surrey, fought against an 
army of the heathens in Teneit, and a great multitude on either 
side was slain, or perished by shipwreck, and both the above- 
named dukes lost their lives. 

Ethelwulph, the illustrious king of Essex, in the nineteenth 
year of his reign, set apart a tenth of all the lands in his realm, 
and bestowed it upon the church, for the love of God, and for 
his own salvation. Afterwards, he went to Rome in great 
state, and took with him his son Alfred, whom he loved more 
than the others. There he remained one year, and on his 
return thence, took the daughter of Charles the Bald, king of 
France, to wife, and brought her with him into this country ; 
after having lived with her two years, he died, and was 
buried at Winchester. He had at first been bishop of that 
city, but on the death of his father, Egbert, being compelled by 
necessity, he was made king, and, having married a noble wife, 
became father of the four sons above-named. About this 
period, the pagans passed the whole winter at Sepey, that is to 
say, " the island of sheep." 

The above-named king, on his decease, left to his son, Ethel- 
bald, his hereditary kingdom of Wessex, and to Ethelbert, 
another son, the kingdom of Kent, with Sussex and Wessex. 
Both the brothers being young men of excellent natural dis- 
position, held their kingdoms without the slightest molestation 
as long as they lived. 

Ethelbald, the king of Wessex, after he had reigned 
peacefully for five years, was cut off by a premature death. 

51 Thanet. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle mentions the isle of Sheppey 
here, and makes it some years later. 



A.D. 900. THE KINGS OF WESSEX. 39 

All England bewailed the youthful age of Ethclbald, and there 
was great mourning for him ; he was buried at Sherburne, and 
England was afterwards sensible what a loss she had expe- 
rienced in him. 

Ethelbert, the brother of the above-mentioned king, reigned 
after him in Wessex, having been previously king of Kent. 
In his days a naval force came, and having attacked Winches- 
ter, destroyed it ; thus " fell the ancient city that for many a 
year had borne the sway." 

Ethelbert, dying ten years after, was succeeded by Ethel- 
red, who, after reigning six years, was succeeded by king 
Alfred, whose reign lasted twenty-eight years. His genealogy, 
together with his actions and the events of his time, are de- 
scribed below. 

THE KINGS OF WESSEX. 

CERDIC reigned five years. 

KENRIC, his son, reigned twenty-six years. 

CHENLING, his son, reigned thirty-one years. 

CHELRIC reigned six years. 

CHELWTJLPH reigned fourteen years. 

KuriGLis, who was a Christian, reigned one year. He was 
baptized by Saint Birinus. 

KENWALD, his son, reigned thirty -one years. 

SEXBURGA, the queen, reigned one year. 

ESCWIN reigned two years. 

KENTWIN reigned nine years. 

CEDWALLA reigned two years; and died at Rome, while 
wearing the white garments. 62 

ISA reigned thirty-six years, and afterwards died at Rome. 

ADELARD reigned thirteen years. 
CHTJTEED reigned sixteen years. 

SIGEBERT, a cruel man, reigned one year, and was expelled. 

KINEWTTLPH reigned twenty-six years, and was afterwards 
slain. 

BEITHEIC reigned sixteen years. In his reign the Danes 
first came to England. 

EGBERT reigned thirty-five years. He was monarch of all 
England. 

ETHELWTJLPH reigned eighteen years. 

52 The white or initiatory garments of the novice, or intended monk. 



40 ANNALS OF ROGER DJS EOVEDEN. A.D. 849. 

ETHELS AID reigned five years. 

ETHELBERT reigned six years. 

ETHELRED, his brother, reigned five years. 

ALFRED the Learned reigned twenty-nine years. 

EDWARD reigned twenty-four years. 

ATHELSTAN, his brother, reigned sixteen years. 

EDMUND reigned six years and one day. 

EDHED reigned nine years and one day. 

EDWIN reigned three years and nine months. 

EDGAR the Just reigned sixteen years. 

EDWARD the Martyr reigned four years. 

ETHELRED, his brother, reigned thirty-eight years. 

EDMUND Ironside reigned nine months. 

CANUTE, the Dane, reigned nineteen years. 

HAROLD, his son, reigned five years. 

HARDICANUTE reigned two years. 

EDWARD the Just reigned twenty-four years. 

HAROLD reigned nine months. 

WILLIAM the Bastard reigned twenty-one years. 

WILLIAM KUFUS reigned thirteen years. 

HENRY, the Lion of Justice, reigned thirty -five years and 
three months. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 849, Alfred, 
king of the Anglo-Saxons, was born in the district called Berk- 
shire j 53 the following is the order of his genealogical line . 
King Alfred was the son of king Ethelwulph, who was the 
son of Egbert, who was the son of Ealmund, who was the son 
of Eafeo, who was the son of Eoppa, who was the son of 
Ingild. Ingild, and Ina, the famous king of the West Saxons, 
were two brothers ; this Ina went to Rome, and there ending 
this life, entered a heavenly country, there to reign with 
Christ. They were the sons of Coenred, who was the son of 
Ceolwald, who was the son of Cutha, who was the son of Cuth- 
win, who was the son of Ceaulin, who was the son of Cynric, 
who was the son of Creda, who was the son of Cerdic, who 
was the son of Elesa, who was the son of Elta, who was the son 
of Gewis, from whom the Britons call all people of that nation 
by the name of Gewis ; 54 he was the son of Wig, who was the 

53 At Wantage. 

54 He probably alludes to the West Saxons, or people of Wessex, who 
were called Gewissae. 



A.D. 852. V1CTOEY OVER THE DAXES. 41 

son of Freawin, who was the son of Freoderegeat, who was 
the son of Brand, who was the son of Bealdeag, who was the 
son of Woden, who was the son of Friderwald, who was the son 
of Frealaf, who was the son of Friderwulph, who was the son 
of Fingoldulph, who was the son of Geta, (which Geta the 
pagans long worshipped as a god,) who was the son of Cetua, 
who was the son of Bean, who was the son of Sceldua, who 
was the son of Heremod, who was the son of Itermod, who 
was the son of Hathra, who was the son of Wala, who was 
the son of Beadwig, who was the son of Shem, who was the 
son of Noah, who was the son of Lamech, who was the son of 
Methusaleh, who was the son of Enoch, who was the son of 
Malaleel, who was the son of Canaan, who was the son of 
Enos, Avho was the son of Seth, who was the son of Adam. 

The mother of Alfred was named Osburg, an extremely 
pious woman, noble by nature, noble too by birth ; she was 
the daughter of Oslac, the famous butler of king Ethelwulph ; 
who was a Goth by nation, inasmuch as he was descended 
from the Goths and Jutes, of the seed of Stuf and Withgar, 
two brothers and earls; who, having received possession of 
the isle of "Wight from their uncle, king Cerdic, and his 
son Cinric, their cousin, slew the few British inhabitants they 
could find in that island, at a place called Withgaraburgh ; 55 
for the rest of the inhabitants of the island had been either 
slain or had escaped into exile. 

In the year 851, Cheorl, earl of Devonshire, with the men 
of Devon, fought against the Danes and defeated them. In 
the same year a great army of the pagans came with three 
hundred and fifty ships to the mouth of the river Thames, and 
sacked Dorobernia, that is, the city of Canterbury, and put to 
flight Bretwulph, king of the Mercians, who had come to 
appose them. 

After this, the Danes growing more bold, all their army was 
collected in Surrey. On hearing this, Ethelwulph, the mighty 
warrior, with his son, Ethelbald, collected an army at the place 
which is called Akelea, 56 and, engaging with the pagans, he 
defeated them with unheard-of slaughter. 

In the year 852, Berthwulph, king of the Mercians, departed 
this life, and was succeeded by Burrhed. In the same year, 

85 It is supposed that this may have been Carisbrook, in the isle of 
Wight. x Ockley, in Surrey. 



42 ANXALS OP BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A D. 855- 

king Ethelstan and earl Elchere, conquered a great army of the 
pagans at Sandwich, and after slaying nearly all of them, took 
nine of their ships. 

In the year 853, Burrhed, king of the Mercians, supported by 
the assistance of king Ethelwulph, attacked the Mid-Britons, 57 
and having conquered them, reduced them to subjection. In 
the same year, king Ethelwulph sent his son Alfred, who was 
then five years old, to Rome with a great escort of nobles ; on 
which, Saint Leo, the pope, at the request of his father, ordained 
and anointed him for king, and, receiving him as his own adopted 
son, confirmed him, and sent him back with his blessing to his 
father. 

In the year 854, "Wulfred, having received the pall, was 
confirmed in the see of York, Osbert being king of Northum- 
bria; Eardulph also received the bishopric of Lindisfarne. At 
this period, earl Alchere with the men of Kent, and duke 
Wada, with the men of Surrey, fought a severe battle in the isle 
of Tened 58 against the pagans, and after routing them at the 
first onset, at length, after very many had fallen on either side, 
both the noblemen were slain. This year, Ethelwulph, king 
of the West Saxons, gave his daughter in marriage to Burrhed, 
king of the Mercians, at the royal town which is called Cyp- 
panhame, 89 with a great profusion of all kinds of riches. 

In the year 855, a great army of the pagans passed the whole 
of the winter in the isle of Sceapeye, 60 that is to say, " the 
island of sheep." In the same year, king Ethelwulph released 
the tenth part of the whole of his kingdom from all royal 
service and tribute, and with an everlasting pen 61 at the cross 
of Christ, offered it up to the One and Triune God, for the re- 
demption of his soul and those of his predecessors. He also 
proceeded with great pomp to Rome, and taking with him 
his son Alfred, whom he loved more than his other sons, and 
whom he had before sent to Rome, now for the second time, 
remained there a whole year, on the completion of which, he 
returned to his own country, bringing with him Juthina, 62 the 
daughter of Charles, king of the Franks. After his return 
from Rome he lived two years. 

Among the other good works that he did, he ordered every 

57 The Welsh, on the borders of England. Thanet. 

69 Chippenham, in Wiltshire. * Sheppey. 

61 Graphic. " Graphium," was properly the " stylus," or iron pen of the 
ancient Romans. 63 Her name was really Judith. 



A.o. 866. DANES WINTER IN EAST ANGLIA. 43 

year to 'be taken to Rome three hundred monetises of money; 
a hundred in honor of Saint Peter, for the purchase of oil, 
with which all the lamps of that church might be filled at 
the vigils of Easter, and likewise at cock-crow ; a hundred 
also, in honor of Saint Paul, for the same purpose ; and a 
hundred mancuses for the Catholic Pontiff, the successor of the 
Apostles. 

He being dead, and buried at Winchester, his son Ethel- 
bald, during two years and a half after the reign of his father, 
governed the West Saxons, and with disgraceful wickedness 
took to wife, Judith, the daughter of king Charles, whom his 
father had married. At the same period, the most holy Edmund, 
who sprang from the race of the ancient Saxons, ascended the 
throne of East Anglia. 

In the year 860, king Ethelbald departed this life, and was 
buried at Sherburne, and his brother Ethelbert succeeding him, 
held Kent, Surrey, 63 and Sussex as his kingdom ; in his days a 
great army of the pagans came up from the sea, and having 
hostilely attacked the city of Winchester, destroyed it. As 
they were returning towards the sea, laden with great booty, 
Osric, earl of Hampshire, with his men, and earl Ethelwulph, 
with the men of Berkshire, stoutly confronted them, and, an 
engagement taking place, the pagans fell on every side, the rest 
being dispersed in flight. 

Ethelbert, also, having governed his kingdom peacefully, and 
with the love of all, for five years, died amid the great regrets 
of his people, and was buried at Sherburne, near his brother, 
in the year 863. In this year also, Saint Swithin, bishop of 
Winchester, departed unto the Lord. 

In the year 864, the pagans wintered in the isle of Tened, and 
made a firm treaty with the men of Kent, who agreed to give 
them money for observing their compact. In the meantime, 
however, just like foxes, the pagans secretly sallied forth from 
their camp by night, and, breaking their covenant, in hopes of 
greater gain, ravaged all the eastern coast of Kent. 

In the year 866, Ethelred, brother of king Ethelbert, un- 
dertook the government of the kingdom of the West Saxons. 
In the same year, a great fleet of the pagans came from 
Danubia to Britain, and wintered in East Anglia, where that 
force in a great measure provided itself with horses. 

63 The reading clearly ought to be " Suthrigiam," but the text has it 
" supremara." 



44 AKNA1S OF BOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A .D. 868. 

In the year 867, the above-mentioned army of the pagans 
removed from East Anglia to the city of York, and laid waste 
the whole country as far as Tynemouth. At this period a 
sedition arising among the people of Northumbria, they ex- 
pelled Osbert 'their lawful king from the kingdom, and raised 
a certain tyrant, Ella by name, who was not of royal birth, 
to the supreme power ; but, on the approach of the pagans, this 
discord was for the common good in some measure allayed, on 
which Osbert and Ella united their forces, and having collected 
an army, marched to York. On their approach, the pagans at 
once took refuge in the city, and endeavoured to defend them- 
selves within the walls. The Christians, perceiving their flight 
and dismay, began to pursue them even within the walls of the 
city, and to destroy the ramparts ; but when the ramparts were 
now levelled, and many of the Christians had entered the city 
together with the pagans, the latter, urged by despair and neces- 
sity, making a fierce onset upon them, slaughtered and cut 
them down, and routed them both within and without the city ; 
here the greater part of the Northumbrians fell, the two kings 
being among the slain ; on which, the remainder who escaped 
made peace with the Danes. Over them the pagans appointed 
Egbert king, in subjection to themselves ; and he reigned 
over the Northumbrians beyond the Tyne six years. This took 
place at York on the eleventh day before the calends of April, 
being the sixth day of the week, just before Palm Sunday. In 
the same year Elflstan, bishop of Sherburne departed this life, 
and was buried at that place. 

In the year 868, a comet was distinctly seen. Alfred, the 
venerated brother of king Ethelred, asked and obtained in 
marriage a noble Mercian lady, daughter of Ethelred, earl 
of the Gaini, 64 who was surnamed " Mucil," which means 
" the great." Her mother's name, who was of the royal family 
of Mercia, was Eadburga ; she was a venerable woman, and 
for very many years after the death of her husband, lived a 
life of extreme chastity, as a widow, even to the day of her 
death. 

In the same year, the above-mentioned army of the pagans, 
leaving Northumbria, advanced to Nottingham, and wintered 

64 This is "Gamorum," in the text, hut it ought to be " Gainorum, of 
the Gaini ;" who were the inhabitants of Gainsborough, in Yorkshire. 



A.D. 871. BATTLE AT ESCHEDUN. 45 

in that place ; on which Burrhed king of Mercia made a treaty 
with them. 

In the year 869, the above-mentioned army of the Danes 
again advanced to Northumbria, and remained there one 
year, ravaging and laying waste, slaughtering and destroying a 
very great number of men and women. 

In the year 870, many thousands of Danes collected together 
under the command of Inguar and Hubba, and coming to East 
Anglia, Avintered at Teoford. 65 At this time king Edmund 
was ruler over all the realms of East Anglia, a man holy and 
just in all things, and in the same year, he, with his people, 
fought valiantly and manfully against the above-mentioned 
army, but inasmuch as God had predetermined to crown him 
with martyrdom, he there met with a glorious death. In the 
same year Ceolnoth, archbishop of Canterbury, departed this 
life, and was succeeded by Ethelred. 

In the year 871, the above-mentioned army of the pagans 
entered the kingdom of the West Saxons, and came to Reading, 
on the southern banks of the Thames, which is situate in the 
district called Bearocscira. 66 There, on the third day after 
their arrival, two of their earls, with a great multitude, rode 
forth to plunder, while the others, in the meantime, were 
throwing up a rampart between the two rivers Thames 
and Kennet, on the right hand side of that royal town. 67 
Ethelwulph earl of Berkshire with his men, encountered them 
at a place which in English is called Englefield, 68 that is to say, 
"the field of the Angles," where both sides fought bravely, 
until, one of the pagan earls being slain, and the greater part of 
their army destroyed, the rest took to flight, and the Christians 
gained the victory. 

Four days after this, king Ethelred and his brother Alfred, 
living collected an army, came to Reading, killing and slaying 
even to the very gates of the castle as many of the pagans as 
they could find beyond. At length, the pagans sallying 
forth from all the gates, engaged them with all their might, 
and there both sides fought long and fiercely, till at last the 
Christians turned their backs, and the pagans gained the day ; 
there too, the above-named earl Ethelwulph was slain. 

Four days after this, king Ethelred with his brother Alfred, 

65 Thetford in Norfolk. M Berkshire. <* Reading. 

68 Englefield about four miles from Windsor. 



46 AtflfALS OF fiOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 871. 

again uniting all the strength of their forces, went out to 
fight against the above-mentioned army, with all their might 
and a hearty good- will, at a place called Eschedun, 69 which 
means "the hill of the ash." But the pagans divided them- 
selves into two bodies, with equal close columns, and prepared 
for battle. For on that occasion they had two kings and 
many earls ; the centre of the army they gave to the two kings, 
and the other part to all the earls. On seeing this, the Chris- 
tians also, dividing their army into two bodies, with no less 
alacrity, ranged them front to front ; after which Alfred more 
speedily and promptly moved onward to give them battle; 
whereas, just then, his brother Ethelred was in his tent at 
prayer, hearing mass, and resolutely declared that he would not 
move from there before the priest had finished the mass, and 
that he would not forsake the service of God for that of men. 
This faith on the part of the Christian king greatly prevailed 
with God, as we shall show in the sequel. 

Now the Christians had determined that king Ethelred, with 
his troops, should engage with the two pagan kings ; and that 
his brother Alfred, with his men, should take the chance of war 
against all the nobles of the pagan army. Matters being thus 
arranged, while the king, still at his prayers, was prolonging 
the delay, the pagans, fully prepared, advanced rapidly towards 
the place of combat ; on which, Alfred, who then held but 
a subordinate authority, being unable any longer to cope with 
the forces of the enemy, unless he either retreated, or made 
the charge before his brother came up, at length, with the 
courage of a wild boar, manfully led on the Christian troops 
against the army of the enemy, and, relying on the divine aid, 
his ranks being drawn up in close order, immediately moved 
on his standards against the foe. At last, king Ethelred having 
finished his prayers, on which he had been engaged, came up, 
and having invoked the great Ruler of the world, immediately 
commenced the battle. 

But at this point, I must inform those who are not aware of 
the fact, that the field of battle was not equally advantageous 
to those engaged. For the pagans had previously taken pos- 
session of the higher ground, while the Christians drew up 
their forces on the lower. There was also on that spot a thorn 

69 Now Aston, in Berkshire ; some, however, think that Ashendon in 
Buckinghamshire is meant. 



A D. 873. BATTLE AT WALTON. 47 

tree, of very stunted growth, around which the hostile ranks 
closed in battle, amid the loud shouts of all. After they had 
fought for some time boldly and bravely on both sides, tho 
pagans, by the Divine judgment, were no longer able to bear 
the onset of the Christians, and the greater part of them being 
slain, the rest took to a disgraceful flight. 

At this place one of the two kings of the pagans, and five 
of their earls, were slain, and many thousands of them besides 
who fell at that spot, and in various places, scattered over the 
whole breadth of the plain of Eschedun. There fell there 
king Baiseg, and earl Sydroc the elder, and another earl Sydf oc 
the younger, earl Osbern, earl Freana, and earl Harold. The 
whole army of the pagans pursued its flight all night, until 
next day, when most who had escaped reached the castle. 

In four days 70 after these events, Ethelred, with his brother 
Alfred, uniting their forces, marched to Basing, again to fight 
with the pagans, and after a prolonged combat the pagans at 
length gained the victory. Again, after a lapse of two months, 
king Ethelred and his brother Alfred, after having long fought 
with the pagans, who had divided themselves into two bodies, 
conquered them at Meretun, 71 putting them all to flight ; but 
these having again rallied, many on both sides were slain, and 
the pagans at last gained the day. 

The same year, after Easter, king Ethelred departed this life, 
after having manfully ruled the kingdom five years amid much 
tribulation, on which his brother Alfred succeeded him as king, 
in the year from the incarnation of our Lord 872. He was 
the most accomplished among the Saxon poets, most watchful 
in the service of God, and most discreet in the exercise of 
justice. His queen Elswisa bore him two sons, Edward and 
Egelward, and three daughters, Egelfleda, queen of the Mercians, 
Jkhelgeva, a nun, and Elethritha. 

At the completion of one year n from the beginning of his 
reign, at a hill called Walton, 73 he fought a most severe battle 

70 Asset and Roger of Wendover say fourteen days ; which is more 
probable. 7l Merton. 

~- " One month " is a various reading here, and is supported by Roger 
of Wendover. 

' 3 A various reading here, supported by Asser, Roger de Wendover, and 
the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, is Wilton, but Brompton calls the place Walton 
in Sussex. 



48 AXXALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. S74. 

with, a handful of men against the pagans ; but, alas ! the 
enemy was victorious ; nor indeed is it to be wondered at, 
that the Christians had but a small number of men in the 
engagement ; for in a single year they had been worn out by 
eight battles against the pagans, in which one of their kings 
and nine dukes, with innumerable troops, had been slain. 

In the year 872, Alchun, bishop of the Wiccii, 74 haying de- 
parted this life, Werefrith, the foster-father of the holy church 
of Worcester, and a man most learned in the holy scriptures, 
was ordained bishop by Ethered archbishop of Canterbury, on 
the seventh day before the ides of June, being the day of Pen- 
tecost ; he, at the request of king Alfred, translated the books 
of the dialogues of the pope Saint Gregory, from the Latin 
into the Saxon tongue. At the same period, the Northumbrians 
expelled their king, Egbert, and their archbishop Wulpher. 
An army of the pagans came to London, and wintered there, 
on which the Mercians made a treaty with them. 

In the year 873, the said army left London, and first pro- 
ceeded to the country of the Northumbrians, and wintered 
there in the district which is called Lindesig, 75 at a place called 
Torkeseie, 76 on which the Mercians again made a treaty of 
peace with them. Egbert the king of Northumbria dying, 
his successor was Eeisig, who reigned three years. Wulpher, 
also, was this year recalled to his see. 

In the year 874, the above-mentioned army left Lindesey, 
and, entering Mercia, wintered at a place which is called Reo- 
padun. 77 They also expelled Burrhed king of Mercia, from 
his kingdom, in the twenty-second year of his reign. Going 
to Rome, he died there, and was honorably buried in the church 
of Saint Mary, in the school of the Saxons. After his expul- 
sion, the Danes reduced the kingdom of the Mercians to 
subjection, and committed it to the charge of a certain military 
officer of that nation, Ceolwnlph by name, on condition that 
whenever they chose, without any subterfuge, they might take 
and keep it. 

74 The inhabitants of Gloucestershire and Worcestershire. 

75 Lindesey in Lincolnshire. 

76 Of this place Lambarde says ; " it is a town in Lincolnshire, which, 
because it stood near the water, and was much washed therewith, obtained 
the name of an island, for so the latter part of the word, ' eie ' doth 
signify, the former being the name of some person." 

77 Repton in Derbyshire. 



A.D. 877. RAVAGES OF THE DANES. 49 

In the year 875, the army of the pagans, leaving Reopadun, 
divided into two bodies, one part of which, with Alfdan, pro- 
ceeded to the country of the Northumbrians, and reduced the 
whole kingdom of Northumbria to subjection. Thereupon 
Erdulph, bishop of Lindisfarne, and abbat Edred carried away 
the body of Saint Cuthbert from the island of Lindisfarne and 
wandered about with it for a period of seven years. The other 
division of the army with Guder, 79 Osbitel, and Amund, their 
three kings, wintered at Grantebrige. 80 

King Alfred, in a naval engagement with six ships of the 
pagans, captured one, and the res.t escaped by flight. 

In the year 876, the pagan king Halden divided Nor- 
thumbria between himself and his followers. Reisig, king of 
the Northumbrians, died, and was succeeded by Egbert the 
Second. Hollo, the pagan, a Dane by birth, with his followers 
this year entered Normandy, on the fifteenth day before the 
calends of December ; he was the first duke of the Normans, and 
on being baptized thirty years afterwards, was named Robert. 

The above-mentioned army sallying forth by night from 
Grantebrige, entered a fortified place which is called Werham. 81 
On learning their sudden arrival, the king of the Saxons made 
a treaty with them, on condition that having first given hos- 
tages, 82 they should depart from the kingdom. However, after 
their usual custom, caring nothing for hostages or oaths, they 
broke the treaty, and one night took the road to Examcester, 83 
which in the British language is called Caer-wisc. 84 

In the year 877, the above-mentioned army left Examcester, 
and marching to Cyppanham, 85 a royal town, passed the winter 
there. King Alfred in these days endured great tribulations, 
and lived a life of disquietude. In the same year also, Inguar 
and Haldene came from the country of the Demetse, 86 in 
mhich they had wintered, like ravening wolves, after having 
slaughtered multitudes of Christians there and burned the mo- 
nasteries, and sailing to Devonshire, were slain there by the 

79 The various reading supported by the other chronicles is Guthrum. 

* Cambridge. 8l Wareham. & The Danes, namely. 

83 Exeter, " the fortified city on the Ex." 
' M " The city on the river Wise." 8i Chippenham. 

% The original has " De Metica regione," which is obviously an error 
for " de Demetica regione." The Demetae were the people of the coast 
of South Wales. 

VOL. I. E 



50 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A .D. 878. 

most valiant thanes of king Alfred, together with twelve hun- 
dred men, at Cernwich, 8 ' in which place the said king's thanes 
had shut themselves up for safety. 

King Alfred being encouraged in a vision by Saint Cuthbert, 
fought against the Danes, at the time and place where the 
saint had commanded him ; and having gained the victory, from 
that time forward was always invincible and a terror to the foe. 
For the king, putting his trust in the Lord, came with an im- 
mense army to the place which is called Edderandun, 88 near 
which he found the forces of the enemy prepared for battle. 
On this, a severe battle being fought, which lasted the greater 
part of the day, the pagans were conquered and put to flight; the 
rest being hemmed in by the king's army, fearing the rigours 
of famine and cold, and dreading the severity of the king, with 
tears and entreaties, sued for peace, and offered hostages toge- 
ther with oaths. In addition to this, their king, whose name 
was Guthrum, declared that he wished to become a Christian ; 
on which, king Alfred having granted all these requests, 
tHe above-named king of the pagans, together with thirty 
chosen men of his army, met him at a place which is called 
Aalr, 89 and king Alfred, receiving him as his son by adoption, 
raised him from the holy font of baptism, and named him Ethel- 
stan, and enriched him and all his companions who had been 
baptized with him, with many presents. He remained with 
the king twelve days, receiving during that time most honorable 
entertainment, and" the king bestowed on him East Anglia, 
over which Saint Edmund had reigned. 

In the year 878, the above-mentioned army of pagans left 
Scippanham 90 as they had promised, and coming to Cirencester 
remained there one year. In the same year also, an immense 
army of the pagans came from the parts beyond the sea to 
the river Thames, and joined the forces before-mentioned. In 
the same year, an eclipse of the sun took place, between the 
ninth hour 91 and vespers. 

In the year 879, the army of the pagans, leaving Cirencester, 

87 MoreproperlyKynwith, near Bideford.in North Devon. Hubberstone, 
the spot where Hubba was buried, is still pointed out. 

8S Probably Edington, in Wiltshire. 

89 Called also "Alre," or " Aller," near the isle of Athelney, in So- 
mersetshire. 90 Chippenham. 

91 Three o'clock in the afternoon. This eclipse took place on the 14th 
of March, 880. 



A.D. 892. SAINT CTXHBEBT APPEARS TO EDKED. 51 

proceeded to East Anglia, and parcelling out that country, began 
to take up their abode there. The pagans, who had passed 
the winter in the island of Hame, 92 began to visit France, 93 
and for one year took their quarters at Ghent. 

In the year 880, the above-mentioned army of the pagans, 
having provided themselves with horses, came into the terri- 
tories of the Franks, on which the Franks engaged them in 
battle, and came off victorious. The pagans, having now ob- 
tained horses, made incursions on every side. In these days, 
numerous monasteries in that kingdom were demolished and 
destroyed. In consequence of this, the brethren of the mo- 
nastery of the abbat Saint Benedict, disinterred his remains 
from the tomb where they had been deposited, and taking them 
with them, wandered to and fro. 

In the year 881, the above-mentioned army, having towed 
their ships up the river Meuse, into the interior of France, 
wintered there one year. In the same year, king Alfred, en- 
gaging in a naval fight with the ships of the pagans, overcame 
them, and took two, after having slain all that were in them. 
After this, he inflicted numerous wounds upon the commanders 
of two ships, till at last, laying down their arms, with prayers 
and entreaties they surrendered to him. 

In the year 882, the army of the pagans so often mentioned, 
took possession of Cundoth, 94 and quartered there one year. 
: The army, which, under the command of Alfdene, the king of 
the pagans, had invaded Northumbria, had for some time been 
without a leader, in consequence, as I have already mentioned, 
of the slaughter of Alfdene and Inguar by the thanes of king 
Alfred : but now, having subdued the inhabitants of the 
country, they took possession of it, and began to take up their 
abode theie, and to inhabit the districts of Jforthumbria that 
thty had before laid waste. 

Upon this, Saint Cuthbert, appearing in a vision to abbat 
Edred, commanded him to tell the bishop and all the army of 
the English and the Danes, that, paying the price of his redemp- 
tion, they must redeem Cuthred, the son of Hardicanute, whom 

vt This is the place which the other chroniclers call Fulenharn, now 
Fulham, near London. 

96 Roger of Wendorer says that the Danes, who wintered at Fuluaiu, 
" arrived from the parts of Gaul." 

54 Or " Cundaht," now Conde, in France. 



52 AJTCTALS OP ROCrER DE HOVEDEH. A.D. 882. 

the Danes had sold as a slave to a certain widow at Winting- 
ham, 94 and when redeemed must make him their king. This 
was accordingly done, in the tlurtaenth year of the reign of 
king Alfred. Cuthred being thus raised to the throne, the 
episcopal see, which was previously in the island of Lindisfarne, 
was established at Cestre, 96 anciently called Cuneceastre, seven 
years after its removal from the island of Lindisfarne. At 
this time also, the law of peace which Saint Cuthbert had also 
enjoined by means of the above-named abbat, (namely, that 
whoever should flee to his body, should enjoy peace without 
molestation from any one, for thirty-seven days, 97 ) both king 
Cuthred and king Alfred enjoined as a law of perpetual obser- 
vance. In addition to this, the above-named two kings, with 
the consent of all, had previously given, in augmentation of 
the former episcopal see, the whole territory between the Tyne 
and the Tees to Saint Cuthbert, for a perpetual possession : for 
long before this period, the bishopric of the church of Ha- 
gustald 98 had ceased to exist. And whatever person, with what 
intent soever, should attempt to infringe these provisions, him 
with everlasting curses they condemned to the punishments of 
hell. 

There belonged to the bishopric of Lindisfarne, from early 
times, Luguballia," or Luel, and Northam ;' all the churches 
also, that lay between the river Tweed and the south Tyne, and 
beyond the uninhabited land, as far as the western side, at 
this period belonged to the above-named church. These 
houses also belonged to the see, Carnhum and Culterham, and 
the two Gedewerdes, 2 on the southern bank of the river Tyne, 
which bishop Egred built ; Meilros 3 also, and Tigbre, and 
Tinigham and Colingham, and Brigham, and Tillemuthe, and 
Northam, above-mentioned, which was anciently called Ub- 
banford. Mercwrede was also in the possession of this 
church, having been given with all its appurtenances by king 
Ceolwulph. 

For this house the king, on renouncing the world, transferred 

35 Whittingham, in Northumberland. 

96 Chester-le-street, in Durham. 

97 Roger of Wendover says a month. 9 <> Hexham. 
99 Carlisle. ! Or Norhain, in Northumberland. 

2 There is no doubt that the names of most of these places belonging 
to the bishopric of Lindisfarne, are shockingly misspelt in the text. 

3 Melrose, in Roxburghshire. 






A.D. 883. ARRIVAL OF JOHN THE SCOT. 53 

together with himself to the church of Lindisfarne, of which, 
he became a monk, and fought for a heavenly kingdom. His body 
being afterwards brought into the church of the above-named 
town of Northam, became famous there, according to the report 
of the inhabitants of the place, for performing many miracles. 
It was through the agency of this king, after he had become a 
monk, that licence was granted to the monks of the church of 
Lindisfarne to drink wine or ale ; for before that, they were 
accustomed to drink nothing but milk and water, according to 
the ancient tradition of Saint Aidan, the first bishop of that 
church, and of the monks, who, accompanying him from Scot- 
land, had there, by the liberality of king Oswald, received a re- 
fuge, and with great severity of discipline, rejoiced to serve God. 

Besides this, the above-named hishop Egred built a church 
at a place which is called Geinforde, and presented it to Saint 
Cuthbert ; he also built Bellingham in Heorternesse, and two 
other towns, Becclif and "Wigeclif, on the southern bank of the 
river Tees, which he gave to Saint Cuthbert, for the maintenance 
and support of his servants ; and in like manner, "Wodecester, 
and "Wliittingham, and Edulfingham, and Ecwlingham, 5 being 
presented by king Ceolwulph, from an early period belonged to 
Saint Cuthbert. 

In the year 883, pope Marinus, in his love for, and at the 
earnest entreaty of, king Alfred, obligingly made the school of 
the Saxons at Rome free from all tax and tribute ; he also 
sent many gifts to that king, among which he gave him a large 
piece of the holy cross, upon which the Son of God was cruci- 
fied for the salvation of mankind. 

At this time the above-mentioned army of the pagans went 
up the river Sunne* to Amiens, and quartered themselves there 
one year. 

In the time of king Alfred, there came into England one 
John, a Scot by birth, a man of shrewd intellect and of great 
eloquence. Having a long time previously left his country, he 
came to France to the court of Charles the Bald, by whom he 
was entertained with great respect, and was honored by him 
with his particular intimacy. He shared with the king both 
his serious and his more merry moments, and was the sole 
companion both of his table and his retirement. He was also 
a man of great facetiousness and of ready wit, of which 

* Probably Eglingham, in Northumberland. * Somme. 



54 ANNALS OF KOGEB DE B.OVEDEN. A.D. 883. 

there are instances quoted even to this day ; as the fol- 
lowing, for instance. He was sitting at table opposite the 
king, who was on the other side of it, and the cups having 
gone round and the courses ended, Charles becoming more merry 
than usual, after some other things, on observing John do some- 
thing offensive to the French notions of good breeding, he 
pleasantly rebuked him, and said, " What is there between a 
sot and a Scot?" On which he turned back this hard hit on 
its author, and made answer, " A table only." What could be 
be more facetious than this reply ? The king had asked him 
with reference to the different notions of manners, whereas 
John made answer with reference to the distance of space. 
Nor indeed was the king offended ; for, being captivated by this 
prodigy of science, he was unwilling to manifest displeasure by 
even a word against the master, for by that name he usually 
called him. 

At another time, when the servant had presented a dish to 
the king at table, which contained two very large fishes, besides 
one somewhat smaller, he gave it to the master, that he might 
share it with two clerks who were sitting near him. They 
were persons of gigantic stature, while he himself was small in 
person. On this, ever devising something merry, in order to 
cause amusement to those at table, he kept the two large ones for 
himself, and divided the smaller one between the two clerks. 
On the king finding fault with the unfairness of the division, 
" Nay," said he, "I have acted right and fairly. For here is 
a small one," alluding to himself, " and here are two great 
ones," touching the fishes ; then, turning to the clerks, " here 
are two great ones," said he, pointing at the clerks, "and hei'e 
is a small one," touching the fish. 

At the request, also, of Charles, he translated the " Hierar- 
chia," of Dionysius the Areiopagite, from Greek into Latin, 
word for word ; the consequence of which is, that the Latin 
version can be hardly understood from having been rendered 
rather according to the Greek order of the words than according 
to our own idiom. He also composed a treatise, which he en- 
titled <xt?t tpusiuv /Mpiffpov,'' that is to say, " On the Divisions 
of Nature ; " very useful for solving the perplexity as to some 
questions, making some allowance, however, for him on cer- 

" Roger of Wendover says that the title was iripi Qvanc 
meaning much the same thing. 



AD. 884. ALFRED DEFEATS THE DAXES. 55 

tain points. In some respects he has certainly deviated from the 
track of the Latins by keeping his eyes intently fixed upon the 
Greeks ; for which reason he has been even considered a here- 
tic, and a certain Florus wrote against him. And, indeed, 
there are in his book, nip! <pveiuv, very many things which, 
unless they are most carefully examined, seem opposed to the 
Catholic faith. Pope Nicholas is known to have been of this 
opinion ; for he says, in an epistle to Charles, " It has been 
reported to our Apostleship, that a certain man, named John, 
by birth a Scot, has lately translated into Latin the work of 
Saint Dionysius the Areiopagite, which he eloquently wrote in 
Greek, touching the divine names and the celestial orders. 
Now, according to the usual custom, this ought to have been 
sent to us and submitted to the approval of our judgment ; 
and the more especially as the said John, though he is stated to 
be a man of great knowledge, has been said for some time past 
by general report not to be quite sound on certain points." 

In consequence of this discredit he became tired of France, 
and came to king Alfred, by whose munificence he was appointed 
a teacher, and settled at Malmesbury, as appears from the king's 
writings. Here, some years afterwards, he was stabbed with 
their writing instruments 8 by the boys whom he was teaching, 
and quitted this life in great and cruel torments ; at a period 
when, his weakness waxing stronger and his hands shaking, he 
had often asked in vain that he might experience the bitter- 
ness of death. He lay for some time with an ignoble burial in 
the church of Saint Laurence, the scene of his shocking death ; 
but, after the Divine favour for many nights had honored him 
by a ray of fire, the monks, being thus admonished, transferred 
him to the greater church, and placed him at the left side of 
the altar. 

. In the year 884, the above-mentioned army of the pagans 
divided themselves into two bodies ; one of which entered East 
France, the other returned into Kent, and lay siege to the city of 
Eouecestre; 9 but the citizens made a stout resistance, and 
king Alfred coming to their aid with his army, compelled the 
heathens to raise the siege and return to their ships, leaving 
the fortress which they had built there before the gates of the 
above named city, besides their spoil, and the men and horses 

* The " graphia," or " styli," the iron pens with which they wrote on 
wax tablets. ' Rochester. 



56 AKNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A .D. 88). 

which they had brought with them from France. In this 
year also a fleet was sent by king Alfred for the defence of the 
places around East Anglia. When they had come to the mouth 
of the river Stour, 9 * they found there sixteen ships of the 
pirates, which they took, slaying all on board of them. Those 
of the Danes, however, who were able to escape, collected their 
ships in various bodies in every quarter, and then engaging 
with the English in a naval battle, while, with inert supine- 
ness, they "were asleep, a multitude of them unarmed were 
slain, and the Danes came off victorious. 

At this period, Carloman, king of the Western Franks, that 
is to say, of the Alemanni, was killed in hunting, having been 
attacked by a wild boar when unattended, which mangled him 
with its tusk. His brother Louis had died the year before, 
who was also king of the Franks ; for they were both sons of 
Louis, the king of the Franks, who had died in the year above- 
mentioned in which 10 the eclipse of the sun took place. He 
also was the son of Charles, king of the Franks, whose daughter, 
Jutthitta, 11 Ethel wulph, king of the West-Saxons, had taken 
for his queen. 

In this year a great army of the pagans came in ships 
from Germany into the country of the ancient Saxons. The 
Saxons and the Frisians having united their forces against them, 
fought with them twice in one year, and were victorious. In 
the same year also, Charles, king of the Alemanni, with the 
voluntary consent of all, received the kingdom of the West 
Franks and all the territories which lie between the Tyrrhenian 
sea and the inlet of the ocean which divides the ancient Saxons 
and the Gauls. This Charles was the son of king Louis, 
who was brother of Charles, king of the Franks, and father of 
the above-named Judith ; these two brothers were sons of 
Louis, the son of Charles the Great, that ancient and most wise 
sovereign, who was the son of king Pepin. 

In the year 885, the above-mentioned army, which had first 
entered the kingdom of the East Franks, again returned to 
the West Franks, and sailed up the river Seine to Paris ; but 
after having besieged the city for a year, the inhabitants 
making a stout defence, they were unable to effect an entrance 
within the walls. 

* The river which divides Essex from Suffolk. w A.D. 880. 

11 Judith. 



A.D. 887. KTN T G ALFRED FOUNDS TWO MONASTEBIES. 57 

King Alfred, after the burning of cities and the slaughter 
of the inhabitants, rebuilt London with great honor, and made 
it habitable, and gave it into the charge of Ethered, earl of 
Mercia. To this king all the Angles and Saxons, who before 
had been dispersed in all quarters, or were with the pagans 1 * 
but not in captivity, came, and voluntarily submitted to his 
sway. At this period, Plegmund was archbishop of Canter- 
bury. 

In the year 886, the above-mentioned army left Paris, being ' 
unable to gain their object, and steered their fleet thence along 
the Seine, as far as a place called Chezy. There having taken 
up their quarters for a year, in the year following they entered 
the mouth of the river lona, 13 and, making great ravages to 
the country, remained there a year. 

In the same year, Charles, king of the Franks, departed this 
life, in the sixth week after his expulsion from his kingdom 
by Ernulph, his brother's son. After his death the kingdom 
was divided into five parts, but the principal part devolved 
on Ernulph, to whom the other four, of their own accord, took 
the oath of fealty ; inasmuch as not one of them could be le- 
gitimate heir on his father's side, except Ernulph alone : with 
him, therefore, remained the supreme power. 

This, then, was the division of the kingdom : Ernulph re- 
ceived the countries on the eastern side of the river Rhine ; 
Ehodulph the inland parts of the kingdom ; Odo the west ; and 
Beorgar and Wido 14 Lombardy and all the lands on that side of 
the mountains. But these kingdoms, thus divided, afflicted 
each other with mighty wars, and the kings expelled one 
another out from their dominions. 

In this year Ethelhem, u earl of Wiltshire, carried to Rome 
the alms of king Alfred. 

In the year 887, among the numberless good things that 
king Alfred did, he founded two most noble monasteries ; one 
for monks, at a place which is called Ethelingege, 16 or the 
"the island of nobles," where, collecting monks of various 

13 Asser seems to say that those submitted " who were in captivity 
with the heathens." This is clearly wrong, for they had not the oppor- 
tunity of so doing. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle and Roger of Wendover 
agree with our author. 

13 Yonne. > 4 Witha, or Guido. 

15 Roger of Wendover erroneously calls this person Athelm, bishop of 
"Winchester. 1B Or Athelney, in Somersetshire. 



58 A3TNALS OP EOGEB DE HOVEDEK. A.D 896. 

orders, he first appointed John to be abhat, a priest and monk, 
and an ancient Saxon by birth ; the other a noble monastery 
also near the east gate of Sceaftesbrig, 17 he erected for the recep- 
tion of nuns, and over it he appointed as abbess his own daughter 
Ethelgiva, a virgin consecrated to God. These two monas- 
teries he enriched with possessions in land, and riches of every 
kind. 

In the year 888, Ethelfrid. archbishop of Canterbury, departed 
' this life, and was succeeded by Plegmund. 

In the year 889, king Guthrum, whom, as I have previously 
mentioned, king Alfred raised from the font, giving him the 
name of Ethelstan, departed this life. He, with his people, 
dwelt in East Anglia, and was the first who held and possessed 
that province, after the martyrdom of the king Saint Edmund. 

In the year 890, "Wulpher, archbishop of York, died, in the 
thirty-ninth year of his archiepiscopate. 

In the year 892, Hasting, the pagan king, entered the 
mouth of the Thames, with eighty piratical ships, and threw 
up fortifications at Middletun. 18 

In the year 893, Cuthred, king of Northumbria, died. The 
pagans of Northumbria ratified the peace with Alfred by 
oath. 

In the year 894, the pagans brought their ships up the river 
Thames, and after that, up the river Lige, 19 and began to throw 
up their fortifications near the river, at the distance of twenty 
miles from London. 

In the year 895, in summer time, a great part of the citizens 
of London, and a considerable number from the neighbouring 
places, attempted to destroy the fortifications which the pagans 
had constructed ; but on their making a stout resistance, the 
Christians were put to flight, and four of the thanes of king 
Alfred slain. 

In the year 896, the army of the pagans in East Anglia 
and Northumbria, collecting plunder by stealth on the coast, 
grievously laid waste the land of the West Saxons, and espe- 
cially by using long and swift ships, which they had built many 
years before. To oppose them, by order of king Alfred ships 
were constructed, twice as long, sharp, and swift, and not 
so high, 20 by the onset of which, the said ships of the 

17 Shafteshury. 18 Milton, near Gravesend. 

19 Probably the same as the Limen or Rother, in Kent. 
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says they were higher. 



A.D 899. SUCCESSION OF EDWAED TIIE ELDER. 59 

enemy might be overcome. On these being launched, the king 
gave orders to take alive, as many as they could, and to slay 
those whom they could not take ; the result of which was, 
that in the same year, thirty ships of the Danish pirates were 
captured, some of whom were slain, and some taken to the 
king alive, and hanged on gibbets. 

In the year 897, Hollo, the first duke of the Normans, with 
his army laid siege to the city of Chartres ; but Walzelm, the 
bishop of that city, calling Richard, duke of Burgundy, and 
Ebalus, earl of Poitou, to his aid, and carrying the tunic of 
Saint Mary in his hands, by the Divine will put duke Eollo to 
flight, and delivered the city. 

In the year 898, Ethelbald was ordained archbishop of 
York. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 899, king 
Alfred, son of the most pious king Ethelwulph, having-reigned 
twenty-nine years and six months, departed this life, in the 
fourth year of the indiction, 21 on the fifth day before the 
calends of November, and was buried in the new monastery at 
Winchester. 

He was succeeded by his son Edward, surnamed the Elder, 
who was inferior to his father in his acquaintance with litera- 
ture, but his equal in dignity and power, andhis superior in glory. 
For, as will be shewn in the sequel, he extended the limits 
of his kingdom much farther than his father did. He also 
built many cities, and restored some that had been destroyed ; 
the whole of Essex, East Anglia, Northumbria, and many 
districts of Mercia, of which the Danes had been long in pos- 
session, he manfully wrested from their hands. After the 
death of his sister Ethelfreda, he obtained possession of the 
whole of Mercia, and received the submission of all the kings 
of the Scots, the Cumbrians, the people of Strath-Clyde, and 
the West Britons. 

By Egewinna, a most noble lady, he had Ethelstan, his 
eldest son : by his wife Edgiva he had three sons, Edwin, Ed- 
mund, and Edred, anda daughter named Eadburga, avirgin most 

t 

21 The indiction was so called from the edicts of the Roman emperors ; 
and as one such edict was supposed to appear regularly every fifteen years, 
the years were reckoned by their distance from the year cf each indiction. 
From the time of Athanasius downwards, they were generally employed 
by ecclesiastical writers in describing epochs. 



60 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE KOVEDEN. \.n. 906. 

strictly consecrated to God, with three 22 other daughters ; one 
of whom, Otho, the eighty-ninth emperor of the Romans, and 
another, Charles, king of the West Franks, took to wife ; whose 
father's sister, that is to say, the daughter of the emperor Charles, 
Ethelwulph, the king of the "West Saxons, had married ; the 
third daughter was married to Sithric, king of Northumbria. 

In this year, Erdulf, bishop of Lindisfarne, departed this 
life, and was succeeded by Guthred ; Osbert was also expelled 
from his kingdom. 

In the year 900, the most valiant duke Athulph, brother of 
queen Ealwitha, the mother of king Edward, and Virgilius, 
the venerable abbat of the Scots, departed this life ; also Grim- 
bald, the saint and priest, one of the masters of king Alfred, 
attained the joys of the kingdom of heaven. 

In the year 902, the people of Kent fought with a great host 
of the piratical Danes, at a place which is called Holme, and 
came off victorious. 

In the year 903, that pious handmaid of Christ, queen 
Elswitha, the mother of king Edward, departed this life ; she 
founded a monastery for nuns at Winchester. 

In the year 904, the armies of the pagans of East Anglia 
and Northumbria, finding that king Edward was invincible, 
made peace with him, at a place which, in the English lan- 
guage, is called Thitingaford. 23 

In the year 905, the city, which is called in the British 
tongue, Karlegion, 24 and in the Saxon, Legacestre, was rebuilt 
by the command of duke Ethered and Ethelfleda. 

In the year 906, the bones of Saint Oswald, the king and 
martyr, were removed from Bardonig, 26 into Mercia. The 
most invincible king Edward, because the Danes had infringed 
the treaty which they had made, sent an army of West Saxons 
and Mercians into Northumbria, which, having arrived there, 
for nearly forty days did not cease to lay it waste, and slay- 
ing a vast number of the Danes, compelled their kings and 

22 Roger of Wendover mentions five daughters, besides Eadburga, 
whom he calls Eadfleda. 

23 This place in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle is called Hitchinford. 
Lambarde calls it " Itingford," and says, " I find it not so circumscribed, 
that I can make any likely conjecture where it should be." 

24 Properly " CaeTlirion," the ancient name of Leicester. 

25 Bardney. 



A .D. 913. VALOTTR OF EGELFLEDA. 61 

leaders to renew the treaty of peace with king Edward, which 
they had broken. 

In the year 907, in the province of Stafford, at a place which 
is called Teotenhale, 26 a memorable battle took place between 
the English and the Danes ; but the English gained the day. 

In the year 908, Ethered, the king's earl of the Mercians, a 
man of great virtue, departed this life ; and after his death, 
Ms wife Egelfleda, the daughter of king Alfred, for a long time 
most ably governed the kingdom of the Mercians, except the 
cities of London and Oxford, of which her brother, king Edward, 
retained the government. 

In the year 909, Egelfleda, the lady of the Mercians, on the 
second day before the nones of May, came with an army to the 
place which is called Sceargate, 27 and there erected a fortified 
castle, and after that, another on the western bank of the river 
Severn, at the place which is called Brige. 28 

In the year 910, at the beginning of summer, Egelfleda, the 
lady of the Mercians, proceeded with the Mercians to Tamu- 
irting, 29 and rebuilt that city. In this year king Niel was 
slain by his brother Sithric. 

In the year 911, Werfred, bishop of the "Wiccii, departed 
this life at Worcester ; he was a man of great sanctity and 
learning, and, as I have previously mentioned, at the request 
of king Alfred, translated the Dialogues of Saint Gregory the 
pope into the Saxon tongue ; he was succeeded by Ethelhun. 
Egelfleda, the lady of the Mercians, founded the city which is 
called Eadesbirig, 30 and at the close of autumn another, which 
is called "Warewic. 31 

In the year 912, the most invincible king Edward went to 
Bedford, before the feast of Saint Martin, and received the sub- 
mission of its inhabitants, and having remained there thirty 
days, ordered a city to be founded on the south side of the 
river Lea. 32 

In the year 913, Egelfleda, the lady of the Mercians, sent 
an army into the territory of the Britons, 33 to besiege the castle 

26 TotenhalL 27 Roger of Wendover calls it " Strengate." 

28 Bridgnorth, in Shropshire. 29 Tamworth, in Staffordshire. 

30 Eddesbury. 3i Warwick. 

32 This is probably the river meant ; though in the original the river 
is called " Ose," being evidently a misprint for Ouse. The Anglo-Saxon 
Chronicle here mentions Hertford, on the south side of the Lea, as being 
founded by Edward. The Welsh. 



62 A1TNALS OF KOGEB DE HOVEDEtf. AD. 919. 

at Bricenamere ; M having taken the place, they captured the 
wife of the king of the Britons, with thirty-four men, and 
brought them prisoners into Mercia. 

In the year 914, Egelfleda, the lady of the Mercians, on the 
day before the calends of August, took Derby by storm, and 
gained possession of that province ; four of her thanes, who 
were most esteemed by her, were there slain at the city gate, 
while bravely fighting. 

In the year 915, Egelfleda, the lady of the Mercians, a 
woman of remarkable prudence, justice, and virtue, departed 
this life, on the nineteenth day before the calends of July, in 
the eighth year after she by herself had governed the king- 
dom of the Mercians with a vigorous rule, and left her only 
daughter Elfwinna, whom she had by Ethered, the king's 
earl, heiress to her kingdom. Her body was conveyed to 
Gloucester, and honorably buried in the church of Saint Peter. 

In the year 916, king Edward sent into Northumbria an 
army of Mercians, to liberate the city of Mamcestre, 35 and post 
there some brave soldiers as a garrison. After this, he en- 
tirely deprived his niece Elfwinna of her authority in the 
kingdom of Mercia, and ordered her to be taken into Wessex. 
King Sithric also took Devonport by storm. 

In the year 917, the king of the Scots, with the whole of 
his nation, Reginald, king of the Danes, with the Danes and 
English who inhabited Northumbria, and the king of the 
Strath-Clyde Britons, 36 with his people, chose Edward the 
Elder as their father and liege lord, and made a lasting treaty 
with him. 

In the year 918, the Clito Ethelward, brother of king Ed- 
ward, departed this life, on the seventeenth day before the calends 
of November, and was buried at Winchester ; Ethelstan, the 
bishop of the Wiccii, 37 also died, and was succeeded by Wilfred. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 919, 38 Edward 
the Elder, the most invincible king of the English, departed 
this life, at the royal town which is called Fearndun, 39 in the 
thirty-fourth 40 year of his reign, and the fifteenth of the indic- 

31 Brecknock. x Manchester. 

36 This, no doubt, as we learn from other historians, is the meaning of 
the word " Strecglendwalli." w Bishop of Worcester. 

38 The other chroniclers say that he died in the year 924. 

i9 Faringdon, in Berkshire. 

40 This is an error, as it should be twenty-fourth ; though, according to 
oar author's reckoning, it would be in the twentieth. 



AD. 925. ATHELSTAN INVADES SCOTLAND. 63 

tion, after having greatly distinguished himself while king. He 
reigned most gloriously over all the nations that inhabited 
Britain, both those of the Angles, the Scots, the Cumbrians, 
the Danes, and the Britons. 41 After his death, he left the helm 
of state to his son Ethelstan, and his body having been carried to 
"Winchester, was buried with regal pomp at the new monastery 
there. 

Ethelstan was crowned at Kingestun, 42 which means " the 
royal town," and was consecrated with due honor by Athelin, 
archbishop of Canterbury. In his time, the illustrious child 
Dunstan was born in the kingdom of Wessex. 

In the year 920, Ethelstan, the illustrious and glorious king 
of the English, with great pomp and state, gave his sister in 
marriage to king Sithric, who was of Danish origin. 

In the year 921, king Sithric departed this life, and king 
Ethelstan having expelled his son Cuthred, who had succeeded 
his father, added his kingdom to his own dominions. All the 
kings beside, of the whole of Albion, namely, Huwald, 43 king 
of the West Britons, 44 Constantine, king of the Scots, and 
Wuer, 45 king of the Wenti, he conquered in battle and utterly 
routed. All of these, seeing that they could not resist his 
valour, met him on the fourth day before the ides of July, at 
a place which is called Eamot, and having made the oaths, 
made a lasting treaty with him. 

In the year 922, Wilfred, bishop of the Wiccii, died, and 
was succeeded by Kinewold. 

In the year 923, Erithestan, bishop of Winchester, a man of 
remarkable sanctity, resigned the bishopric of Winchester, 
Brinstan, a religious man, being ordained bishop in his stead, 
and in the following year departed to the Lord. 

In the year 924, king Ethelstan ordered his brother Edwin 
to be drowned in the sea. 

In the year 925, Ethelstan, the valiant and glorious king of 
the English, Constantine, king of the Scots, having broken 
the treaty which he had made with him, marched with a large 
army into Scotland, and coming to the tomb of Saint Cuthbert, 
commended himself and his expedition to his guardianship, 
and presented to him many and various gifts, such as befitted a 

41 The Welsh. Kingston-on-Thames. 

43 Howel. West Welsh. 

45 Roger of Wendover calls him Wulferth. The Wenti were prohahly 
the people of Monmouthshire. 



64 ATTCfALS OF KOGEK DE HOVEDEW. A.D. 941. 

king, and lands as well ; consigning to everlasting flames those 
who should take away any portion therefrom. After this, with 
a very large force he subdued the enemy, and with his army 
laid waste Scotland, even as far as Feeder and Wertermore, 
while with his fleet he ravaged as far as Catencs ;" in conse- 
quence of this, king Constantine, being compelled so to do, gave 
up his son to him as a hostage, together with suitable presents ; 
and the peace being thus renewed, the king returned to Wessex. 
In the same year Saint Bristan departed this life. 

In the year 925, the religious monk Elphege, surnamed the 
Bald, a kinsman of Saint Dunstan, received the bishopric of 
Winchester. 

In the year 927, Anlaf, the pagan king of Ireland and of 
many of the islands, being encouraged by his father-in-law, 
Constantine, king of the Scots, entered the mouth of the 
Humber with a vast fleet, amounting to six hundred and fifteen 
sail ; on which he was met by king Ethelstan and his brother 
the Clito Edmund, with an army, at the place which is called 
Brumanburgh. 47 The battle lasted from the beginning of the 
day to the evening, and they slew five minor kings and seven 
dukes, whom the enemy had invited to their aid, and shed 
such a quantity of blood, as in no battle before that had ever 
been shed in England ; and, having compelled the kings Anlaf 
and Constantine, and the king of the Cumbrians, to fly to their 
ships, they returned in great triumph. But the enemy having 
experienced extreme disaster in the loss of their army, returned 
home with only a few men. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 940, Ethel- 
stan, the valiant and glorious king of the English, departed 
this life at Gloucester, in the sixteenth year of his reign, and 
in the fourteenth of the indiction, on the sixth day before the 
calends of November, being the fourth day of the week ; his 
body was carried to the city of Maidulph, 47 * and was there 
honorably interred. His brother Edmund succeeded him in 
the eighteenth year of his age. 

In the year 941, the Northumbrians proving regardless 
of the fealty which they owed to Edmund, the mighty 
king of the English, chose Anlaf, king of the Norwegians 

46 Caithness. 

41 Or Brunenburgh ; 1 rumley, in Lincolnshire. This battle was tlie 
subject of an Anglo-Saxon poem, which is still in existence. 
47 * Malmesbury. 



A.D. 943. BIRTH OF EDGAB. 65 

as their king. The elder Richard became duke of the Nor- 
mans, and continued so for fifty-two years. 

In the first year of the reign of king Edmund, king Anlaf 
first came to York, and then marching to the south, laid siege 
to Hamtune ; 44 but not succeeding there, he turned the steps of 
his army towards Tameworde, 45 and having laid waste all the 
places in the neighbourhood, while he was returning to Lega- 
cestre, 46 king Edmund met him with an army ; but he had 
not a severe struggle for the mastery, 47 since the two arch- 
bishops Odo and "Wulstan, having allayed the anger of both of 
the kings, put an end to the fight. And thus peace being made, 
the "Watlingastrete 48 was made the boundary of both kingdoms ; 
Edmund having the sway on the southern side, and Anlaf on 
the northern. Anlaf having pillaged the church of Saint 
Balther and burnt Tinningham, shortly after perished. After 
this, the people of York laid waste the island of Lindisfarne, 
and slew great numbers. The son of Sithric, whose name was 
Anlaf, then reigned over the Northumbrians. 

In the year 942, Edmund, the mighty king of the English, 
entirely wrested five cities, namely, Lincoln, Nottingham, 
Derby, Leicester, and Stamford from the hands of the Danes, 
and reduced the whole of Mercia under his own power. He was 
a friend 49 of Dunstan, the servant of God, and by following his 
counsels became renowned. Being loaded by him with various 
honors the latter was appointed to the abbacy of Glastonbury, in 
place he had been educated. 

In the year 943, when his queen, Saint Elgiva, had borne 
to Edmund, the mighty king, a son named Edgar, Saint Dun- 
stan heard voices, as though on high, singing and repeating, 
" Peace to the church of England in the times of the child that 
is now born, and of our Dunstan." In this year, the same 
^ing raised king Anlaf, of whom we have previously made men- 
tion, from the font of holy regeneration, and gave him royal 
presents, and shortly afterwards held Reginald, king of the 

14 Southampton. 45 Tamworth. <6 Leicester. 

On the contrary, Roger of Wendover says that the loss on either 
side was excessive. 

43 The road which passed from the south of England, through London, 
into the north. 

49 There is little doubt that the word " summus " here, is an error for 
" amicus." 

VOL. I. r 



66 AITNALS OF KOGEB DE HOVEDEN". A.D. 948. 

Northumbrians when he was confirmed by the bishop, and 
adopted him as his own son. 

In the year 944, Edmund, the mighty king of the English, 
expelled two kings, namely, Anlaf, son of king Sithric, and 
Reginald, son of Guthferth, from Northumbria, and reduced it 
to subjection. 

In the year 945, Edmund, the mighty king of the Englisfi, 
laid waste the lands of the Cumbrians, and granted them to 
Malcolm, king of the Scots, on condition that he should be 
faithful to him both by land and sea. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 946, Edmund, 
the mighty king of the English on the day of the feast of 
Saint Augustine, the instructor of the English, while, at a 
town, which in English is called Pucklecirce, 50 he was attempt- 
ing to rescue his sewer Leo 51 from the hands of a most vile 
robber, for fear lest he should be killed, was slain by the 
same man, after having reigned five years and seven months, 
in the fourth year of the indiction, on the seventh day before 
the calends of June, being the third day of the week. Being 
taken to Glastonbury, he was there interred by Saint Dunstan, 
the abbat. 

His brother Edred succeeded him in the kingdom, and was 
consecrated king by Saint Odo, the archbishop, at Kingston. 

In the year 947, "Wulstan, archbishop of York, and all 
the nobles of Northumbria, swore fidelity to Edred, the excel- 
lent king of the English, at a town which is called Tadenes- 
clif, 62 but they did not long observe it ; for they elected a cer- 
tain man, named Eiric, a Dane by birth, to be king over them. 

In the year 948, in return for the unfaithfulness of the 
Northumbrians, Edred, the excellent king of the English, laid 
waste the whole of Northumbria; in which devastation the 
monastery at Rhipum, 53 which was said to have been formerly 
built by Saint Wilfred, the bishop, was destroyed by fire. But, 
as the king was returning homewards, the army sallied forth 
from York, and made great slaughter of the rear of the king's 

50 Pucklechurch, in Gloucestershire. Matthew of Westminster and 
Roger of Wendover call the place Micklesbury. 

81 It is more generally represented that the name of the robber was Leof ; 
the name no doubt which is here given to the attendant. 

52 Lambarde takes this place to be the same as Topcliff, in Yorkshire. 

43 Ripon. 



AD. 953. EARLS OF NOETHTJMBRIA. 67 

army, at a place which is called Chesterford. The king 
being greatly enraged thereat, wished to return at once and 
entirely to depopulate the whole of that region ; but, on un- 
derstanding this, the Northumbrians, being struck with terror, 
forsook Eiric, whom they had appointed king over them, and 
made compensation to the king for his injuries with honors, 
and for his losses with presents, and mitigated his anger with 
no small sum of money. 

In the year 951, Saint Elphege, surnamed the Bald, bishop 
of Winchester, who had graced Saint Dunstan with the monas- 
tic garb and the degree of priest, ended this life, and was 
succeeded in the see by Efsin. In this year also died Oswel, 55 
the king of the Britons. 

In the year 952, Edred, the renowned king of the English, 
placed Wulstan, archbishop of York, in close confinement at 
Withanbrig, 56 because he had been often accused before him 
on certain charges. 

In the year 953, Wulstan, the archbishop of York, having 
been released from custody, the episcopal dignity was restored 
to him at Dorchester. 

The kings of the Northumbrians having now, as I have 
mentioned above, come to a close, it is my intention here to 
insert how and to what earls that province afterwards became 
subject. 

The last of the kings of that provinpe, as I have said a 
little above, was Eiric, whom the Northumbrians, on violating 
their plighted faith, which they had sworn to king Edred, 
made king ; for which reason the king, in his anger, ordered 
the whole province to be utterly laid waste. On this, 
the Northumbrians having expelled their king and slain 
^A.mancus, the son of Anlaf, and with oaths and presents 
appeased king Edred, the province was given in charge to 
earl Osulph; who afterwards, in the reign of king Edgar, 
took Oslac as his associate in the government. After this, 
Osulph took charge of the parts on the northern side of 
Tyne, while Oslac ruled over York and its vicinity. He was 
succeeded by Waltef the Elder, who had, as his successor, his 
son, Ucthred. When, in the reign of king Edric, king Canute 

45 V. r. Owel, or, as we write it, Howel. 

66 The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says Jedburgh. 



68 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 953. 

invaded Korthumbria with a hostile force, being compelled by 
necessity, he went over with his followers to Canute ; and 
after having taken the oath of fealty and given hostages, he was 
slain by a certain very wealthy Dane, Thurebrand, surnamed 
Holde, Canute giving his sanction thereto ; and in his place 
his brother, Eadulph Cudel, was substituted. Earl Ucthred 
left three sons surviving him, Aldred, Eadulph, and Cospatric. 
The first two of these were successively earls of Northumbria ; 
the third, who did not enjoy the honor of the earldom, had a 
son named Ucthred, whose son was Eadulph, surnamed Rus, 
who, in after times, was the leader of those who murdered 
bishop Walcher ; indeed, he himself is said to have slain him 
with his own hand. However, shortly afterwards, he himself 
was slain 'by a woman, and was buried in the church of Gede- 
worde ; but afterwards such a mass of filth as his body was 
cast out from there by Turgot, formerly prior of the church of 
Durham, and archdeacon. 

After Eadulph Cudel, Aldred, the son of the above-named 
earl Ucthred, received the earldom, and slew the murderer, 
Thurebrand, in revenge for the death of his father. On this, 
Carl, the son of Thurebrand, and the said earl Aldred, after 
plotting against the lives of each other, were at last reconciled. 
But shortly after, Aldred, suspecting no evil, was slain by 
Carl, in a wood which is called Eisewode, the brother of 
Aldred having joined in the plot. After the death of his 
brother, Eadulph became earl of Northumbria; who, being 
elated with pride, laid waste the country of the Britons that 
is to say, of the Welsh in a most cruel manner. But, in the 
third year after, when, a treaty having been made, he had come 
to Hardicanute to be reconciled, he was slain by Siward ; who, 
in succession to him, had the earldom of the whole of that pro- 
vince of Northumbria : that is to say, from the Humber to the 
Tweed. On his death he was succeeded by Tosti ; who, having 
been banished from England for the great injuries which he had 
done to Northumbria, his earldom was given in charge by king 
Edward to Morcar ; and, afterwards, by king William. Morcar, 
finding his attention distracted by weighty matters in other 
quarters, entrusted the earldom beyond the Tyne to Osulph, a 
young man, son of the above-named earl Eadulph. Morcar being 
afterwards taken prisoner and placed in confinement, king Wil- 
liam gave the earldom of Osulph to Copsi, who was the uncle of 



A.D. 953. MALCOLM EECETTES COSPATRIC. 69 

earl Tosti, a man of wisdom and prudence. He, having made 
a vow to Saint Cuthbert, gave to his servants in his church, 
namely, that of Durham, these lands : In Merscum, ten car- 
rucates and a half of land, and the church of Saint Germanus 
in the same town ; in Thortuna, two carrucates ; and in Thes- 
trota, ten bovates of land ; in Eeadeclive half a carrucate, and 
in Gisburgh one carrucate of land. 

On being deprived of the earldom by Copsi, Osulph, after 
hiding himself in hunger and destitution in the woods and 
mountains, at length collected a band of his companions, whom 
the same necessity had brought together, and surrounded 
Copsi at Niwebrin ; " who, escaping among the confusion that 
ensued, concealed himself in the church. Being however 
betrayed, the enemy set fire to the church : whereon he was 
compelled to make his way to the door, where he was slain by 
the hand of Osulph, in the fifth week after he had received 
the earldom, on the fourth day before the ides of March. In 
the ensuing autumn, Osulph himself, rushing headlong upon 
a spear which a robber presented at him, was pierced thereby, 
arid died on the spot. 

After his death, Cospatric, the son of Maldred, the son of 
Crinan, went to king William, and, for a large sum of money, 
made purchase of the earldom of Northumbria ; for, through 
his mother's side, the honor of that earldom belonged to him; 
his mother being Algitha, the daughter of earl Ucthred, whom 
Elgiva, daughter of king Ethelred, bore to him. This Al- 
githa her father gave in marriage to Maldred, the son of 
Crinan. After this, Cospatric held the earldom until the king 
deprived him of it ; making it a charge against him that he 
had with his counsel and assistance aided those who had 
slain the earl Robert Cumin with his followers, at Durham, 
although he really was not present there ; and also alleging 
that he had sided with the enemy when the Normans were 
slain at York. Flying, therefore, to king Malcolm, he shortly 
afterwards set sail for Flanders; and, after sometime, on 
his return to Scotland, the above-named king gave him Dun- 
bar, in Lothian, 58 with the adjacent lands, that with these 
he might maintain himself and his people until more fortunate 

s " Probably Newburgh, in Yorkshire,. 

58 In the original it is " Londoneio ;" most probably an error for " Lau- 
donia." 



70 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D 955. 

times. But not long after this, being reduced to extreme in- 
firmity, lie sent for Aldwin and Turgot, the monks, who at 
this time were living at Meilros, 59 in poverty and contrite in 
spirit for the sake of Christ, and ended his life with a full 
confession of his sins, and great lamentations and penitence, 
at Ubbanford, which is also called Northam, and was buried 
in the porch of the church there. He gave them two fair 
dorsals, 60 that, in whatever place they might chance to take 
rest, they should set them up there in remembrance of him. 
These are still preserved in the church at Durham. 

This Cospatric was the father of Dolfin, Walthen, and Cos- 
patric. After Cospatric, the earldom of Northumbria was 
given to Walthen, the son of earl Siward, who was entitled 
to it both on his father's and his mother's side. For he was the 
son of earl Siward, by Elfleda, the daughter of Alfred, who 
was formerly earl. Some time after, Walthen having been 
taken prisoner, the charge of the earldom was entrusted to 
bishop Walcher up to the time of his death. After him, the 
king conferred that honor on Alfric. He, being unable to 
make head against times of difficulty, and having returned to 
his own country, the same king made Eobert de Mowbray earl 
of Northumbria ; but he being taken prisoner, king William 
the younger, and, after him, king Henry, kept Northumbria 
in their own hands. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 955, Edelred, 61 
the excellent king of the English, fell sick, in the tenth year 
of his reign, and his life was despaired of; on which, speedily 
dispatching a messenger, he sent for the father of his con- 
fessions, 62 namely, Saint Dunstan, the abbat. While repairing 
with all haste to the palace, and when he had now got half way 
thither, a voice was distinctly heard by him from above, say- 
ing, " King Edelred now rests in peace;" whereupon, the 
horse on which he was sitting, not being able to endure the 
force of the angelic voice, without any injury to his rider, 
fell dead upon the ground. The king's body was carried to 

w Melrose. 

60 Dorsals were garments, or pieces of tapestry, which were hung against 
walls as a screen for the backs of those who sat near them : whence their 
name 61 A mistake for Edred. 

62 The text is probably corrupt in this passage. 



A.D. 958. W5ATH OF ARCHBISHOP 01)0. 7t 

Winchester, and received an honorable burial from the abbat 
Dunstan, at the old monastery there. 

His cousin, the Clito 63 Edwin, 64 succeeded him in the king- 
dom ; he was the son of king Edmund, and of Saint Elgiva, 
his queen. In the same year he was consecrated king by 
archbishop Odo, at Kingston. 

In the year 956, Saint Dunstan, the abbat, was banished 
on account of his righteousness by Edwin, king of the English, 
and passing the seas, took refuge, during the period of his exile, 
in the monastery of Bland igny. 64 On the seventh day before 
the calends of January, Wulstan, archbishop of York, departed 
this life, and was buried at Oundle j 66 he was succeeded by 
Oskitel, a venerable man. 

In the year 957, Edwy, king of the English, by reason of 
his unwise administration of the government, being despised 
by them, was forsaken by the people of Mercia and Northum- 
bria, and his brother, the Clito Edgar, was chosen king by 
them, and the rule of the two kings was so separated that the 
river Thames divided their kingdom. Shortly after this, 
Edgar, the king of the Mercians, recalled Saint Dunstan, the 
abbat, from exile, with great honor and distinction. A short 
time after, Coenwald, the bishop of Worcester, departed this 
life, a man of great humility, and of the monastic profession. 
In his place Saint Dunstan was elected bishop, and was con- 
secrated by Odo, archbishop of Canterbury. 

In the year 958, Saint Odo, the archbishop of Canterbury, 
separated from each other, Edwy, king of the West Saxons, 
and Elgiva, either because, as it is said, she was related to 
him, or because he loved her instead of his own wife. 67 In the 
same year, the said archbishop, a man famed for his talents, 
and commendable for his virtues, endued also with a spirit of 

63 " Clito " was a title which was sometimes given to all the king's sons 
among the Anglo-Saxons, but more generally in especial to the eldest 
sons. It was probably derived from the Latin " inclytus," " glorious," 
or from its root, the Greek word icXaroc, of the same meaning. 

64 Generally called Edwy. 

65 The reading in the text is Blandimum ; it should be Blandinium. The 
monastery of Blandigny, or St. Peter, was in the city of Ghent. 

68 In Northamptonshire. 

67 "Sub propria uxore." It is not universally agreed that king Edwy 
was married. Bridferth, one of the early writers, says that Edwy was 
intimate with two women, mother and daughter. 



72 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 959. 

prophecy, was removed from human affairs, and carried by the 
hands of angels into Paradise. He was succeeded by Elfsin, 
bishop of "Winchester, and in his place Brihtelm was ordained 
to the see of Winchester. 

In the year 959, Elfsin, archbishop of Canterbury, while 
proceeding to Home to obtain his pall, perished, frozen with 
ice and snow, upon the Alpine mountains. Edwy also, king 
of the "West Saxons, after having reigned four years, departed 
this life at Winchester, and was buried in the new monas- 
tery there ; on which he was succeeded in the kingdom by 
his brother, Edgar, king of Mercia, who was elected king by 
the people of all England, and united the kingdom, before 
divided, into one. This took place in the sixteenth year of his 
age, five hundred and ten years after the arrival of the Angles 
in Britain, and in the three hundred and sixty-third year after 
Saint Augustine and his companions had come to England. 

Brihtelm, bishop of the people of Dorset, 68 was elected to 
the primacy of the see of Canterbury, but as he was not suited 
for an office of such importance, by command of the king 
he left Canterbury, and returned to the church which he 
had lately left. Upon this, by the Divine will, and the counsel 
of the wise, Saint Dunstan, the bishop of Worcester, was ap- 
pointed primate and patriarch of the mother church of the 
English ; by whom and other prudent men, Edgar, the king of 
the English, being becomingly instructed, he everywhere 
checked the wicked, reduced the rebellious under the yoke of 
correction, cherished the virtuous and modest, restored and 
enriched the churches of God that had been laid waste, and 
having removed all corruptions 68 * from the monasteries of the 
secular 69 clergy, gathered together multitudes of monks and 
nuns for the praise of the mighty Creator, and ordered more 
than forty monasteries to be erected for them. All these he 
honored as brethren, and cherished as most beloved sons, ad- 
monishing by his example the pastors whom he had set over 
them, to exhort them to live regularly and without reproach, 
to the end that they might please Christ and his saints in all 
things. 

68 Meaning bishop of Winchester, and not bishop of Dorchester, in 
Oxfordshire, of which Leowin was at this time bishop. 

68 * The word in the text is " venenis," perhaps too strong a word to 
be the correct one. 

69 In the original, " scholarium ;" probably a mistake for " secularium." 



A.D. 967. HOXXS PLACED IX THE NEW MONASTERY. 73 

In the year 960, Saint Dunstan went to the city of Rome, 
in the third year of the indiction, and received the pall from 
pope John, and then returned to his country in the paths of 
peace. In the lapse of a few months after this, he repaired 
to the royal threshold, and, knocking at the gate of the palace, 
with suggestions for the exercise of the royal piety and with 
most humble prayers, he entreated the king that he would pro- 
mote to the honor of the bishopric of Worcester the blessed Os- 
wald, the cousin of his own predecessor Odo, a monk noted for 
his piety, meekness, and humility, and who, by real experience, 
he had proved to wax strong in the Divine fear and in the holy 
exercise of virtue. King Edgar assented to the requests of 
Saint Dunstan, and the blessed Oswald was installed by him- 
self in the high priesthood. 

In the year 963, on the death of Brihtelm, Saint Ethel- 
wald, the venerable abbat, 70 who had been educated by the 
blessed Dunstan, received the bishopric of Winchester, and in 
the same year, by the king's command, the clergy 71 having 
been expelled, filled the old monastery with monks ; for he 
had especially persuaded the king, whose chief adviser he was, 
to expel the clergy from the monasteries, and to place in them 
monks and nuns. 

In the year 964, Edgar the Peaceful, king of the English, took 
to wife Elfthritha, 72 the daughter of Ordgar, duke of Devonshire, 
after the death of her husband, Elfwold, the glorious duke of the 
East Angles; by whom he had two sons, Edmund and Egelred; 
he had also before this, by Egelfleda 73 the Fair, the daughter 
of duke Ordmar, Edward, afterwards king and martyr ; and 
by Saint Elfthritha, 74 he had a daughter, Editha, a virgin 
most strictly consecrated to God. 

In the same year, the same king placed monks in the new 
rfbnastery 78 and in that at Middleton, and over the former he 
appointed Ethelgar, over the latter, Kineward, abbats. 

In the year 967, Edgar the Peaceful, king of the English, 

70 Of Abingdon. 7l The secular clergy. 

72 More generally called Elfrida. <* More generally called Elfleda. 

74 She is called Wulfreda by Roger of Wendover and William of Malmes- 
bury. By the term, " sancta," our author would seem to imply that she 
was a nun ; but William of Malmesbury says, " it is certain that she was 
not a nun at that time, but being a lay virgin, had assumed the veil through 
fear of the king, though she was immediately afterwards forced to the royal 
bed." Roger of Wendover gives the same account. 75 At Winchester. 



74 AJfNALS OF KOGEE DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 973. 

placed nuns in the monastery of Rameseie, 76 which his grand- 
father, king Edward the Elder, had built, and appointed Saint 
Merwinna abbess over them. 

In the year 968, bishop Aldred died at St. Cuthbert's, in 
Cuneceastre, 77 and was succeeded in the bishopric by Elfsin. 

In the year 969, Edgar the Peaceful, king of the English, 
commanded Saint Dunstan, archbishop of Canterbury, and the 
blessed Oswald, bishop of Worcester, and Saint Ethelwald, 
bishop of Winchester, to expel the secular clergy in the larger 
monasteries, that were built throughout Mercia, and to place 
monks in them. In consequence of this, Saint Oswald, having 
gained his wish, expelled from the monastery the clergy of the 
church of Worcester, who refused to assume the monastic habit ; 
but those who consented to do so, the bishop himself ordained 
as monks, and appointed over them as prior, 78 Winsin, a man 
of great piety. 

In the year 970, one hundred and ten years after his burial, 
in the fourteenth year of the indiction, on the ides of July, 
being the sixth day of the week, the relics of the holy and 
venerable bishop Swithin were removed from the place of their 
sepulture by Saint Ethelwald, the venerable bishop, Elstan, 
the abbat of Glastonbury, and Ethelgar, the abbat of the new 
monastery, 79 and were interred in the church of the apostles 
Saint Peter and Saint Paul. 

In the year 971, the Clito Edmund, son of king Edgar, died, 
and was honorably interred in the monastery of Kameseie. 
Shortly after this, Ordgar, duke of Devonshire, the father-in- 
law of king Edgar, departed this life, and was buried at Exan- 
cestre. 81 

In the year 972, Edgar the Peaceful, king of the English, 
having completed the church of the new monastery, which 
had been begun by his father, king Edmund, caused it to be 
dedicated with all honor. Oskitel, the archbishop of York, 
having departed this life, his kinsman, Saint Oswald, the bishop 
of Worcester, was chosen archbishop in his room. 

In the year 973, in the thirtieth year of his age, being the 
fifth year of the indiction, on the fifth day before the ides of 
May, being the day of Pentecost, Edgar the Peaceful, king of 

7S Ramsey. Chester-le-street. 

78 " Decanum," properly, " dean ;" an older term, meaning the same as 
prior. 79 At Winchester. Exeter. 



A.D. 975. DEATH OP EDGAB. 75 

the English, received the blessing from Saints Dunstan and 
Oswald, the archbishops, and from the other bishops of the 
whole of England, as the city of Accamann, 82 and was conse- 
crated with very great pomp and glory, and anointed king. 

In the lapse of a short time after this, sailing round the 
north of Britain with a large fleet, he came to the city of the 
Legions, 83 where, according to his command, his eight tri- 
butary kings met him, namely, Binath, king of the Scots ; 
Malcolm, king of the Cumbrians ; Maccus, king of numerous 
islands ; and five others Dusnal, Sifreth, Huwald, James, and 
Inchil ; M and there they swore that they would be faithful to 
him, and would be ready to assist him both by land and by sea. 

On a certain day he embarked with them in a vessel, and 
they taking their places at the oars, he himself took the helm, 
and steered it skilfully according to the course of the river ; 
and amid all the multitude of his chieftains and nobles who 
attended in similar vessels, he sailed from the palace to the 
monastery of Saint John the Baptist, where prayers having been 
offered up, he returned in the same state to the palace ; on 
entering which, he is reported to have said to his nobles, that 
now at last each of his successors would be able to boast that he 
was king of the English, after he had enjoyed the display of 
such honors, so many kings paying obedience to him. In 
this year Saint Oswald received the pall from Stephen, the 
hundred and thirty-fourth pope. 

In the year 974, there was a great earthquake throughout 
the whole of England. 

In the year 975, king Edgar the Peaceful, the monarch of 
the English land, the flower and grace of the kings his prede- 
cessors, departed this life ; not less worthy of remembrance 
among the English than Romulus among the Romans, Cyrus 
among the Persians, Alexander among the Macedonians, Arsaces 
among the Parthians, Charles the Great among the French, 
Arthur among the Britons. After having accomplished all 
things in a royal manner, he departed this life in the thirty- 

82 Bath : which by the Saxons was called Akemancester. 

83 Chester. 

84 These five subreguli, with their territories, are thus mentioned by 
Roger of Wendover " Dusnal, king of Demetia (South Wales) ; Siferth 
and Huwall, kings of Wales ; James, king of Galwallia ; and liikil, king 
of Westmoreland." 



76 ANNALS OF EOGEB, DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 975. 

second year of his age, the nineteenth of his reign over Mercia 
and Northumbria, the sixteenth of his rule over all England, in 
the third year of the indiction, and on the eighth day before 
the ides of July, it being the fifth day of the week, leaving 
his son Edward heir to his kingdom and his virtues. His 
body was carried to Glastonbury, and there interred with royal 
honors. 

He, during his lifetime, had collected together three thou- 
sand six hundred ships ; and it was his custom every year, 
after the solemnities of Easter were concluded, to collect 
twelve hundred of these on the eastern, twelve hundred on 
the western, and twelve hundred on the southern coast of the 
island, and to row to the western side with the eastern fleet, 
and then sending that back, to row to the north with the 
western one ; and again sending that back, to row to the east 
with the northern one ; and in this manner it had been his 
usage every summer to sail around the whole island, manfully 
acting thus for the defence of his kingdom against foreigners, 
and for the exercise of himself and his people in military 
affairs. 

But in the winter and spring it was his practice to pass 
along the interior of his kingdom throughout all the provinces 
of the English, and to see how his legal enactments, and his 
decrees and statutes, had been observed by the men in power. 
He was also accustomed to use every possible precaution that 
the poor might not receive detriment by oppression from the 
rich. Thus, in one respect, his object was military strength, 
in the other, justice ; and in both he consulted the welfare of 
the people and of the realm. By reason of this he was held 
in fear by his enemies on every side, while he was endeared 
to those who were subjected to him ; at his departure the 
whole kingdom was in a state of perturbation, and after a period 
of gladness, because the country flourished in peace in his days, 
tribulation began to arise in every quarter. 

For Elpher, the duke of the Mercians, and many chief men 
in the kingdom, blinded by great bribes, expelled the abbats 
and monks from the monasteries in which king Edgar the 
Peaceful had placed them, and introduced there secular clergy 
with their wives; but the madness of this rash man was 
resisted by Ethelwin, the duke of East Anglia, a friend of 
God, and his brother Elfwold, and earl Brithnoth, who, hold- 



A.D. 978. PBOPHECY OF SAINT DUNSTAN. 77 

ing a synod, declared that they could never allow the monks 
to be expelled from the kingdom, inasmuch as it was they 
who kept all religion within the realm ; after which, collecting 
an army, they defended the monasteries of East Anglia with 
the greatest determination. 

While this was going on, a dissension about the election of 

a king arose among the nobles of the realm, as some favoured 

Edward, the son of the deceased king, and others his brother 

Egelred. For which reason the archbishops Dunstan and 

, Oswald convened the bishops, abbats, and a great number of 

*the nobles, and, having elected Edward, as his father had 

commanded, consecrated him, and anointed him king. In the 

autumn of this year a comet was seen. 

In the year 977, a very great synod was held in East 
Anglia, at a town which is called Kirding. 85 After this, 
while another synod was being held at Calne, a royal town, 
the elders of all England, who were there assembled, fell from 
an upper chamber, with the exception of Saint Dunstan ; some 
: of them were killed, while some with difficulty escaped death. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 978, Edward, 
king of the Angles, was unrighteously slain by his people, by 
the command of his stepmother, Elfritha, at a place which is 
called Corvesgate, 86 and was buried without royal pomp at 
Werham. 87 His brother, Egelred, 88 succeeded him, a dis- 
tinguished prince, of elegant manners, beauteous countenance, 
and graceful aspect. He was consecrated king, at Kingestun, 
by the holy archbishops Dunstan and Oswald, and ten bishops, 
in the sixth year of the indiction, on the eighth day before the 
calends of May, being the Lord's day after the festival of Easter. 

Saint Dunstan, being filled with the spirit of prophecy, fore- 
told to him that in his reign he would suffer much tribulation, 
in these words : " Because thou hast aspired to the kingdom 
through the death of thy brother, whom thy mother hath 
slain, hear, therefore, the word of the Lord ; thus saith the 
Lord, ' The sword shall not depart from thy house, but shall 
rage against thee all the days of thy life, and shall slay thy 
seed, until thy kingdom shall be transferred unto another 

85 A misprint for Kirtling, now Kirtlington, in Cambridgeshire. The 
subject discussed by the synod was the marriage of the priesthood. 
** Corfe Castle, in Dorsetshire. 87 Wareham. 

88 V. r. Ethelred, by which name he is generally known. 



78 AITSTALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEK. A.D. 984. 

kingdom, whose manners and whose language the people 
whom thou dost govern knoweth not ; nor shall thy sin be 
expiated but by a prolonged vengeance, the sin of thyself, and 
the sin of thy mother, and the sin of the men who have shared 
in her unrighteous counsels.' " Therefore, after this, a cloud 
appeared at midnight throughout all England, at one time of a 
bloody, at another of a fiery, appearance, which afterwards 
changed to various hues and colours ; it disappeared towards 
dawn. 

In the year 979, Elpher, duke of the Mercians, came to 
Werham 89 with a multitude of people, and ordered the holy body 
of Edward, the precious king and martyr, to be taken up 
from the tomb, where many miracles had taken place. When 
it was stripped, it was found to be whole and entirely free 
from all corruption and contagion ; it was then washed and 
arrayed in new vestments, and conveyed to Scaftesbirig, 90 and 
honorably buried there. 

In the year 980, Southampton was ravaged by the Danish 
pirates, and almost all of its citizens either killed or carried 
away captives. Shortly after this, the same army devastated 
the isle of Tenedland. 91 In this year, also, the province of the 
city of the Legions 92 was laid waste by the Norwegian pirates. 

In the year 981, the monastery of Saint Petroc 93 the con- 
fessor, in Cornwall, was ravaged by the pirates, who, the year 
before, had laid waste Southampton, and were then com- 
mitting frequent ravages in Devonshire, and in Cornwall 
near the sea-shore. 

In the year 982, three ships touched on the coast of the 
province of Dorset, and laid waste Portland. In this year 
the city of London was burned with fire. 

In the year 983, Alpher, duke of the Mercians, a kinsman 
of Edgar, king of the English, departed this life, on which 
his son Alfric succeeded to the dukedom 

In the year 984, Saint Ethel wold, bishop of Winchester, 
departed from this world to the Lord, in the second year of 
the indiction, on the calends of August ; and was succeeded 
by Elphege, M abbat of Bath. He had assumed the religious 
habit at the monastery which is called Dehorhirst. 94 * 

*> Wareham. 9 Shaftesbury. 91 The isle of Thanet. 

92 Chester. 93 Padstow. M The second bishop of that name. 

** Deerhurst, near Gloucester. 



A.D. 991. RAVAGES OF TUB DANES. 79 

In the year 986, by reason of certain dissensions, Egelred, 
king of the English, laid siege to the city of Rochester, but 
perceiving the difficulty of taking it, departed in anger, and 
laid waste the lands 95 of Saint Andrew the Apostle. Alfric, 
the duke of the Mercians, son of duke Alfer, was this year 
banished from England. 

In the year 987 ; there occurred two plagues, unknown to 
the English nation in preceding ages, namely, a fever affecting 
the people, and a murrain among animals, which, in the En- 
glish language, is called " Scitha," being a flux of the bowels; 
these greatly ravaged the whole of England, and affected both 
men and animals with great devastation, and, consuming the 
inner parts of the body, raged in an indescribable manner 
throughout all the territories of England. 

In the year 988, "Wesedport 96 was ravaged by the Danish 
pirates, by whom, also, Goda, earl of Devon, and Stremewold, 
a very brave warrior, were slain ; but a considerable number of 
the enemy having been killed, the English became masters of 
the place. 97 

In the first year of the indiction, on the fourteenth day 
before the calends of June, it being the Sabbath, Saint Dunstan 
the archbishop departed this life, and attained a heavenly 
kingdom ; in his stead Ethelgar, bishop of Selsey, 98 received 
the archbishopric, and held it one year and three months. 

In the year 989, archbishop Aldred 99 died, and was suc- 
ceeded by Aldune. 

In the year 991, Gippeswic 1 was ravaged by the Danes. 
Their leaders were Justin, and Guthmund, the son of Steitan ; 
rith them, not long after this, Brithnoth, the brave duke of 

ic East Saxons, engaged in battle near Meldun ; 2 but, after a 
multitude on both sides had fallen, the duke himself was slain, 
anfl the Danish fortunes prevailed. Moreover, in this year, 
by the advice of Sine, the archbishop of Canterbury, and the 
lukes Ethel ward and Alfric,- a tribute, which consisted often 

* 5 Belonging to the bishopric of Rochester. 

96 Probably Watchet, in Somersetshire. 

97 " Loco fluminis" in the original ; " fluminis" being probably an error 
or some other word. 

98 In Sussex. 

99 The same who just before is called Ethelgar. 
1 Ipswich. * Maldon. 



80 AlfNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 994. 

pounds, 3 was for the first time paid to the Danes, in order 
that they might desist from the continued pillage, conflagra- 
tions, and slaughters of the people, of which they were re- 
peatedly guilty near the sea- shore, and might observe a 
lasting peace with them. 

Saint Oswald the archbishop, on the sixth day before the 
ides of November, being the third day of the week, conse- 
crated the monastery of Eawele, which he and Ethelwin, 
the duke of East Anglia, a friend of God, aided and comforted 
by the Divine counsel and assistance, had erected. 

In the year 992, being the fifth year of the indiction, on the 
day before the calends of March, being the second day of the 
week, Saint Oswald the archbishop departed this life before 
the feet of the poor, where, according to his usual custom, he 
was performing the Divine command, 4 in the manner he had 
previously predicted, and attained the joys of the kingdom of 
lieaven ; he was buried in the church of Saint Mary, at Wor- 
cester, which he himself had erected from the very foundation. 
He was succeeded by Adulph, the venerable abbat of Medes- 
hampstead ; 5 and not long after the death of the blessed father 
Oswald, duke Ethelwin, of illustrious memory, the friend 
of God, departed this life, and was honorably buried at 
Ramesege. 6 

In the year 993, the above-mentioned army of the Danes 
took Bebbanburgh, 7 and carried off all they could find in it. 
After this, they directed their course to the mouth of the river 
Humber, and, having burned many towns and slain many per- 
sons in Lindesey and Northumbria, took considerable booty. 
Against them a great number of the people of the district 
collected with all haste ; but when they were about to engage, 
the leaders of the army, whose names were Frana, Frithe- 
gist, and Godewin, because, on the fathers' side, they were of 
Danish origin, betrayed their followers, and were the first to 
set the example of flight. 

In the year 994, Anlaf, the king of the Norwegians, and 
Sweyn, the king of the Danes, arrived at London, on the day 
of the nativity of Saint Mary, with ninety-four galleys, and 

3 The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle and Roger of Wendover say that it was 
ten thousand pounds, which no doubt is the correct statement. 

4 In washing the feet of the poor. 

5 Peterborough. 6 Ramsey. " Bainborough. 



A.D. 997. BAKES E1TTZK TEE 8EVEBN. 81 

immediately attempted to force an entrance and burn it : but 
by the aid of God and of His Mother, they -were repulsed by 
the citizens, with no small loss to their army. Thereupon, 
being exasperated with rage and sorrow, on the same day 
they betook themselves thence, and first in Essex and in Kent, 
and near the sea-shore, and afterwards in Sussex and in the 
province of Southampton, they burned houses, laid waste the 
fields, and without respect to sex or age destroyed a very great 
number of people with fire and sword, and carried off a large 
amount of spoil ; at last, having obtained horses for themselves, 
furiously raging, they traversed many provinces to and fro, and 
spared neither the female sex nor yet the innocent age of in- 
fants, but, with the ferocity of wild beasts, consigned all to 
death. 

Upon this, king Egelred, by the advice of his nobles, sent 
ambassadors to them, promising that he would give them tribute 
and provisions, on condition that they should entirely put an 
end to their cruelty. Assenting to this request of the king, 
they returned to their ships, and then the whole of the army 
assembled together at Southampton and passed the winter 
there. The provisions were provided for them by the whole of 
Wessex; and by the whole of England the tribute, which 
amounted to sixteen pounds, was paid. In the meantime, by 
the command of king Egelred, Elphege, the bishop of Win- 
chester, and the noble duke Ethelwald, proceeded to king 
Alaf, and, having given hostages, brought him with great 
honor to tie royal town of Andeafaran, 8 where the king was 
staying. 

He was honorably received by the king, who caused him to 
be confirmed by the bishop, and, adopting him as his son, pre- 
sented him with royal gifts, on which he promised king Egelred 
rthat he would no more come with an army to England ; and, 
after this, he returned to the ships, and at the approach of 
summer returned to his own country, and carefully adhered 
to his promise. 

In the year 995, Aldune, the bishop, removed the body of 
Saint Cuthbert from Cestre ' to Dunholm. 10 

In the year 996, Elfric was consecrated archbishop of Can- 
terbury. 

In the year 997, the army of the Danes, which had remained 

8 Andover. 9 Chester le-Street. 10 Durham. 

VOL. I. G 



82 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 999. 

in England, having sailed round "Wessex, entered the mouth 
of the river Severn, and at one time laid waste South Britain ; u 
at another, Cornwall ; at another, Wesedport, in Devonshire ; 
and, burning a vast number of towns, put multitudes of people 
to the sword; and after this, again going round Penwith- 
steort 12 up to the mouth of the river Tamar, their ships 
having coasted along Devonshire and Cornwall, they disem- 
barked from their ships, leaving them behind, and, there being 
no one to prevent them, continued their conflagrations and 
slaughter as far as Lideford. 13 In addition to this, they 
burned the monastery of the primate, Ordulf, which is called 
Taustoke, 14 and, laden with great booty, made their way back 
to their ships, and wintered at that place. 

In the year 998, the above-named army of the pagans, leav- 
ing the mouth of the river which is called Frome, repaired 
again to Dorsetshire, .and, after their usual manner, be- 
took themselves to plundering; and, as often as they took 
up their quarters in the Isle of "Wight, 15 levied supplies upon 
Sussex and the province of Southampton. Against such 
an outburst as this, forces were often gathered together ; but, 
as often as the English were about to engage in battle, either 
through treachery or some misfortune, they turned their backs 
and left the victory in the hands of the enemy. 

In the year 999, the army of the pagans so often mentioned, 
entering the mouth of the river Thames, passed up the river 
Meodewege, 16 as far as Rochester, and for a few days laid strict 
siege to it, upon which, the people of Kent, uniting together 
to repel them, had a severe engagement with them ; but, after 
many had been slain on both sides, the Danes remained masters 
of the river. After this, taking horse, the Danes laid waste 
almost the whole of the western coast of Kent. On hearing 
of this, Egelred, the king of the English, by the advice of his 

South Wales. 

12 Of this place Lamharde says : " The country that lieth next the 
point of Cornwall is to this day called Pen with ; and, therefore, the Saxons 
adding ' steort,' which signifyeth a last of a region or promontory that 
runneth narrow into the sea, called that cape Penwithsteort." 

13 A town in Devonshire, on the river Tamar. 14 Tavistock. 

16 As a sample of the state of the text, this passage is thus printed : 
" Et quotiescunque invecta jacuit de Suthsaxonia, et Suthamtunensi pro- 
vincia sibi victum accepit." 

16 Medway. 



A.D. 1002. EGELRED MAKES PEACE WITH THE DANES. 83 

principal men, collected together both a fleet and a land force. 
But, in the end, neither the land nor the naval force effected 
anything for the public good, beyond harassing the people, 
wasting money, and arousing the vengeance of the enemy. 

In the year 1000, the above-mentioned fleet of the Danes 
invaded Normandy. Egelred, king of the English, laid waste 
the lands of the Cumbrians. He gave orders to his fleet, that, 
sailing round the north of Britain, it should meet him at a 
place named ; but, being prevented by the violence of the 
winds, it was unable to do so. However, it laid waste the 
island which is called Monege. 17 

In the year 1001, the above-mentioned army of the pagans, 
returning from Normandy into England, entered the mouth of 
the river Exe, and shortly after commenced the siege of the 
city of Exanceeter; but, while attempting to destroy the walls, 
they were repulsed by the citizens, who manfully defended the 
city. Upon this, being greatly incensed, after their usual manner, 
they wandered through Devonshire, burning towns, ravaging 
the fields, and slaughtering the people ; and, in consequence, the 
men of Devonshire and Somerset uniting together, gave them 
battle at a place which is called Penhou. 18 But the English, 
by reason of the small number of their soldiers, were not 
able to cope with the multitude of the Danes, and took to 
flight ; whereon, the enemy having made a great slaughter, 
gained the day. After this, taking horse, throughout almost 
the whole of Devonshire they committed worse excesses than 
before, and, having collected much booty, returned to their 
ships. After this, they turned their course to the Isle of 
"Wight ; and, for a long time, there being no one to resist them, 
occupied themselves in plundering as usual, and raged to such a 
degree against the people with the sword, and against the 
houses with fire, that no fleet would dare to engage with them 
at sea, and no army by land. In consequence, the sadness of 
the king was far from slight, while the people were afflicted 
with incredible sorrow. 

In the year 1002, Egelred, king of the English, having 
held a council with his chief men, thought proper to make 
peace with the Danes, and to give them provisions and tribute 
to appease them, in order that they might cease from their 

17 Mona, or Man. 

18 Penhoe ; a place either in Somersetshire or Dorsetshire. 

o 2 



84 AJTNA1S OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1003. 

evil-doings. For this purpose duke Leofsy was sent to 
them, who, on coming, asked them to receive the supplies and 
the tribute ; whereupon they willingly received his embassy, 
and acceding to his request, fixed the amount of tribute 
that should be paid them for keeping the peace. And, not 
long after this, the sum of twenty-four pounds was paid them. 

In the meantime, the same duke Leofsy slew Easig, a noble- 
man, the king's high steward, for which reason, the king, 
being inflamed with anger, banished him from the country. 
In the same year king Egelred took to wife Emma, called in 
Saxon Elgiva, the daughter of Richard, the first duke of the 
Normans. In this, the twenty-fifth year of the reign of king 
Egelred, and the fifteenth of the indiction, on the seven- 
teenth day before the calends of May, being the fourth day of 
the week, Ardulph, archbishop of York, the abbats, priests, 
monks, and religious men being there assembled, raised the 
bones of Saint Oswald, the archbishop, from the tomb, and 
placed them, with due honor, in a shrine which he had pre- 
pared ; and not long after this, that is to say, on the day 
before the nones of May, he himself died, and was buried in 
the church of Saint Mary, at Worcester, being succeeded by 
the abbat Wulstan. 

In this year, also, king Egelred ordered all the Danes who 
lived in England, both great and small, and of either sex, to 
be slain, because they had endeavoured to deprive him and 
his chief men of kingdom and life, and to reduce the whole of 
England under their dominion. 

In the year 1003, by reason of the carelessness and treachery 
of Hugh, the Norman earl, whom queen Emma had appointed 
over Devonshire, Swe.yn, king of the Danes, entered the city 
of Exeter by storm and sacked it, destroying the walls from 
the eastern as far as the western gate, and filling 19 his ships 
with much spoil. After this, while he was laying waste the 
province of Wiltshire, a stout army manfully assembled from 
the provinces of Southampton and Wiltshire, and went up 
with fixed determination to fight against the enemy; but 
when the armies were so near that the one could see the other, 
Alfric, the above-named earl, who was at the time in com- 
mand of the English, forthwith had recourse to his old 

19 " Reperiit" is evidently a mistake for " replevit." 






A.D. 1006. DEATH OP AKCHBISHOP AZFRIC. 85 

devices, 20 and, pretending illness, began to vomit, saying that 
a severe fit of illness had come upon him, and that in conse- 
quence he was unable to fight with the enemy. 

When the army saw his inertness and timidity, in sorrow 
they turned away from the enemy without fighting, making 
good the ancient adage " When the leader trembles in battle, 
all the other soldiers become still more fearful." Sweyn, on 
observing the irresoluteness of the English, led his army to 
Wilton, and spoiled and burned it ; in like manner, he also 
ravaged Salisbury, and then returned to his ships. 

In the year 1004, Sweyn, king of the Danes, coming with 
his fleet to Norwich, laid it waste and burned it. Upon this, 
Ulfketel, duke of East Anglia, a man of great activity, as 
Sweyn had come unawares, and he had had no time for col- 
lecting an army against him, after taking counsel with the 
chief men of East Anglia, made peace with him ; but he, 
breaking the treaty the third week after, secretly stole forth 
from the ships with his forces, and attacking Theodford, 21 
laid it waste, and after staying in it one night, burned it at day- 
break. On learning this, duke Ulfketel gave orders to some 
men of the province to break up the ships of the enemy; but 
they were either afraid to do so, or neglected to obey his 
commands. He himself, however, as soon as he possibly 
could, having secretly collected an army together, boldly 
advanced against the enemy; and, on their return to the 
ships with an unequal number of soldiers, he met them, and 
had a most severe engagement with them ; and many on both 
sides being slain, the most noble men of East Anglia fell, and 
the Danes escaped with difficulty. But if the full forces of 
the East AngHans had been present, the Danes could have 
never regained their ships ; as, indeed, they themselves bore 
"witness that they had never experienced in England a more 
severe and hard-fought battle than that in which duke Ulfketel 
had engaged with them. 

In the year 1005, a severe and dreadful famine afflicted 
England. For this reason Sweyn, king of the Danes, returned 
to Denmark, with the intention of returning before long. 

In the year 1006, Alfric, archbishop of Canterbury, departed 
this life, and was succeeded by Elphege, bishop of Winchester, 
who was succeeded in his bishopric by Kenulph. In the 

20 " Arces," a mistake for " artes." Sl Thetford. 



86 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1008. 

month, of July an innumerable fleet of Danes arrived in Eng- 
land, and entered the port of Sandwich, and ravaging all 
places with fire and sword, first in Kent and then in Sussex, 
collected a very large quantity of spoil. On this, king 
Egelred assembled an army in Mercia and Wessex, and re- 
solved to fight manfully with them ; but they would under no 
circumstances engage with him openly, but frequently com- 
mitted their ravages, now in one place, and now in another, 
immediately, after their usual manner, retreating to their 
ships ; and in this way, throughout the autumn, they harassed 
the army of the English. 

At length, on the approach of winter, as they were returning 
homeward with enormous booty, they repaired to the Isle of 
Wight, and remained there until the Nativity of our Lord f 2 
on the approach of which, as the king was at that period 
staying in the province of Shrewsbury, they made way through 
the province of Southampton to Berkshire, and burned Read- 
ing, and Wallingford, and Ceolesy, 23 with a great number of 
men. Moving thence, they passed Easterdune* 4 and came to 
Cwichelmelow ; 25 returning from there by another road, the 
pirates provoked the natives of the place to battle, and at once 
engaging with them, put them to flight, and then retreated to 
the ships with the booty they had taken. 

In the year 1007, by the advice of his chief men, Egelred, 
king of the English, sent ambassadors to the Danes, and told 
them that he was willing to give them sustenance and tribute, 
on condition that they should desist from their ravages, and 
keep a lasting peace with him ; to this request they consented, 
and from that time, provisions, and a tribute of thirty-six thou- 
sand pounds, were given to them from the whole of England. 
In this year, also, king Egelred made a certain Edric, whose 
surname was Streone, duke of the Mercians ; who, although 
he had Edgitha the king's daughter in marriage, was still 
frequently found, by his shifting craftiness, to be a perfidious 
traitor to his country, and a public enemy, as will appear in 
the sequel ; at last, in the reign of king Canute, he received a 
worthy reward for his treachery. 

In the year 1008, Egelred, king of the English, ordered for 

M Christmas Day. M Cholsey. 

2 *Ashdown, in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. 

25 The same place that is also called Ceolesy ; it is four miles from 
Wallingford, in Berkshire. 






A.D. 1009. DANES ATTACK CANTEEBTJBY. 87 

every one hundred and ten hides of land, one galley to be 
built, and for every nine, 26 a coat of mail and a helmet to be 
provided, and gave directions that ships should be built with 
all speed throughout the whole of England. These being pre- 
pared, he put on board of them picked soldiers, with provi- 
sions, and that they might protect the extremities of his kingdom 
from the incursions of the foreigners, collected them at the port 
of Sandwich. At this period, Brithric, the brother of the perfi- 
dious duke Edric Streone, a slippery, ambitious, and haughty 
man, unjustly accused before the king, Wulnoth, 27 a thane of 
the South Saxons, who shortly after took to flight to avoid 
being seized, and having obtained nine vessels, committed 
numerous ravages near the sea-shore. 

But when word was brought to the royal fleet, that if any 
one wished, he might easily take him ; Brithric, having col- 
lected eighty galleys, set out to give him chase ; however, after 
he had sailed for some time with a fair wind, on a sudden a most 
violent tempest arose, and wrecked and shattered his ships, 
and threw them ashore, where they were shortly after burnt 
by "Wulnoth. On this being known, the king with his chief- 
tains and nobles returned home. But by his orders the fleet 
repaired to London, and thus this mighty labour of the people 
was wasted. 

In the year 1009, the Danish earl Turkill came with his 
fleet to England, and afterwards, in the month of August, 
another innumerable fleet of the Danes, the chiefs of which 
were Hemming and Ailaf, came to the Isle of Tenedland, 28 
and without delay united with the aforesaid fleet, after which 
both of them entered the harbour of Sandwich, and the men 
disembarking, hastily attacked the city of Canterbury, and began 
jto storm it; but shortly after, the citizens of Canterbury, 
with the people of East Kent, suing for peace, obtained their 
request, and gave them, in consideration of a treaty of peace, 
three thousand pounds. 

Upon this they returned to their ships, and steered their 
course to the Isle of Wight, and after that, according to their 
usual practice, frequently collected spoil in Sussex and in the 

26 Roger of Wendover and the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle say, " for every 
eight." 

27 The father of Earl Godwin. He was accused of treason. 
Thanet. 



88 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1010. 

province of Southampton, in the neighbourhood of the sea-shore, 
and burned a great number of towns. On this, king Egelred 
collected an army throughout all England, and stationed it in 
the provinces adjoining the sea, as a protection against their 
incursions ; but for all this, the enemy did not cease committing 
ravages in all quarters, according to the situation of the places. 
But upon one occasion, when they had made a descent for plun- 
der at a greater distance than usual from the sea, and were re- 
turning laden with spoil, the king, attended by many thousands 
of armed men, got before them, prepared, as was all his army, 
to conquer or die. 

But the perfidious duke Edric Streona, his son-in-law, used 
his endeavours in every way, both by treachery and ambiguous 
speeches, that they might not engage, but for that time let 
the enemy escape. To this he persuaded the king, and pre- 
vailed, and, like a traitor to his country, rescued the Danes 
from the hands of the English, and allowed them to escape ; on 
which, taking a different direction, with great joy they re- 
turned to their ships. After the feast of Saint Martin, they 
arrived in Kent, and chose their winter quarters on the river 
Thames, and collected provisions in Essex and other provinces 
that were adjoining either bank of the river. They also fre- 
quently attacked the city of London, and endeavoured to take 
it, but were repulsed by the citizens, not without some little 
loss to themselves. 

In the year 1010, the above-mentioned army of the Danes, 
in the mouth of January, disembarking from their ships, came 
through the forest which is called Cyltern, 29 into Herefordshire, 
and after laying it waste ravaged it with flames, and on their re- 
turn collected booty on both banks of the river Thames. When 
they had been informed that an army was collected against 
them at London, and was about to engage with them, a part 
of the army passed over to the southern side of the river, at a 
place which is called Stane, 30 and having united and enriched 
themselves with abundance of spoil, proceeded through Surrey, 
and then returned to their ships, which during the season of 
Lent, while they were staying in Kent, they refitted. 

After Easter, they came to East Anglia, and having disem- 
barked near Gipeswic, 31 marched to a place which is called 
Rigmere, where they had learned that duke Ulfketel was en- 

2 > Chiltern. i0 Staines. Ipswich. 



A.D. 1011. RAVAGES OF THE DANES. 89 

camped with his army, and fought a severe battle with him on 
the third day before the nones of May. But while the battle 
was being hotly contested, the East Angles turned their backs, 
a certain thane of the king, a man of Danish origin, Turketel, 
surnamed Merenheauod, being the first to begin the flight ; but 
the men of Cambridgeshire, manfully fighting, made a stout re- 
sistance, till at last, being overpowered, they took to flight. 

In this battle fell Ethelstan, the king's son-in-law, Oswy, a 
noble thane, together with his son, "Wulfric the son of Leofwin, 
Edwy, the son of Effuic, and many other noble thanes, and an 
innumerable multitude. The Danes being masters of the field 
of slaughter, gained possession of East Anglia ; and taking to 
horse, did not cease for three months ravaging the whole pro- 
vince, collecting booty, burning towns, and slaughtering men 
and animals ; after which they laid waste Thetford and 
Grantebrige, 32 and burned them ; having accomplished which, 
the foot on board ship, and the cavalry on horseback, returned 
again to the river Thames. After the lapse of a few days, 
they again sallied forth to plunder, and made straight for the 
province of Oxfordshire, and first ravaged it, and then the dis- 
tricts of Buckinghamshire and Bedfordshire, burning the 
towns, and slaughtering the men and cattle, after which they 
returned to their ships with vast booty. 

After this, about the time of the festival of Saint Andrew 
the Apostle, they committed to the flames Northampton and 
its vicinity, as far as they pleased, and then crossed the river 
Thames and entered Wessex, where, having consigned to the 
flames Caning' s-marsh, 33 and the greater part of the province 
of Wiltshire, after their usual manner, they returned with great 
booty to their ships about the Nativity of our Lord. 

In the year 1011, on the northern side of the Thames, the 
provinces of East Anglia, Essex, Middlesex, Herefordshire, 
Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, Bedfordshire, Grantebrige- 
shire, 34 the middle parts of Huntingdonshire, and the villages 
of a great part of Northamptonshire, were ravaged ; and on 
the southern side of the river Thames, the provinces of Kent, 
Surrey, Sussex, Southampton, Wiltshire, and Berkshire were 
laid waste by the above-mentioned army of the Danes, with fire 
and sword ; upon which Egelred, king of the English, and the 

32 Cambridge. M A large tract of land in Wiltshire. 

31 Cambridgeshire. 



90 AITNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1011. 

chief men of his kingdom; sent ambassadors to them to sue for 
peace, and request them to cease from their ravages, promising 
them provisions and tribute ; on hearing which, not without 
treachery and dissimulation, as the event proved, they con- 
sented to his offer. 

For, although food was provided for them in abundance, and 
tribute paid as much as they pleased, still, they did not desist 
from making incursions in straggling bodies throughout the 
provinces wherever they chose, laying waste towns, spoiling 
some wretched people of their property and slaying others. 

In the same year, after having ravaged a great part of Eng- 
land, an army of the Danes, between the Nativity of Saint Mary 
and the feast of Saint Michael, drawing their lines around 
it, laid siege to the city of Canterbury. On the twentieth day 
of the siege, through the treachery of the archdeacon Elmer, 
whom Saint Elphege had before rescued from being condemned 
to death, a part of the city was burnt, and, the army effecting 
an entrance, the city was taken. Some were slaughtered with 
the sword, some destroyed by the flames. Many were also 
thrown from the walls, while some were put to death by being 
hung up by their secret parts. The women were dragged by 
their hair through the streets of the city, and then, being 
thrown into the flames, were thus put to death ; infants were torn 
from their mother's breasts, and were either caught on the points 
of spears, or ground to pieces under the wheels of vehicles. 

In the meantime archbishop Elphege was taken, bound in 
fetters, kept in confinement, and put to various torments. Ail- 
mar, abbat of the monastery of Saint Augustine, was allowed 
to depart. Godwin, the bishop of Rochester, was also taken, 
and Leoufruna, abbess of the monastery of Saint Mildred, 
Elfrige, the king's steward, the monks also and secular clergy, 
and an innumerable multitude of either sex. After this, 
Christ's Church was sacked and burnt ; a multitude of monks, 
and a crowd, consisting not only of men, but even women and 
children as well, were decimated, and nine were put to death, 
while the tenth was reserved alive : the amount of the de- 
cimated thus saved was four monks and eight hundred men. 
After the people had been slaughtered and the whole of the 
city burnt, archbishop Elphege was dragged forth in fetters, 
hurried along with violence, grievously wounded, and after- 
wards led away to the fleet and thrust into prison, where he 
was tortured for seven months. 



A.O. 1012. PEACE WITH THE DANES. 91 

In the meantime the wrath of God, waxing fierce against 
this murderous race, put an end to two thousand of them by a 
tormenting pain in the intestines. The others being attacked 
in a similar manner, were appealed to by the faithful, to 
make reparation to the archbishop, but refused to do so. In the 
meantime, the mortality increased, and at one time would put 
an end to ten, at another twenty, and at another a still greater 
number at the same instant. 

In the year 1012, the perfidious duke Edric Streona, and all 
the chief men of England, assembled at London before Easter, 
and remained there until the tribute promised to the Danes, 
which consisted of forty-eight pounds, 35 was paid. In the mean- 
time, on the holy Sabbath of the rest of our Lord, a proposal 
was made to archbishop Elphege by the Danes, that if. he wished 
to preserve his life and liberty, he should pay three thousand 
pounds. Upon his refusal, they deferred his death until the 
next Sabbath, on the approach of which they were inflamed 
against him with great anger, both because they were intoxi- 
cated with excess of wine, and because he had forbidden that 
any thing should be given for his liberation. After this, he was 
brought forth from prison, and dragged before their council. 
On seeing him, they instantly sprang from their seats, struck 
him down with the butt ends of their axes, and overwhelmed 
him with stones, bones, and the skulls of oxen. 

At length, a certain person, whose name was Thrum, and 
whom he had confirmed the day before, moved with pity at 
this wickedness, 36 struck him on the head with an axe, upon 
which he immediately fell asleep in the Lord, on the thir- 
teenth day before the calends of May, and sent his soul ex- 
ulting in the triumph of martyrdom to heaven. On the 
Allowing day his body was carried to London, and being 
received with due honor by the citizens, was buried by the 
bishops Ednoth of Lincoln, and Alphune of London, in the 
church of Saint Paul.* 

After this, when the tribute had been paid and peace es- 
tablished with the Danes on oath, the Danish fleet which had 
been collected, dispersed far and wide; but five-and-forty 
ships remained with the king, and swore fealty to him, and 

35 Evidently a mistake for forty-eight thousand pounds, mentioned by 
Roger of Wendover and the Anglo Saxon Chronicle. 

36 " Impia motus pietate," can hardly be a correct reading here. 



92 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1013. 

promised that they would defend England, on condition of his 
giving them food and clothing. 

In the year 1013, Living was appointed to the archbishopric 
of Canterbury. In the month of July, Sweyn, king of the 
Danes, arrived at the port of Sandwich with a strong fleet, 
and after remaining there a few days, took his departure, and 
sailing round East Anglia, entered the mouth of the river 
Humber, from which, entering the river Trent, he sailed up 
to Gainesburg, 37 where he pitched his camp. Without delay 
there made submission to him, first, earl Ucthred and the 
people of Northumbria and Lindesey, and after them the people 
of the Five Boroughs, 33 next all the people living in the dis- 
trict north of Watlingastrete, the road which the sons of king 
Wethle made through England, from the Eastern Sea to the 
Western; all these made submission, and having entered 
into a treaty of peace with him and given hostages, swore 
fealty to him, and were ordered to provide horses and food 
for his army. 

These things being done, and the fleet with the hostages 
entrusted to his son Canute, he took chosen men as auxiliaries 
from those who had been surrendered, and made an expedi- 
tion against the South Mercians. Having passed over Wat- 
lingastrete, he issued an edict to his followers that they 
should lay waste the fields, burn the towns, spoil the churches, 
slay without regard or mercy all those of the male sex who 
should fall in their hands, and reserve the females to satisfy 
their lust, doing all the mischief they possibly could. 

They acting in this manner, and raving with the rabidness 
of wild beasts, he came to Oxford, and took it more speedily 
than he had previously expected ; having received hostages, 
he passed on in haste to Winchester, and arriving there, 
the citizens, being alarmed, made peace with him without 
delay, and gave him hostages, such and as many as he de- 
manded. Having received these, he moved on his army to- 
wards London ; and great numbers of them being drowned 
in the river Thames, perished there, having never attempted 
to find either a bridge or a ford. On arriving at London, he 
endeavoured in many ways to capture it either by stratagem or 
by force. 

37 Gainsborough. 

38 These were Lincoln, Nottingham, Leicester, Stamford and Derby. 



A.D. 1014. SWEYN'S EXACTIONS. 93 

But Egelred, king of the English, with the citizens and the 
aid of the Danish earl, Turkill, so often mentioned, who was 
with him at the time, manfully defended the walls of the 
city, and held out against him. Being repulsed, he repaired 
first to Wallingford, then to Bath, ravaging and laying waste 
everything in his progress, according to his usual practice, and 
there he sat down with his forces to refresh them. Then came 
to him Athelmar, the earl of Devon, and with him the thanes of 
the west, and having made peace with him, gave him hostages. 
All these things heing thus accomplished to his wish, on return- 
ing to his fleet, he was by all the -people styled and considered 
king, although he acted in most respects in a tyrannical manner. 

The citizens of London, also, sent hostages to him, and made 
peace with him; for they were afraid that his fury would 
he so inflamed against them, that, taking away all their pos- 
sessions, he would either order their eyes to be put out, or 
their hands or feet to be cut off". "When king Egelred saw this, 
he sent queen Emma by sea to Normandy, to her brother 
Eichard, the second duke of Normandy, and her sons Edward 
and Elfred, together with their tutor, Elphune, bishop of 
London, and Elfsy, abbat of Medeshampstead. 39 But he him- 
self remained for some time with the Danish 40 fleet, which lay 
in the Thames at a place called Grenwic ; 41 and afterwards 
proceeding to the Isle of "Wight, there celebrated the Nativity 
of our Lord ; after which, he passed over to Normandy, and 
was honorably entertained by duke Richard. 

In the mean time, the tyrant Sweyn ordered provisions to be 
prepared in abundance for his fleet, and an amount of tribute 
to be paid that could hardly be endured. In like manner, in 
all respects, earl Turkill ordered payment to be made to the 
fleet which lay at Grenwic. In addition to all this, each of 
tlfem, as often as they thought proper, collected spoil, and did 
much mischief. 

In the year 1014, the tyrant Sweyn, after innumerable and 
cruel misdeeds, which he had been guilty of either in England 
or in other countries, to complete his own damnation, dared to 
exact a heavy tribute from the town where lies interred the 
uncorrupted body of the royal martyr, Edmund ; a thing that 
no one had dared to do before, from the time when that town 48 

39 Peterborough. * Qy. English ? 41 Greenwich. 

42 Burv St. Edmunds. 



94 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1014. 

had been given to the church of the above-named saint ; he 
repeatedly threatened, also, that if it was not quickly paid, 
beyond a doubt he would burn the town, together with the 
townsmen, utterly destroy the church of the martyr himself, 
and torment the clergy with various tortures. In addition to 
this, he even dared frequently to speak slightingly of the martyr 
himself, and to say that he was no saint at all. But, inasmuch 
as he was unwilling to put an end to his misdeeds, the Divine 
vengeance did not permit this blasphemer to live any longer. 

At length, towards the evening of the dny on which, in a 
general council which he had held at a place which is called 
Geagnesburt, 43 he had again repeated these threats, while sur- 
rounded with most numerous crowds of Danes, he alone beheld 
Saint Edmund coming armed towards him ; on seeing whom, 
he was terrified, and began to cry out with loud shrieks, ex- 
claiming, "Fellow-soldiers, to the rescue, to the rescue! be- 
hold Saint Edmund has come to slay me ;" after saying which, 
being pierced by the Saint with a spear, he fell from the 
throne 41 upon which he was sitting, and, suffering great tor- 
ments until nightfall, on the third day before the nones of 
February, terminated his life by a shocking death. 

After his death, the fleet of the Danes elected his son, 
Canute, king. But the elders of the whole of England, with 
one consent, in all haste sent messengers to king Egelred, 
declaring that they loved no one, and would love no one, more 
than their own natural lord, if he would either rule them more 
becomingly, or treat them with more mildness than he had pre- 
viously done. On hearing this, he sent his son, Edward, to them, 
with his deputies, and in a friendly way greeted his people, 
both great and small, promising that he would be to them a 
loving and affectionate lord, and would consult their wishes 
in all things, would listen to their advice, and with a for- 
giving temper pardon whatever had been said in abuse, or 
done in contradiction by them to himself or his family ; if, 
on the other hand, they would be ready to restore him with 
unanimity and without guile, to his kingdom. To this they 
all made answer in kindly terms, and full friendship was 

** Probably Gainsborough. 

4 * " Emissario " is the word in the text, probably a mistake for some 
other word. " Missarius " means one that strikes or wounds ; but if it is 
to be retained here, some other word is omitted. 



A.D. 1015. MABKIAGE OF EDMT7ND IBONSIDE. 95 

established on either side, both by words and by pledge. In 
addition to this, the nobles unanimously made promise that they 
would no more admit a Danish king into England. 

On these things being concluded, a deputation was sent by 
the English to Normandy, and the king was brought back in 
all haste during the season of Lent, and received with due 
honor by all. In the meantime it was arranged by Canute 
and the men of Lindesey, 45 that, procuring horses for the 
army, they should make a descent for the purpose of plun- 
der. But, before they were prepared, king Egelred came 
thither with a strong army, -and, Canute with his fleet 
being put to flight, laid waste the whole of Lindesey, and 
ravaged it with fire, slaughtering all the inhabitants he could. 
But Canute, at once taking safety in flight, directed his course 
towards the south of England, and in a short time came to the 
port of Sandwich, where he put on shore the hostages that had 
been given to his father by the whole of England, and, having 
cut off their hands, ears, and nostrils, allowed them to de- 
part, and then set sail for Denmark, to return in the ensuing 
year. In addition to all these evils, king Edward ordered to 
be paid to the fleet, which lay at Grenwic, a tribute which 
amounted to thirty thousand pounds. 

On the third day before the calends of October, the sea 
overflowed its shores, and drowned a great number of towns 
in England and numberless multitudes of people. 

In the year 1015, while a great council was being held in 
secret at Oxford, the perfidious duke Edric Streona, by strata- 
gem enticed Sigeferth and Morcar, the sons of Earngrim, the 
very worthy and influential thanes of the Seven Boroughs, 
into his chamber, and there ordered them to be put to death. 
King Egelred thereupon took possession of their property, and 
dered Aldgitha, the relict of Sigeferth, to be taken to the city 
of Maidulph. 46 While she was being kept in confinement there, 
Edmund, the king's son, surnamed Ironside, came thither, and, 
against the will of his father, 47 took her to wife, and, between 
the feasts of the Assumption and the Nativity of Saint Mary, 
set out for the Five Boroughs, and invading the territories of 
Sigeferth and Morcar, subjected their people to himself. 

45 Roger of Wendover says that he had gained them over to his cause. 

<f Malmesbury. 

47 Roger of Wendover says, without his father's knowledge. 



96 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1016. 

At the same time, Canute, king of the Danes, came with a 
great fleet to the port of Sandwich ; and then, sailing round 
Kent, entered the mouth of the river Frome, and collected 
great booty in Dorsetshire, Somersetshire, and the province 
of Winchester. 48 At this period, because king Egebred lay 
sick at Corsham, the Clito Edmund, his son, acted in his 
behalf, and, with the duke Edric Streona, who was full of 
guile and treachery, collected a large army : but, when they 
had met together, duke Edric in every possible way laid snares 
for the Clito Edmund, and tried by treachery to cut him 
off. On Edmund learning this, they soon separated from each 
other, and left the place to the enemy. Not long after 
this, the same duke enticed away forty ships of the royal 
fleet, manned with Danish soldiers, and, going over to Canute, 
made submission to him. The men of "Wessex did the same, and 
gave hostages, and afterwards provided horses for his army. 

In the year 1016, Canute, king of the Danes, and the per- 
fidious duke Edric Streona, with a large retinue, 49 crossed the 
river Thames at a place which is called Cricklade ; and, on 
the approach of the Epiphany of our Lord, made a hostile 
irruption into Mercia, and laying waste many towns in the 
province of Warwick, burned them, and slew all the persons 
they could find. When the Clito Edmund, surnamed Ironside, 
heard of this, in all haste he collected an army ; but, after it 
was brought together, the men of Mercia were unwilling to 
engage with the men of Wessex and the Danes, unless king 
Egebred and the citizens of London were with them. In con- 
sequence of this, the expedition was given up, and each one 
returned home. 

After the festival was concluded, the Clito Edmund again 
formed a still greater army ; after which, he sent messengers 
to London, to beg his father to meet him as soon as possi- 
ble, with all the men he could find. But, after an army had 
been collected together, intimation was given to the king, 
that, if he did not take due precaution, some of his allies were 
about to betray him. The army was soon broken up in conse- 
quence, on which he returned to London; but the Clito proceeded 
to Northumbria. For which reason some thought that he still 
intended to form a greater army against Canute ; but in the 

* 8 It ought to be " Wiltonensi," Wiltshire. 
48 V. r. "Equitatu," body of cavalry. 



A.D. 1016. BEATH OX KETG EGELEED. 97 

same way that Canute and Edric did on their part, so did he 
and Ucthred, the earl of Northumbria, lay waste some of the 
provinces. For first they ravaged Staffordshire, and next the 
provinces of Shrewsbury and Leicester, because they had re- 
fused to go out to fight against the army of the Danes. 

In the meantime, Canute and Edric Streona laid waste, first 
the provinces of Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Huntingdon- 
shire, Northamptonshire, Somersetshire, and Nottinghamshire, 
and, afterwards, Northumbria. On hearing this, the Clito 
Edmund Ironside, pausing in his ravages, hastened to London 
to his father ; while, on the other hand, earl Ucthred returned 
home with all speed, and, compelled by necessity, betook him- 
self, with all the Northumbrians, to Canute, and gave him 
hostages ; yet, for all that, either by his command or with his 
sanction, he was slain by Turebrand, a noble Dane, together 
with Turketel, the son of Navena. After his death, Canute 
appointed Eiric earl in place of Ucthred ; and after that, re- 
turning in all haste to the south, 50 before the festival of 
Easter, with the whole of his army retreated to his ships. 

At this period, in the fourth year of the indiction, on the 
ninth day before the calends of May, being the second day of 
the week, Egelred, king of the English, departed this life at 
London, after having in his life experienced great troubles and 
many tribulations, which Saint Dunstan had prophesied to 
him should come upon him for the death of his brother 
Edward, as I have mentioned under the first year of his reign. 
His body was becomingly buried in the church of Saint Paul. 

After his death, the bishops, abbats, and most noble men 
of England met together and with one consent elected Canute 
their lord and king, and coming to him at Southampton, re- 
pudiated and rejected in his presence all the family of king 
Egelred, and made peace with him, and took the oaths of fealty 
to him ; on which he swore to them that before God and men 
he would be a faithful master to them. 

But the citizens of London, and a part of the nobles who 
were at that time staying there, with unanimous consent 
elected the Clito Edmund king, who, being thus elevated to 
the royal throne, fearlessly entered Wessex, and being received 
by all the people with great congratulations, reduced it very 

60 A various reading has here, " Edmund Ironside returning in all 
haste to the south by another road." 

VOL. I. H 



98 JLNNALS OF EOGEK DE HOVEDEK. A.D. 1016. 

speedily to subjection ; on hearing which, many of the people 
of England with alacrity voluntarily submitted to him. 
But Canute, in the meanwhile, aboxit the time of the Rogation 
days, came up with all his fleet to London ; and on arriving 
there, the Danes dug a great ditch 81 on the southern side of 
the Thames, and towed their ships along to the western side, 
after which, surrounding the city with a wide and deep 
trench, in strict siege they shut out all from either ingress or 
egress. They also made frequent attempts to take it by storm ; 
but, the citizens making a stout resistance against them, they 
were repulsed from the walls ; in consequence whereof, the 
siege being put off for a time, and a part of the army left to 
guard the ships, they hastened with all speed to Wessex, and 
gave king Edmund Ironside no time for collecting a large army. 
However, with the army which in such a short period he had 
collected, relying on the aid of God, he boldly met them in 
Dorsetshire, and attacking them at a place which is called 
Penn, 52 near Gillingham, fought with them, and conquered, 
and put them to flight. After this, midsummer being past, 
he again collected a still larger army than before, and re- 
solved to engage boldly with Canute ; this took place in Wor- 
cestershire, at a place which is called Eearstam, 53 where he 
drew up his army as the situation and his own strength would 
allow him, and placing all his best men in the front rank, the 
rest of the army he set in reserve ; and then appealed to them, 
calling each by name, and exhorting and entreating them that 
they would bear in mind that they were fighting for their 
country, their children, their wives, and their homes ; and, in 
the most encouraging language having kindled the spirits of the 
soldiers, he then ordered the trumpets to sound, and his troops 
to advance at a gentle pace. The army of the enemy did the 
same. When they had come to the spot where the battle was 
able to be commenced, with immense clamour they rushed on 
with hostile standards, and the combat was waged with lances 

51 This is supposed to have been commenced on Ihe eastern side of 
London Bridge, at either Deptford or Rotherhithe, and running through 
the present St. George's Fields, to have entered the river at Vauxhall. 

5 * It is wrongly called in the text " Peomum." 

53 Properly Sherston. According to Hardy, this is supposed to have 
been a stone which divided the four counties of Oxford, Gloucester, Wor- 
cester, and Warwick. 



A.D. 1016. DEFEAT OP THE DANES. 99 

and swords, and the engagement carried on with the greatest 
vigour. In the meantime, king Edmund Ironside fought bravely 
in the front rank, hand to hand, while giving all requisite 
orders. He himself fought most valiantly, and struck down 
many an enemy, at the same moment performing the duties 
of a valiant soldier and of a good general ; but, inasmuch as 
his brother-in-law Edric Streona, that most perfidious duke, 
and Almar the beloved, and Algar, the son of Mehu, who 
ought to have been aiding him, together with the men of the 
provinces of Southampton and Wiltshire, and an innumer- 
able multitude of people, were on the side of the Danes, his 
army had to struggle hard for victory. 

However, on the first day of the week, Monday to wit, so 
severe and so bloody a battle was fought, that either army, from 
exhaustion being no longer able to -fight, at sunset ceased of 
its own accord. Still, on the following day, king Edmund 
would have crushed all the Danes, if it had not been for the 
treachery of the perfidious duke Edric Streona. For, when the 
battle was at its height, and he saw that the English were 
prevailing, having cut off the head of a man, Osmer by name, 
who very strongly resembled king Edward in features and 
hair, raising it aloft, he exclaimed : " Englishmen ! it is in 
vain you fight!" adding, "You men of Dorset, Devon, and 
Wiltshire, your chieftain is slain, take to flight with all 
speed. 54 Behold the head of Edmund, your king ! I hold it 
in my hand; give way, then, instantly !" 

When the English heard this, they were more shocked at the 
atrocity of the deed than alarmed through belief in him who 
announced it. Hence it came to pass that the more unsteady 
ones were nearly taking to flight, but instantly, on it being 
found that the king was alive, they recovered their courage, 
nd boldly rushing upon the Danes, slaughtered many of them, 
fighting with all their might until twilight, on the approach of 
which, as on the preceding day, they separated of their own 
accord. But when the greater part of the night had passed, 
Canute commanded his men to decamp in silence, and taking 
the road towards London, returned to the ships, and shortly 
after again laid siege to it. 

On the next day, when king Edmund Ironside found that 
the Danes had fled, he returned into Wessex to collect a 
w " Prsecipites" seems a better reading here than " principes." 



100 AITNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1016. 

larger army. His brother-in-law, the perfidious duke Edric, 
seeing his valour, sought him again as his natural lord, and 
making peace with him, swore that he would continue faithful 
to him; upon which, with an army collected together for 
the third time, the king liberated the citizens of London from 
the siege, and drove the Danes to their ships. Two days after 
this, he passed over the Thames at a place which is called 
Brentford, to engage with the Danes for the third time ; there 
he joined battle with them, and having put them to flight, 
gained the victory. On this occasion many men on the side 
of the English, while crossing the river without due precau- 
tions, were drowned. After this, the king hastened to Wessex, 
for the purpose of collecting a more numerous army ; on which, 
the Danes again repaired to London, laid siege to it, and stormed 
it on every side ; but, by the aid of God, they were unsuc- 
cessful. 

Upon this, they returned thence with their fleet, and entered 
the river which is called Are we, 55 and, landing from their 
ships, proceeded into Mercia for the purpose of plunder, after 
their usual manner slaughtering all they met, burning towns, 
and carrying off the spoil : after which, they returned to their 
ships, and the land forces were conveyed by sea to the river 
which is called Meodewege, 55 while the cavalry endeavoured to 
drive the live-stock, which formed part of their booty, by land. 

In the meantime, king Edmund Ironside for the fourth time 
collected a valiant army throughout the whole of England, and 
passing over the Thames at the place 57 where he had done 
so previously, quickly entered Kent, and fought a battle with 
the Danes near Ottaford ; on which, being unable to resist his 
attack, they turned their backs and fled with their horses to 
Scepege. 58 However, he slew all he could overtake, and had 
not the perfidious duke Edric Streona, with his treachery, 
withheld him at Eagleford, 59 from pursuing the enemy, he 
would that day have gained a complete victory. After re- 
turning into Wessex, Canute crossed over with his forces into 
Essex, and proceeded again to Mercia, for the sake of plun- 
der, giving orders to his army to commit still greater excesses 
than before. 

55 The Orwell, in Suffolk. * The Medway. 

y < Brentford. ** The Isle of Sheppey. 6J Aylesford, in Kent. 






A.D. 1016. PROPOSED DIVISION OF THE KINGDOM. 101 

On this, with the greatest alacrity, they obeyed his com- 
mands, and having slaughtered all who fell into their hands, 
and burned a very great number of towns, and laid waste 
the fields, greatly enriched, they repaired with all haste to 
their ships. Edmund Ironside, king of the English, pur- 
suing them with an army which he had levied from the 
whole of England, came up with them, as they were retreat- 
ing, at a hill which is called Assendun, 60 that is to say, "the hill 
of the ass." There, with all expedition, he drew up his troops 
in three divisions, and then going round each troop, exhorted 
and entreated them, bearing in mind their ancient valour and 
victories, to defend him and his kingdom from the avarice of 
the Danes, and reminded them that they were about to engage 
with those whom they had conquered already. 

In the meantime, Canute slowly led his forces to a level 
spot ; while, on the other hand, king Edmund quickly moved 
his line in the order in which he had drawn it up, and sud- 
denly giving the signal, fell upon the Danes ; on both sides 
they fought with the greatest valour, and in every quarter 
multitudes fell. But that most perfidious and most wicked 
duke, Edric Streona, seeing the line of the Danes wavering, and 
the English likely to gain the victory, just as he had previously 
arranged with Canute, took to flight with the people of Mai- 
seveth 61 and the part of the army which he commanded, and 
by treachery betrayed his lord, king Edmund, and the army 
of the English. There were slain in that battle duke Alfric, 
duke Godwin, Ulfketel duke of East Anglia, duke Ethelward, 
son of Ethelwin, the friend of God, duke of East Anglia, and 
almost the entire mass of the nobility of England, which in 
no battle ever sustained a greater wound than it did there. 
Eadnoth, also, the bishop of Lincoln, and the abbat "Wulsy, 
who had come for the purpose of invoking the Lord on behalf 
of the soldiers while waging the battle, were slain. 

A few days having intervened after this, king Edmund 
Ironside being still desirous to come up with Canute, while 
the most iniquitous and treacherous Edric and some others 
did not wish that to take place, they gave him advice to make 
peace with Canute and divide the kingdom between them. 
At length, though with some reluctance, he yielded to their 
suggestions, and messengers going from one to the other, and 
60 Ashendon, in Essex. 61 Radnorshire. 



102 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1017. 

hostages being given on either side, the two kings met at a place 
which is called Deerhurst ; Edmund pitched his camp with 
his men on the western bank of the Severn, while Canute en- 
camped with his on the eastern side. 

Upon this, the two kings were conveyed in boats 63 to the 
island called Olanege, 64 which is situate in the middle of the 
river; where 65 peace, friendship, and brotherhood having 
been established by pledge and by oath, the kingdom was 
divided. Then, after having exchanged arms and clothes, the 
tribute being agreed upon which should be paid to the 
fleet, they separated from each other. The Danes, however, 
returned to their ships with the spoil which they had col- 
lected, and the citizens of London made peace with them, 
paying a price for it, and allowing them to winter there. 

After these things, in the fifteenth year of the indiction, 
about the time of the feast of Saint Andrew the Apostle, 
king Edmund Ironside died at London, 66 but was buried at 
Glastonbury, with his grandfather, king Edgar the Peaceful. 
After his death, king Canute ordered all the bishops and chief- 
tains, and all the nobles and principal men of the English 
nation, to be assembled at London. When these had come before 
him, as though he did not know it, he cunningly asked those 
who had acted as witnesses between him and king Edmund 
when they made the treaty of friendship and partition of the 
kingdom between them, to what effect he and king Edmund 
had expressed themselves about the brothers and sons of the 
latter, as to whether it should be allowed the same to reign 
over the kingdom of "Wessex after their father, in case Ed- 
mund should die while he was still living : on which they began 
to say that, beyond a doubt, they were quite certain that king 
Edmund neither living nor dying had bespoken any portion of 
the kingdom for his brothers. But, as to his sons, they said 
that they knew this, that king Edmund wished Canute to 
be their guardian and protector, until they should be of fit age 
to reign. 

63 " Trabariae," the word used in the text, were boats like canoes, made 
out of a single piece of wood. 61 Olney. 

65 According to Roger of Wendover and other historians, Edmund 
Ironside and Canute first engaged there in single combat. 

66 Roger of Wendover says at Oxford, where he was barbarously mur- 
dered by the son of Edric Streona. 



A.D. 1017. CANUTE DIVIDES THE KINGDOM, 103 

Uut they, God testifying thereto, gave false testimony and 
treacherously lied, thinking both that Canute would prove more 
kind to them by reason of their falsehoods, and that they should 
gain great rewards from him ; whereas, not long after, some of 
these false witnesses were slain by the same king. After having 
put the above question, king Canute received the oaths of 
fealty from the nobles above-mentioned ; on which they swore 
to him that they willingly chose him for their king, and would 
readily obey him, and pay tribute to his army ; and having 
received pledges from his bare hand, together with the oaths 
of the principal men among .the Danes, they utterly dis- 
regarded the brothers and sons of king Edmund, and declared 
that they should not be their kings. 

Now, one of the above-mentioned Clito's was Edwin the Ex- 
cellent, a most revered brother of king Edmund, whom on that 
occasion, with most wicked counsels, they pronounced deserving 
of banishment. When, therefore, Canute had listened to the 
adulation of the persons above-mentioned, and the contempt in 
which they held Edwin, rejoicing, "he entered his chamber, and 
calling to him the perfidious duke Edric, inquired of him in what 
way he might be able to beguile Edwin to the risk of his life ; 
on which Edric made answer, that he knew a certain man 
named Athelward, who could very easily put him to death, 
with whom he should be able to have some conversation, and 
to whom he would offer a very considerable reward. 

However, on learning the name of the man, the king cun- 
ningly sent for him, and said : " Thus and thus has duke 
Edric informed me, saying that you are able to beguile the 
Clito Edwin, so that he may be slain ; do you only assent to 
my proposal, and obtain for me his head, and you shall enjoy 
all the honors and dignities of your forefathers, and shall be 
dearer to me than my own born brother." On this, he made 
answer that he was willing to seek for him in order that he 
might be slain, if in any way he could effect it : but, in reality, 
he did not wish to kill him at present, but, by way of excuse, 
made this promise : he was a person sprung from a most 
noble English family. 

In this year king Canute obtained the rule of the whole of 
England, and divided it into four parts; Wessex he took for him- 
self, East Anglia he gave to earl Turkill, Mercia to the perfidious 
duke Edric, and Northumbria to earl Eiric. He also made a 
treaty with the nobles and all the people, and they established 



104 AJfNALS OP HOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1018. 

by oath a firm friendship between them, and, laying them aside, 
set at rest all ancient enmities. Then, by the counsel of the 
perfidious duke Edric, king Canute banished the Clito Edwin, 
the brother of king Edmund, and Edwin, 67 who was styled 
"the King of the Churls;" but this Edwin was reconciled 
to the king. The Clito Edwin, however, being deceived by 
tlie treachery of those whom he had hitherto deemed to be most 
friendly disposed to him, at the request and entreaty of king 
Canute, was, the samey ear, without guilt on his part, put to death. 

Edric also gave him this advice, that he should put to death 
the younger Clito's, Edward and Edmund, the sons of king 
Edmund ; but as it seemed to him a great disgrace for them 
to be put to death in England, after the lapse of a short time he 
sent them to the king of Sweden to be slain; he however, 
although there was a treaty between them, would by no means 
assent to his request, but sent them, for the preservation of 
their lives, to Salomon, king of the Hungarians, to be brought 
up ; and one of them, namely, Edmund, in process of time, ended 
his life there. But Edward received in marriage Agatha, the 
daughter of the emperor, by whom he had Margaret, after- 
wards queen of the Scots, Christina, a virgin, who became a 
nun, and the Clito Edgar. 

In the month of July, king Canute took to wife queen 
Emma, the widow of king Egebred, by whom he had a son, 
named Hardicanute, afterwards king, and a daughter, named 
Gunhilda, who was afterwards married to Henry, the emperor 
of the Romans. 

In the year 1018, at the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, 
while Canute was in London, he ordered the perfidious duke 
Edric Streona to be slain in his palace, because he feared lest he 
should be on some occasion betrayed by his treachery, just as 
his former masters Egelred and Edmund had been frequently 
betrayed. He also ordered his body to be thrown over the walls 
of the city, and to be cast out without burial ; together with 
him duke Norman, the son of duke Leofwin, and brother of 
earl Leofric, Ethelward, the son of duke Engelmar, and 
Brithric, the son of Elphege, earl of Devonshire, were slain 
without any guilt on their parts. In this year, by the whole 
of England, seventy-two pounds, and by London, four hundred 
and ten pounds, 68 were paid to the army of the Danes. Aldun, 

67 Properly Edwy. 

68 These numbers are manifestly wrong ; the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle 



A.D. 1027. MESSAGE TO THE DANES 105 

bishop of Durham, departed this life, and a great battle was 
fought between the English and the Scots at Carre. 69 The 
English and the Danes came to an understanding at Oxford 
as to the observance of the laws of king Edgar. 

In the year 1019, Canute, king of the English and of the 
Danes, crossed to Denmark, and remained there throughout the 
whole of the winter. 

In the year 1020, king Canute returned to England, and at 
the festival of Easter held a great council at Cirencester. 
Edmund was appointed to the see of Durham, and Living, 
archbishop of Canterbury, departing this life, was succeeded 
by Agelnoth, who was called the Good, the son of Agelmar, a 
nobleman. In the same year, the church which king Canute 
and earl Turketel had built on the hill which is called Assen- 
dun, 70 was dedicated in their presence with great honor and pomp 
by Wulstan, the archbishop of York, and many other bishops. 

In the year 1021, Canute, king of the English and of the 
Danes, before the feast of Saint Martin, expelled the earl Tur- 
kill so often mentioned, together with his wife, Egitha, from 
England. Algar, the bishop of East Anglia, departed this life, 
and was succeeded by Alfwin. 

In the year 1022, Agelnoth, the archbishop of Canterbury, 
went to Rome, and being received by pope Benedict with great 
honor, the pall was given to him. 

In the year 1023, the body of Saint Elphege the Martyr 
was transferred from London to Canterbury. Wulstan, the 
archbishop of York, departed this life at York, on the day before 
the calends of July, being the third day of the week, but 
his body was carried to Ely, and there buried. He was suc- 
ceeded by Alfric, the prior of Winchester. 

In the year 1026, Alfric, the archbishop of York, went to 
"Rome, and received the pall from pope John. Richard, the 
second duke of Normandy, departed this life ; and was suc- 
ceeded by Richard the Third, who died in the same year, being 
succeeded by his brother Robert. 

In the year 1027, it having been intimated to the king of the 
English and of the Danes that the people of Norway greatly 
despised their king, Olaf, for his simplicity, mildness, justice 

states the amount paid by the whole of England as 72.000 pounds, and 
that paid by the city of London, 10,500. 
99 Probably Carron. 10 Ashendon, in Essex. 



106 ATTCTALS OF BOGEB, DE HOVEDEtf. A.D. 1033. 

and piety, lie sent to certain of them a great quantity of gold 
and silver, begging them, with many intreaties, that, having 
deposed and expelled him, they would become subject to 
him, and permit him to reign over them. Receiving, with 
great avidity, what he sent them, they ordered word to be 
sent him, that they were ready to receive him whenever he 
chose to come. 

In the year 1028, Canute, king of the English and of the 
Danes, crossing over to Norway with fifty large ships, expelled 
king Olaf, and rendered it subject to himself. 

In the year 1 029, Canute, king of the English, of the Danes, 
and of the Norwegians, returned to England ; and shortly after 
Bent into exile Hacun, a Danish earl, on the pretext that he 
was sending him on an embassy, as he feared lest he should 
be deprived of his life by him. He was married to a noble 
woman, Gunhilda, the daughter of his own sister and of 
"Wertgeorn, king of the Windi. 

In the year 1030, the above-named earl Hacun perished at 
sea; some say that he was slain at this period in the island of 
Orkney. Saint Olaf, the king and martyr, son of Harold, king 
of Norway, whom king Canute had expelled, returning to 
Norway, was unrighteously slain by the Norwegians. 

In the year 1031, Canute, king of the English, of the 
Danes, and of the Norwegians, set out with great state from 
Denmark for Rome, and presented to Saint Peter, the chief of 
the Apostles, vast gifts of gold and silver and other precious 
things, and obtained, at his request, from pope John, that the 
school of the English at Rome should be exempt from all 
tax and tribute; also, in going and returning he bestowed 
bounteous alms on the poor, and put an end to many barriers on 
the road where toll was exacted from strangers, by payment 
of a large sum of money ; before the tomb of the Apostles he 
also made a vow to amend his life and manners. 

In the year 1032, the church of Saint Edmund, the king and 
martyr, was dedicated. Conflagrations, almost unextinguish- 
able, ravaged many places throughout England. Elphege, 
the bishop of Winchester, departed this life, and was succeeded 
by Elfwyn, the king's priest. 

In the year 1033, died Leolf, bishop of the Wiccii, 72 a 
man of great piety and modesty, at the episcopal town of 
73 Worcester. 



A.D. 1036. ACCESSION OF HAEOLD. 107 

Kemeys. 73 He died on the fourth day before the calends of 
September, being the third day of the week, and, as we have 
reason to believe, departed to the kingdom of heaven ; his body 
was buried with due honor in the church of Saint Mary, at 
Worcester. To his see was elected Brithege, abbat of Per- 
shore, son of the sister of Wulstan, the archbishop of York. 

In the year 1034, Malcolm, 74 the king of the Scots, departed 
this life, and was succeeded by Machetad. 

In the year 1035, Canute, king of the English, just before 
his death appointed his son, Sweyn, king of the Norwegians ; 
and of the Danes Hardicanute,- his son by queen Emma ; his 
son Harold, whom he had by Elfgiva of Southampton, he ap- 
pointed king of England ; and shortly after, in the same 
year, on the second day before the ides of November, being 
the fourth day of the week, he departed this life at Shaftes- 
bury, but was buried at Winchester, with all due honors, 
in the old monastery there. After his burial, queen Elfgiva, 76 
who was also called Emma, took refuge 16 at that place. 

But Harold, on obtaining the royal dignity, sent his follow- 
ers with all haste to Winchester, and took away from her, in a 
tyrannical manner, the largest and best portion of the treasures 
which king Canute had left her ; and after having spoiled her, 
dismissed her, to take her seat there as she had previously done. 
With the consent, also, of the greater part of the elders of 
England he began to reign, as being the lawful heir; but 
yet not with such power as did Canute, because [by some] 
Hardicanute was looked for as being the more lawful heir. 
For which reason, shortly afterwards, the kingdom of England 
was divided by lot, and the northern part fell to Harold, the 
southern to Hardicanute. Robert, duke of the Normans, died, 
and was succeeded by his son, William the Bastard, at a very 
youthful age. 

In the year 1036, the innocent Clito's Alfred and Edward, 
the sons of Egelred, the former king of the English, crossed 
over to England with a few ships from Normandy, where they 
had remained for a long time with their uncle Richard, and, 

73 In Pembrokeshire. 71 The Second. 

75 A suspicion is mentioned by some of the chroniclers that this woman 
palmed off the children of a priest and a cobbler on Canute as his own. 
She herself was the daughter of earl Elfelm. 

76 This was for protection from the violence of Harold. 



108 AXNALS OF BICHARD DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1037. 

attended by a great number of Norman soldiers, came to 
Winchester, to have an interview with their mother, who was 
staying at that place. This some of the men in power took 
amiss, and were indignant at it ; because, although unjustly 
BO, they were much more devoted to king Harold than to them, 
and especially, as it is said, the earl Godwin. 

He, after having hurried on Alfred towards London for the 
purpose of an interview with king Harold, in obedience 
to his commands, detained him and placed him in close cus- 
tody. Some of his attendants he dispersed, some he placed 
in chains, and afterwards put out their eyes ; some he scalped 
and tortured, and deprived of their handy and feet, by cutting 
them off. Many, also, he caused to be sold, and by various 
and shocking deaths he put to death six hundred men at 
Guilford. But their souls, we believe, are now rejoicing in 
Paradise with the Saints, whose bodies, without cause, were 
so cruelly consigned to death on earth. 

On hearing this, queen Emma in great haste sent back her 
son Edward, who had remained with her, into Normandy ; 
whereupon, by the command of Godwin and certain others, the 
Clito Alfred was led in the most strict bonds to the isle of Ely ; 
but as soon as the ship came to shore, on board of it, they in- 
stantly in the most cruel manner put out his eyes, and then, 
being led to the monastery by the monks, he was delivered into 
their charge ; here, shortly afterwards, he departed this life, 
and his body was buried with due honor in the south porch 
on the western side of the church, while his soul enjoys the 
delights of Paradise. 

In the year 1037, Harold king of the Mercians and Nor- 
thumbrians, was chosen king by the nobles and the people, to 
reign over all England. But Hardicanute, because he stayed 
too long in Denmark and delayed coming to England as he had 
been requested, was entirely set aside, and his mother Elfgiva, 
who was also called Emma, the former queen of the English, 
at the beginning of the winter, was expelled from England 
without mercy, and shortly afterwards, passing over in a ship to 
Flanders, was received with honor by earl Baldwin. He, in 
the way that became such a man, as long as her need demanded 
it, willingly took care that all necessaries were provided her. 
In the same year, a short time before this, Avic, the prior of 
Evesham, a man of great piety, died. 



A.D. 1040 TETBrTE PAID TO HABDICAXTTTE. 109 

In the year 1038, Egelnoth, archbishop of Canterbury, de- 
parted this life, on the fourth day before the calends of Novem- 
ber, on the seventh day after whose death, Egelred, bishop of 
Sussex, 77 died : for he had asked of God, that he might not 
live long in this world after the death of his most beloved father 
Egelnoth. Grimketel succeeded Egelred in the bishopric, and 
Eadsy, the king's chaplain, succeeded Egelnoth as archbishop. 
In the same year also, died Brithege, the bishop of Worcester, 
on the fourteenth day before the calends of January, being the 
fourth day of the week, and was succeeded by Living. 

In the year 1039, there was a very severe storm. Brithmar, 
bishop of Lichfield, died, and was succeeded by Wulsy. Hardi- 
canute, king of the Danes, crossed over to Flanders, and visited 
his mother Emma. 

[In the year 1040], Harold, the king of the English, died at 
London, and was buried at Westminster ; after his burial, the 
nobles of almost the whole of England sent ambassadors to 
Hardicanute at Bruges, where he was staying with his mother, 
and thinking that they were acting rightly, entreated him to 
come to England, and receive the sceptre of the kingdom. Having 
prepared forty ships, and equipped them with Danish soldiers, be- 
fore midsummer he arrived in England, and was joyfully re- 
ceived by all, and shortly after elevated to the throne of the 
kingdom. But, during the period of his reign, he did nothing 
worthy of the royal dignity. For as soon as he began to reign, 
not forgetting the injuries which his predecessor Harold, (who 
was supposed to he his brother), had done either to him or to his 
mother, he sent Elfric, archbishop of York, earl Godwin, 
Stir, master of the household, Edric, his keeper of the purse, 
Thrond, his executioner, and other men of high rank to 
London, and ordered them to dig up the body of Harold, and 
cast it into a swampy place. After it had been thrown up on 
shore there, he ordered it to be dragged out, and to be cast into 
the river Thames. But a short time after, it was taken up by 
a certain fisherman, and carried off in haste by the Danes, 
and honorably buried by them in the burying ground which 
they had at London. 

These things being done, king Hardicanute ordered eight 
marks to be paid by the whole of England to each rower, 
and twelve to each pilot of his fleet, a tribute so heavy, that 
17 Bishop of Selsey. 



110 AlTffALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEIT. A .D. 1041. 

hardly any person, was able to pay it. In consequence of this, 
to all who, before his arrival, greatly wished for it, he be- 
eame exceedingly odious. Added to this, he was extremely exas- 
perated against earl Godwin, and Living, the bishop of "Wor- 
cester, for the death of his brother Alfred, Alfric, the archbishop 
of York, and certain others being their accusers. He therefore 
took away the bishopric of Worcester from Living, and gave it 
to Alfric ; but in the following year he took it from Alfric, and 
restored it, with marks of kindness, to Living, with whom he 
had become reconciled. 

But Godwin, to make his peace, presented to the king a galley 
or ship, of exquisite workmanship, having a gilded beak, pro- 
vided with the choicest equipments, and fitted out with splendid 
arms and eight hundred 78 picked soldiers. Each one of these 
had on his arms bracelets of gold, weighing sixteen ounces, a 
triple coat of mail, a helmet on his head partly gilded, a 
sword girt to his loins with a gilded hilt, a Danish battle-axe 
ornamented with gold hanging from the left shoulder, in his 
left hand a shield, the boss and studs of which were gilded, 
and in his right a lance, which in the English language is 
called " Ategar." 

In addition to this, he made oath before the king, and almost 
all the nobles and most dignified thanes of England, that it 
was neither by his advice or concurrence that his brother had 
been deprived of his sight, but that his lord, king Harold, had 
ordered him to do what he did do. 

In the year 1041, Hardicanute, king of the English, sent the 
servants of his household throughout all the provinces of the 
kingdom, to collect the tribute which he had ordered. A 
sedition arising in consequence, two of them, Feader and Tur- 
stan by name, were slain by the people of the province of Wor- 
cester and the citizens, in the upper room of a tower in the 
monastery of Worcester, whither they had fled for the purpose 
of concealment ; this took place on the fourth day before the 
nones of May, being the second day of the week. In con- 
sequence of this, the king, being aroused to anger, for the purpose 
of avenging their death, despatched thither, Thuri, earl of Mid- 
Anglia, Leofric, earl of Mercia, Godwin, earl of Wessex, Si- 

7* " Octingesimo " in the text. Eighty, spite of the eight hundred of 
Roger of Wendover, is much more probable. 



A.D. 1042. SUCCESSION OF EDWAKD. Ill 

ward, earl of Northumbria, Rome, earl of Maiseveth, 79 and 
the earls of the whole of England, and nearly all his own 
household servants, with a great army, Alfric then being 
bishop of Worcester ; these he sent thither, with orders to 
slay all they could, and, after plundering the city, to set it on 
fire and lay waste the whole province. 

A short time after the feast of All Saints, they began to lay 
waste the city and the province, and ceased not to do so for 
four days ; however, they took and slew but few of the citizens 
or provincials, because, their approach being known beforehand, 
the provincials had taken to flight in various directions ; but 
a multitude of the citizens had fled for refuge to a certain 
little island, situate in the middle of the river Severn, which 
is called Beverege, and, having thrown up fortifications there, 
stoutly defended themselves against their enemies, until peace 
was restored and they had free liberty to return home. On the 
fifth day, therefore, after the burning of the city, every man 
returned home laden with considerable spoil, and the king's 
anger was immediately appeased. Not long after this, Edward, 
the son of Egelred the former king of the English, came to 
England from Normandy, where he had been in exile many 
years, and being honorably entertained by his brother, king 
Hardicanute, took up his residence at his court. 

In the year 1042, Hardicanute, king of the English, was 
present at a banquet, at which Osgod Clapa, a man of high rank, 
was marrying his daughter Gyta, to Tuvy, a Dane, and a very 
influential man, at a place which is called Lamtithe j 80 while 
in merry mood, and in perfect health and good spirits, he was 
enjoying the hilarity of the nuptials by the side of the bride, 
and standing up, was drinking to certain men, he suddenly fell 
to the earth with a dreadful shock, and remaining speechless, 
^expired on the sixth day before the ides of July, being the third 
day of the week, and being carried to Winchester, was buried 
near king Canute, his father. 

Upon this, his brother Edward, by the especial aid of earl 
Godwin and Living, the bishop of Worcester, was elevated to 
the dignity of king, at London ; his father was Egelred, whose 

79 Radnorshire. 

w Lambeth, in Surrey. This event took place at Clapham, which was 
fermerly in the parish of Lambeth. 



112 ANNALS OF ROGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1044. 

father was Edgar, whose father was Edmund, whose father 
was Edward the Elder, whose father was Alfred. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 1043, on the 
first day of Easter, being the nones of April, Edward was 
anointed king at Winchester, by Eadsy, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, and Alfric, archbishop of York, and nearly all the other 
bishops of England. 

In the same year, after the feast of Saint Martin, the king, 
with Leofric, Godwin, and Siward attending him, suddenly 
proceeded from the city of Gloucester to Worcester, and follow- 
ing the advice which they had given him, took away from his 
mother all the valuables she had, consisting of gold, silver, 
jewels, precious stones, and other things; either because before 
he had been made king, or since then, she had given him less 
than he required, and had been extremely harsh towards him. 

Edmund, bishop of Durham, having departed this life, he 
was succeeded by Egelric, Siward being at that time earl of 
Northumbria. 

In the year 1044, Alword, bishop of London, who, both 
before he was bishop, and in the time of his episcopate, was 
abbat of the monastery of Evesham, being unable to perform 
the duties of the see by reason of his infirmities, wished 
to reside at Evesham, but the brethren of that place would by 
no means consent thereto. Consequently, taking away most 
of the books and ornaments that he had given to that place, 
and as some say, some things that other persons had given, 
he retired to the monastery of Eamsege, 81 and gave to Saint 
Benedict all that he brought ; there he took up his abode, 
and dying there in the same year, on the eighth day before 
the calends of August, being the fourth day of the week, he 
was buried at that place. 

At a general synod, which at this time was held at London, 
a religious monk of Evesham, who had also been a monk in 
the Isle of Man, 82 was chosen abbat of Evesham, and was 
ordained on the fourth day before the ides of August, being 
the sixth day of the week. In the same year, the noble 
matron Gunhilda, the daughter of king Wertgeorn and of 
the sister of king Canute, who was left a widow after the 

81 Ramsey. 

82 " Qui et Manni," are the words in the text ; but they are most pro- 
bably not the correct reading. 



A.D. 1017. DEATH OP MAGNUS. 113 

death of earl Hacun and Harold, with her two sons, Hemming 
and Turkill, was expelled from England. Proceeding to 
Flanders, she resided for some time at a place which is called 
Briege, 83 and then went to Denmark. 

In the year 1045, Brithwold, hishop of Wiltshire, 84 departed 
this life, and was succeeded by Herman, the king's chaplain, 
a native of Lorraine. In the same year, Edward, king of the 
English, assembled a very strong fleet, at the port of Sandwich, 
against Magnus, king of Norway, who was making preparations 
to invade England ; but a war being waged against himself by 
Sweyn, king of the Danes, it put an end to the expedition. 

In the year 1046, on the tenth day before the calends of April, 
being the Lord's day, Living, bishop of the Wiccii, 85 and of 
Devonshire and Cornwall, died; after whose death the bishopric 
of Crediton and Cornwall was immediately given to Leofric, a> 
Briton, 86 the king's chancellor ; and Aldred, who was first a 
monk of Winchester, and afterwards abbat of Tavistock, re- 
ceived the bishopric of the Wiccii. 87 In this year Osgod 
Clapa was banished from England. Magnus, king of Norway, 
the son of king Olaf the Saint, having put to flight Sweyn 
king of the Danes, subdued the country of Denmark. 

In the year 1047, the snow fell, in the west of England, in 
such vast quantities, that it even broke down the woods. Aid- 
win, bishop of Winchester, departed this life, on which Stigand 
was raised to the see. Sweyn, king of the Danes, sent am- 
bassadors to Edward, king of the English, 88 on which earl God- 
win advised the king to send him at least fifty ships, equipped 
with soldiers ; but because this advice did not seem good to earl 
Leofric and all the people, he was not willing to send him any. 
After this, Magnus, king of Norway, attended with a large and 
powerful fleet, fought a battle with Sweyn, and, after many 
thousands had been slain on both sides, expelled him from Den- 
mark ; after which, he reigned over that country as well, and 
compelled the Danes to pay him a small tribute, and not long 
after, died. 

83 Bruges. 

s * Bishop of Ramesbury ; which see was afterwards removed to Salis- 
bury. K Worcester. ** A native of Wales. 

87 The meaning is, that the bishopric of Worcester was divided into 
two ; that of Crediton being formed from it. 

8S The text has here, " Norreganorum," " of the Norwegians," evidently 
a mistake. 

VOL. I. I 



114 A.STNALS OF ROGEB, DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1049. 

In the year 1048, Sweyn regained possession of Denmark, 
and Harold Harf ager, who was the son of Siward, king of Nor- 
way, and, on the mother's side, brother of Saint Olaf, and 
on the father's side, uncle to king Magnus, returned to Norway, 
and shortly after sent ambassadors to Edward, king of the 
English, and offered to him, and received in return, assurances 
of peace and friendship. On the calends of May, being the 
Lord's day, there was a great earthquake at "Worcester, in the 
county of the Wiccii, at Derby, and at many other places ; a 
mortality among men and animals prevailed throughout. many 
of the provinces of England, and fires in the air, commonly 
called woodland 89 fires, destroyed towns and crops of standing 
corn in the province of Derby, and some other provinces. 

In the year 1049, Leo began to reign, 80 the hundred and fifth 
pope ; he was the pope who composed the new Gregorian chaunt. 
The emperor Henry collected an innumerable force against Bald- 
win, earl of Flanders, especially because he had burned his palace 
at Nimeguen, and, most beauteous as it was, destroyed it. 
Pope Leo took part in this expedition, and a great number of 
noblemen and grandees of many nations. Sweyn, king of 
the Danes, as the emperor had commanded him, was there also 
with his fleet, and on this occasion took the oaths of fealty to 
the emperor, who sent also to Edmund, king of the English, 
and requested that he would not allow Baldwin to escape, if he 
should attempt to do so by sea. In consequence of this, the 
king went with a large fleet to the port of Sandwich, and 
remained there until the emperor had obtained of Baldwin 
every thing he required. 

In the meantime, earl Sweyn, the son of earl Godwin and 
Gyta, who had formerly left England, (because he was not 
allowed to marry Edgiva, abbess of the monastery of Lcomin- 
fiter, whom he had debauched), and had gone to Denmark, 
returned with eight ships, and, dissembling, declared that he 
would, in future, continue faithful to the king. Earl Beorn, 
who was the son of the Danish earl Ulph, the uncle of Sweyn, 
the son of Spralling, the son of Urse, promised him that he 
would obtain his request of the king, and that his earldom 
should be restored to him. 

Therefore, after earl Baldwin had made peace with the em- 
peror, the earls Godwin and Beorn, with the king's permission, 
came with forty-two ships to Pevensey ; but the rest of the 
w Silvalicus. 90 Leo the Ninth. 



A.D. 1000. 



MACHETAD SENDS MONEY TO HOME. 



115 



fleet he ordered to return home, retaining only a few ships 
with him. When word was brought to the king that Osgod 
Clapa lay at Ulps with twenty-nine 91 ships, he recalled as 
many as he could of the ships that he had sent away ; on 
which, Osgod, having fetched away his wife, whom he had 
sent to Bruges, returned to Denmark with six ships ; but 
the others, going to Essex, returned, carrying off no little 
booty from the neighbourhood of Eadulph's Promontory. 
But in returning, they were overtaken by a violent storm, 
which sank them all, except two, that were taken in the parts 
beyond sea, when all were slain who were found on board of 
them. While these things were going on, earl Sweyn came 
to Pevensey, and with deceitful intent, requested his cousin, 
earl Beorn, to go with him to the harbour of Sandwich, and, 
as he had promised, reconcile the king to him. 

Beorn, trusting in his relationship, and taking with him but 
three companions, set out with him ; on which, Sweyn took him 
to Bosanham, 92 where his ships were, and putting him on board, 
instantly ordered him to be strongly fettered, and kept him 
there with him until he came to Dartmouth, where having 
slain him, and thrown him into a deep ditch, and covered him 
with earth, the six ships left him ; two of which were shortly 
afterwards taken by the men of Hastings, who, having slain 
those on board of them, carried the ships to Sandwich, and 
there presented them to the king. Sweyn, however, flying to 
Flanders, with two ships, remained there until Aldred, the 
bishop of Worcester, brought him back, and reconciled the king 
to him. 

In the same year, at the request of the abbat Herimar, a 
man of exemplary piety, Saint Leo the pope came to France, 
having in his retinue the governor and all the dignitaries of 
the city of Rome, and dedicated the monastery of Saint Re- 
migius, the apostle of the Franks, which had been built at 
Rheims, with the greatest pomp ; and afterwards held a 
great synod of archbishops, bishops, and abbats, in that city, 
which lasted six days ; to which synod was sent, by Edward, 
king of the English, Aldwin, a monk of Ramsey, and abbat 
of the monastery of Saint Augustine. 

In the year 1050, Machetad, the king of Scotland, sent money 

91 The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says thirty-nine. 
''- Bosham, in Sussex. 



116 ANNALS OF KOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.U. 1051. 

to Rome, for the purpose of distribution. Edsy, archbishop 
of Canterbury, departed this life, and was succeeded by Robert, 
bishop of London, a Norman by birth. Herman, bishop of 
Wiltshire, 93 and Aldred, bishop of Worcester, set out for Rome. 

In the year 1051, Alfric, who was also called Putta, arch- 
bishop of York, died at Southwell, and was buried at Medes- 
hamburgstede, 94 being succeeded by Kinsy, the king's chaplain. 
In this year, king Edward freed the English from the heavy tax, 
in the thirty-eighth year after his father, king Egelred, had 
first ordered it to be paid for the Danish soldiers. 

After these things, in the month of September, Eustace the 
Elder, earl of Boulogne, who had married the sister of king 
Edward, Goda by name, arrived at Canterbury with a few 
ships. Here 95 his soldiers, while stupidly and awkwardly in 
quest of lodgings for themselves, killed one of the citizens ; 
on which, a fellow-citizen of his, being witness of this, 
avenged him, by slaying one of the soldiers. On this, the 
(.-arl and his men, being greatly enraged, slaughtered a great 
number of men and women with their arms, and trod down 
children and infants under their horses' hoofs. But when 
they saw the citizens running together to resist them, disgrace- 
fully taking to flight, they escaped with difficulty, after seven 
of their companions had been slain, and fled to king Edward, 
who was then at Glavome. 915 

Earl Godwin being indignant at such things taking place 
in his earldom, and greatly inflamed with anger, in his own 
earldom, that is to say, in Kent, Sussex, and Wessex, and 
his eldest son Sweyn in his, namely Oxford, Gloucester- 
shire, Herefordshire, Somersetshire, and Berkshire, and his 
other son Harold in his, namely, the provinces of Essex, 
East Anglia, Huntingdon, and Grantebrigge, 97 collected an in- 
numerable army; which however did not escape king Edward. 
Consequently, sending messengers in all haste to Leofric, earl 
of the Mercians, and Siward, earl of Northumbria, he begged 
them to make haste and come to him with all they could as- 
semble, as he was placed in great jeopardy. 

93 Of Ramesbury. M Peterborough. 

95 The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle and Matthew of Westminster represent 
this as taking place at Dover, after the return of Eustace from Canterbury, 
where he had stopped to refresh himself. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle 
places the event in 1048. 9G Gloucester. 97 Cambridge. 



A.D. 1051. FLIGHT OF GODWIN. 117 

However, they came at first with a few only ; but -when they 
knew how the matter stood, they sent through their earldoms 
swift messengers on horseback, and collected a large army. In 
like manner, earl Rodulph, son of Goda, sister of king Ed- 
ward, collected as many as he could in his earldom. In the, 
meantime, Godwin and his sons, after the nativity of Saint 
Mary, coming with their forces into the province of Gloucester, 
pitched their camp at a place which is called Langeto, and 
sending ambassadors to the king at Gloucester, under the threat 
of making war, demanded the surrender of earl Eustace, and 
his allies as well, both Normans and men of Boulogne, who had 
taken possession of the castle on the hill of Dover. 

In consequence of this, the king was for the moment greatly 
alarmed, and, being afflicted with great anguish, was utterly at a 
loss to know what to do ; but when he understood that the army 
earls Siward, Leofric, and Eodulph were approaching, he de- 
terminedly made answer that he would on no account give up 
Eustace and the others who were demanded ; on hearing which, 
the messengers returned empty-handed. After their departure 
the army entered Gloucester, being prepared for battle with 
such hostile and resolutje spirit, that they wished to engage im- 
mediately with earl Godwin's army, if the king would permit 
them. But, inasmuch as the best men in all England were 
assembled together on his side and theirs, it seemed to earl 
Leofric and some others, to be the more prudent part not to 
begin a battle with their fellow-countrymen ; but they pro- 
posed that, exchanging hostages, the king and Godwin should, 
on a day named, meet at London for a conference. 

This counsel being approved of, and messages interchanged, 
and hostages given and received, the earl returned into 
Wessex; but the king assembled a more numerous army 
from the whole of Mercia and Northumbria, and led it with 
him to London. On the other hand, Godwin and his sons 
came to South weorc, 98 with a great multitude of the men of 
Wessex ; but, as his army had gradually diminished, he 
did not dare to come to the conference with the king, but on, 
the approach of night, took to flight. Wherefore, next morn- 
ing, the king in council, and by the unanimous consent of 
his army, pronounced sentence of banishment against him and 
his five sons ; on which he, with his wife Githa, and Tosti, 
M Southwark. 



118 ANNALS OF ROGEH DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1052. 

with his wife Juthitha, daughter of Baldwin, earl of Flan- 
ders, and two other of his sons, Sweyn and Girth, repaired 
to Tornege, where his ships were in readiness. Hastily placing 
on hoard as much gold and silver and other precious things 
as they were able to carry, and embarking with all speed, 
they directed their course to Baldwin, earl of Flanders. More- 
over, Harold and Leofwin, his sons, going to Bristol, embarked 
on board a ship which their brother Sweyn had provided for 
himself, and crossed over to Ireland. The king, on account 
of the anger which he entertained against her father Godwin, 
repudiated queen Edgitha, and sent her ignominiously with a 
single attendant to Werewell, where he gave her into the 
custody of the abbess. 

After these things had thus happened, "William, duke of 
the Normans, with a multitude of his subjects, came to Eng- 
land, and, with his attendants, was honorably entertained by 
king Edward, who afterwards dismissed him, on his return 
to Normandy, with great and numerous presents. 

In the year 1052, Elfgiva, or Emma, the former queen, and 
wife of kings Egelred and Canute, departed this life at Win- 
chester, on the second day before the nones of March, and was 
buried there. In the same year, Griffin, king of Wales, ra- 
vaged a great part of the province of Hereford ; the people of 
the province, and a considerable number of Normans, went 
out from the castle against him, but, after slaying many of 
them, he gained the victory, and carried off with him con- 
siderable spoil. This battle was fought on the same day that, 
thirteen years before, the Welch had slain Edwin, the brother 
of earl Leofric. 

Shortly after this, earl Harold and his brother Leofwin re- 
turned from Ireland, and entering the mouth of the Severn with 
a great number of ships, landed at the confines of Somerset and 
Devon, and laid waste many towns and fields in those parts. 
Against them a great number of the people of Somerset and 
Devon went out, but Harold defeated them, slaying more than 
thirty noble thanes of their number, together with many others ; 
after which he returned to his ships with the spoil, and then 
sailed round Penwithsteort." Upon this, king Edward, with 
all expedition, sent forty ships, supplied with provisions and 
picked soldiers, to the port of Sandwich, and ordered them to 
99 Land's End. 



A. D. 1052. GODWIN'S FLEET SAILS ~u? THE THAMES. 119 

await the approach of earl Godwin, and be on the look-out ; 
but, in spite of this, unknown to them all, returning with a 
few ships, he landed in Kent, and secretly sending messengers, 
enticed to his assistance the people of Kent, and afterwards 
the people of Sussex, Essex, Surrey, and all the mariners of 
Hastings and of all the parts near the sea-shore, besides some 
others ; all these with one voice declared that they were ready 
to live or die for him. 

When this became known to the king's fleet that lay at the 
port of Sandwich, it set out in pursuit of him, on which he 
took to flight, and escaped, concealing himself in whatever place 
he could. But the king's forces returned to the port of Sand- 
wich, and from there repaired to London. On learning 
this, earl Godwin returned to the Isle of Wight, and sailed 
near the shore until his sons Harold and Leofwin came with 
their fleet ; and when they had met they desisted from plunder 
and rapine, only, when necessity demanded it, taking pro- 
visions for their troops. Enticing to their assistance all the 
people they could in the vicinity of the sea-shore and in 
other places, and picking up all the mariners they met with, 
they steered their course towards the port of Sandwich, their 
arrival at which place was reported to king Edward, who 
was at this period staying at London. Despatching messen- 
gers with all speed, he sent word to all who had not re- 
volted from him, that they must come to his assistance with 
the greatest haste ; but being very slow in their movements, 
they did not come in time. 

In the meantime, earl Godwin coming up the Thames with 
his fleet against the tide, on the day of the exaltation of the 
Holy Cross, being the second day of the week, came to South- 
weorc, 1 and waited there until flood- tide. Meanwhile, by 
means of messengers, he convened certain of the citizens 
of London whom he had previously brought over by various 
promises, and caused nearly all of them to wish entirely 
as he would have them. After this, all things being arranged 
and set in order, on the flood-tide coming, with all speed 
they heaved their anchors, and no one on the bridge op- 
posing them, sailed up the river close to the south shore. The 
land forces also came, and putting themselves in battle 
array on the bank of the river, presented a dense and terrible 
Southwark. 



120 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1052. 

line of battle ; after which, the fleet turned towards the north 
shore, as it was its intention to surround the king's fleet. 
For the king had both a fleet and a numerous land army ; but 
because both with the king and with Godwin there were very 
few who had any spirit (so greatly did almost all the English 
abhor fighting against their own kindred and fellow-country- 
men), the consequence was, that all the more prudent men on 
either side, effecting a reconciliation between the king and the 
earl, bade the army lay aside their arms. The following morn- 
ing the king held a council, and fully restored to Godwin and 
his wife and all his sons, with the exception of Sweyn, their 
former honors. 

He, being moved with penitence, because, as previously 
mentioned, he had slain his cousin Beorn, journeyed from 
Flanders to Jerusalem, barefoot, and on his return thence, having 
contracted a disease from the excessive cold, died in Lycia. 
Edgitha, also, his queen, the daughter of the earl, the king 
received with due honor, and restored her to her former dignity. 

Peace and concord being thus established, to all the people 
they promised good laws, and banished all the Normans who had 
instituted unjust ones, and had pronounced unjust judgments, 
and had given the king bad counsel against the English. Some 
few, however, namely, Robert Le Dragon, and his son-in-law, 
Richard the son of Scrobi, Alfred, the king's master of the horse, 
Aufrid, surnamed Ceokesfot, and some others whom the king 
loved more than the rest, and who had preserved their fidelity 
to him and all the people, they allowed to remain in England. 
But Robert, the archbishop of Canterbury, William, the bishop 
of London, and Ulph, the bishop of Lincoln, with difficulty 
escaping with their Normans, crossed the sea ; however, on 
account of his virtues, William was shortly after recalled and 
reinstated in his bishopric. 

Osborn, however, surnamed Pentecost, and his companion, 
Hugh, surrendered their castles, and, with the permission of 
earl Leofric, passing through his earldom, repaired to Scotland, 
where they were received by Machetad, 2 king of the Scots. 
In the same year, on the night of the feast of Saint Thomas 
the Apostle, there was a wind so strong and violent that it blew 
down many churches and houses, and broke numberless trees, 
or tore them up by the roots. 

2 The king who is more generally known as Macbeth. 



A.D. 1055. DEATH OF SIWARD. 121 

In the year 1053, the brother of Griffin, king of South 
Wales, whose name was Rees, on account of the frequent 
depredations which he had committed, was slain by com- 
mand of king Edward, at a place called Bulendun, 8 and his 
head was brought to the king at Gloucester, on the vigil of 
the Epiphany. In the same year, when the second day of 
the festival of Easter was being celebrated, a dreadful cala- 
mity befel earl Godwin at Winchester, while, as usual, he 
was sitting at table with the king. For, being suddenly 
attacked by a fatal malady, he sank down on his seat bereft 
of speech : on seeing which, his sons, Harold, Tosti, and 
Girth, carried him into the king's chamber, hoping that, after 
a little while, he would recover from the attack ; but he, 
being deprived of all strength, departed this life on the fifth 
day after, being the seventeenth day before the calends 01 
May, and was buried in the old monastery there. He was 
succeeded in the dukedom by his son Harold, whose earldom 
was given to Algar, the son of earl Leofric. 

In the year 1054, Siward, the valiant earl of Nor- 
thumbria, by command of king Edward, invaded Scot- 
land, with both an army of horse and a strong fleet, and 
fought a battle with Machetad, king of the Scots ; and, after 
many thousands of the Scots, and all the Normans, of whom 
mention has been made above, were slain, put him to flight, 
and gave the crown to Malcolm, son of the king of the Cum- 
brians, as king Edward had commanded. But in this battle 
his own son, 4 and many of the English and Danes, were 
slain. 

On the death of Godwin, the abbat of Winchelcomb, Aired, 
bishop of Worcester, on the feast of Saint Kenelm, ap- 
pointed abbat in his room Godric, the son of Godman, the 
king's chaplain. After this, the same bishop was dispatched 
on an embassy, with costly presents, to the emperor : by whom, 
and Herman, archbishop of Cologne, he was entertained with 
great honor, and remained with them a whole year; on 
the king's behalf, he also suggested to the emperor to send 
ambassadors to Hungary, and bring back his cousin, the 
son of king Edmund Ironside, and procure his return to 
England, 

In the year 1055, Siward, earl of Northumbria, died at 
3 Bullingdon. 4 Osborn. 



122 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1U55. 

York, and was buried at the monastery of Galmanho, 5 which 
he had founded, and his earldom was given to Tosti, the 
brother of duke Harold. 

A short time after this, a council was held in London, and 
king Edward outlawed earl Algar, the son of earl Leofric, 
without any blame on his part ; who immediately went to 
Ireland, and, having procured eighteen piratical ships, re- 
turned, and going to Griffin, king of the Welsh, 6 begged 
that he would aid him against king Edward ; on which he, 
immediately collecting from the whole of his kingdom a nume- 
rous army, requested Algar, with his forces, to meet him and 
his army at a place nalned. Having met, they entered the 
province of Hereford, for the purpose of laying waste the ter- 
ritories of the English ; whereupon the timid duke Rodulph, 
nephew of king Edward, collecting an army, met them two 
miles from the city of Hereford, on the ninth day before the 
calends of November. He ordered the English, contrary to 
their usage, to fight on horseback ; but, just when they were 
about to engage, the duke, with his Franks and Normans, was 
the first to take to flight, which the English seeing, followed 
their leader's example. 

Nearly the whole of the enemy pursued them, and slew of 
them four or five hundred men, and wounded a great number ; 
after which, having gained the victory, king Griffin and earl 
Algar entered Hereford, and, having slain seven canons who had 
defended the doors of the principal church, and having burnt 
the monastery (which bishop Athelstan, the true worshipper 
of Christ, had built), with all its ornaments, and the relics of 
Saint Egelbert, the king and martyr, and of other Saints, and 
having slain some of the citizens and taken many prisoners, 
and spoiled and burnt the city, they enriched themselves with 
a vast amount of plunder. 

After this, the king commanded an army to be levied in Eng- 
land, and, assembling it at Gloucester, gave the command of it 
to the valiant duke Harold, who followed them, and, boldly en- 
tering the territories of the Welch, pitched his camp beyond 
Straddele. But they, being aware that he was a brave man and 
a warlike commander, did not dare to join battle with him, 
but fled into South Wales ; on discovering which, he dispatched 

5 An abbey, afterwards incorporated with St. Mary's, at York. 
North Wales. 



A.D. 1056. BISHOP LEONEGAE IS SXAOT. 123 

thither the greater part of his army, and commanded them, 
if necessity demanded it, manfully to resist the enemy. Re- 
turning with the rest of his troops to Hereford, he sur- 
rounded it with a deep trench, and fortified it with gates 
and bars. 

In the meantime, messages being interchanged, Griffin, 
Algar, and Harold, and those who were with them, met at a 
place which is called Billigesleage, 7 and, peace being granted 
and received, agreed upon a lasting friendship between them. 
This being settled, the fleet of earl Algar proceeded to 
Chester, and there awaited the pay that had been promised 
it ; but he himself went to the king, and received back from 
him his earldom. At the same period, Tremerin, the bishop of 
Wales, 8 a religious man, departed this life. He had for a long 
time been the coadjutor of Athelstan, bishop of Hereford, after 
he himself had become unable to perform the duties of the 
bishopric ; for, during a period of thirteen years, he was de- 
prived of his eyesight. 

Herman, the bishop of the province of Wiltshire, being 
annoyed because the king was unwilling to allow the transfer 
of the see from the town which is called Ramnebirig 9 to the 
abbey of Malmesbury, 10 resigned the bishopric, and, crossing 
the sea, assumed the monastic habit at Saint Bertin's, and re- 
mained at the monastery there three years. 

In the year 1056, the emperor Henry died at Rome, and 
was succeeded by his son Henry. Athelstan, the bishop of 
Hereford, a man )f great sanctity, departed this life on the 
fourth day before the ides of February, at the town which is 
called Bosanbrig, and his body being taken to Hereford, was 
buried in the church there, which he had built from the 
foundation. He was succeeded by Leonegar, the chaplain of 
duke Harold, who, in the same year, on the sixteenth day 
before the calends of July, was slain at the place which is 
called Glastingeberie, 11 together with his clergy, and the sheriff 
Agelnoth, and many others, by Griffin, king of the Welsh. 
He enjoyed the bishopric eleven weeks and four days. 

After his death, the bishopric of Hereford was given in 
charge to Aldred, bishop of Worcester, until a bishop should 
be appointed. Afterwards, the same bishop, and the nobles 

7 Or Bilsley. 8 Of Saint David's. 9 Ramesbury. 

10 Roger of Wendover says Salisbury. " Glastonbury. 



124 ANKALS OP KOGEE DE HOYEDEX. A.D. 1057. 

LeoMc and Harold, reconciled Griffin, king of the Welsh, with 
king Edward. Earl Agelwin Oddo, 11 * the lover of churches, 
the supporter of the poor, the defender of widows and orphans, 12 
the guardian of chastity, haying received the mojiastic habit 
a month before his death from Aldred, bishop cf Worcester, 
died on the second day before the calends of September, at 
Deorhirst, but being honorably buried in the monastery of 
Pershore, rests there. Algeric, the bishop of Durham, having of 
his own accord resigned the bishopric, retired to his own monas- 
tery, which is called Burgh, 13 where he was educated, and be- 
came a monk, and lived there twelve years. He was succeeded 
in the bishopric by his brother, Egelwin, a monk of the 
monastery. 

In the year 1057, the Clito Edward, son of king Edmund 
Ironside, according to the command of his uncle, king Ed- 
ward, came to England from Hungary, whither, as previously 
mentioned, he had long before been sent into banishment. 
For the king had determined to make him heir to the kingdom 
in succession to himself; but, shortly after he had arrived, 
he departed this life at London. Leofric, the praiseworthy 
earl, and of happy memory, son of duke Leofwin, departed 
this life at a good old age, at his own town, which is called 
Bromleage, 14 on the second day before the calends of Septem- 
ber, and was honorably buried at Coventry : which monastery, 
among the other good works which he did in his lifetime, he 
himself and his wife, the noble countess Godiva, a worshipper 
of God, and a devoted lover of Saint Mary ever a virgin, had 
built with their patrimonial possessions from the very founda- 
tion, and abundantly endowed it with lands, and so enriched 
it with various ornaments, that in no monastery throughout 
the whole of England could such a quantity of gold, silver, 
jewels, and precious stones be found, as was at that period con- 
tained therein. 

The monasteries, also, of Leominster and Wenlock, and of 
Saint John the Baptist, and Saint Werburgh the Virgin, at 
Chester, and the church which Eadnoth, bishop of Lincoln, 
had built at the famous place which, in English is called 

n * Earl of Devon. 

12 This seems to be intended as the meaning of the word " pupillorura" 
here. 1S Burgh, near Stamford. " Bromley. 



A.D 1061. ALDBED RECEIVES THE PALL. 125 

Stow Saint Mary, 15 in Latin the place of Saint Mary, they 
enriched with precious ornaments : the monastery of Worces- 
ter, also, they endowed with lands, and that of Evesham with 
buildings, and enriched it with various ornaments and lands. 
The wisdom of this earl, so long as he lived, greatly benefitted 
the kings and all the people of England : he was succeeded in 
his dignities by his son, Algar. 

Hecca, the bishop of the South Saxons, 16 died, and in his 
place Egelric, a monk of Christ's church in Canterbury, was 
chosen bishop. 

In the year 1058, Algar, earl of Mercia, was outlawed by 
king Edward the Second, but, by the aid of Griffin, king of 
the Welsh, and the assistance of a fleet of the Norwegians, 
which unexpectedly came to aid him, he speedily regained 
his earldom by force. Aldred, bishop of Worcester, with be- 
coming honor, dedicated the church which he had built in 
the city of Gloucester, from the foundation, in honor of Peter 
the chief of the Apostles ; and afterwards, with the king's 
permission, appointed Wulstan, who had been ordained by 
himself a monk of Worcester, abbat there. Then, resigning 
the charge of the bishopric of Wiltshire, 17 which had been 
entrusted to him to govern, and restoring it to Herman, who 
has been previously mentioned, he went beyond sea, and set 
out for Jerusalem by way of Hungary, a thing that no arch- 
bishop or bishop of England is known to have done till then. 

In the year 1059, Nicolas, bishop of the city of Florence, 
was elected pope, and Benedict was expelled. 

In the year 1060, Henry, king of the Franks, departed this 
life, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Philip. Duduc, 
bishop of Wells, died, and was succeeded by Gisa, the king's 
chaplain ; they were both natives of Lorraine. Kinsy, arch- 
bishop of York, died at York, on the eleventh day before the 
calends of January, and being carried to the monastery which 
is called Burgh, was honorably interred there. In his room, 
Aldred, bishop of Worcester, was chosen archbishop, on the 
Nativity of our Lord ; and the bishopric of Hereford, which 
had also been conferred on him by reason of his zeal, was given, 
to Walter, a native of Lorraine, the chaplain of queen Edgitha. 

In the year 1061, Aldred, archbishop of York, set out for 
Rome with earl Tosti, and received the pall from pope Nicolas. 

u In Lincolnshire. 16 Of Selsey, in Sussex " Ramcsbury. 



126 AlfNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. J062. 

In the meantime, Malcolm, king of the Scots, boldly laid 
waste Northumbria, the earldom of his sworn brother, Tosti, 
having violated the peace 18 of Saint Cuthbert at Eilond. In 
the same year, pope Nicolas departed this life, and Alexander, 
being chosen the hundred and forty-ninth pope, succeeded 
him. 

In the year 1062, "Wulstan, a venerable man, was appointed 
bishop of Worcester. Beloved by God, he was a native of the 
province of Warwick in the kingdom of Mercia, and sprung of 
pious parents, Eastan being the name of his father, and Wulf- 
giva of his mother ; he was trained in literature and the eccle- 
siastical duties, at the noble monastery which is called Burgh ; 
indeed, both his parents were so extremely zealous in the 
cause of piety, that long before the end of their lives, making a 
vow of chastity, they separated from each other, and rejoiced 
to end their days in the holy garb of the monastic order. 
The young man, led by their example, his mother in especial 
persuading him to it, left the world, and in the same monastery 
at Worcester, in which his father before him had served God, 
received the monastic habit and ordination from the venerable 
Brithege, bishop of that church, by whom he was ordained 
both deacon and priest. Immediately, therefore, at the very on- 
set, he embraced a life of severe discipline and entirely devoted to 
the practice of piety, and speedily became a wonderful example 
in watching, fasting, praying, and all kinds of virtues. In con- 
sequence of this, by reason of the rigidness of his morals, he was 
first chosen for some time master and guardian of the novices ; 
after which, on account of his intimate acquaintance with 
ecclesiastical duties, he was, by the mandate of the seniors, ap- 
pointed both chaunter and treasurer of the church. 

Having now gained an opportunity of more freely serving 
God, by reason of the guardianship of the church being en- 
trusted to him, he gave himself up wholly to a life of contem- 
plation; both day and night he devoted himself either to 
prayer or to reading the Scriptures, and subdued his body by 
fasting two or three days together ; he practised holy vigils to 
such an extent, that not only day and night, but even some- 
times, a thing that we could hardly have credited, if we had not 
heard it from his own mouth, even four days and nights together 

18 Probably meaning that he had ravaged some of the lands belonging 
to the church of Saint Cuthbert, or the see of Durham. 



A.D. 1062. CONSECRATION OF WULSTAX. 127 

he would pass without sleep, and thus incur danger through the 
brain being almost dried up, had he not hastened to satisfy 
nature by a hurried sleep. At length, when, by the power of 
nature he was compelled to sleep, he did not refresh his limbs in 
slumber by means of bed or bedclothes, but, upon a bench in 
the church, supporting his head with the book from which he 
was praying or reading, he would recline for a short time. 

At length, on the death of Egelwin, prior of the monastery, 
this venerable man was chosen by bishop Aldred, prior and 
father of the fraternity. This office he discharged most laud- 
ably, far from relaxing the severity of his former life, but on 
the contrary increasing it in many ways, that he might thereby 
afford to the others an example of good living. Afterwards, 
in the course of some years, on the election of the abovenamed 
Aldred, bishop of Worcester, to the archbishopric of York, the 
unanimous consent both of the clergy and of the whole of the 
people fixed upon him, king Edward having given them leave 
to choose as their bishop whomsoever they pleased. 

It so happened that, on this occasion, the legates of the 
Apostolic See were present at his election, namely, Armenfred, 
bishop of Sion, and another, who, having been sent by pope 
Alexander to Edward, king of the English, on ecclesiastical busi- 
ness, by the royal orders resided at Worcester throughout nearly 
the whole of Lent, waiting there for an answer to be given to 
their legateship, when a royal court was held at the ensuing 
Easter. These persons, while staying there, were witnesses of 
his laudable life, and not only gave their sanction to his election, 
but even encouraged in every way both the clergy and the people 
to that course, and by their authority confirmed the election. 

He however, on the other hand, most obstinately refused, 
and exclaimed, that he was not worthy, and even affirmed with 
an oath that he would much more willingly assent to his de- 
capitation than to the acceptance of so high an office. 

When, therefore, he had been often attended by several re- 
ligious men on this question, and could not by any means be 
persuaded to give his consent, he was at length severely rebuked 
for his disobedience and obstinacy, by Wulsy, a recluse, and a 
man of God, who was known then to have passed more than 
forty years of his life in solitude. Alarmed, also, by a Divine 
warning, with the greatest sorrow of heart he was compelled 
to give his consent, and having accepted the bishopric, was 



128 ANNALS OF ROGER BOVEDEN. A .D. 1063. 

consecrated on the Lord's day on which was celebrated the na- 
tivity of Saint Mary, 19 and by his life and virtues shone forth 
as an illustrious bishop of the see of Worcester. He was con- 
secrated, however, by Aldred, the archbishop of York, as at 
this period the episcopal duties of Stigand, the archbishop of Can- 
terbury, were suspended by our lord the pope, because he had 
presumed to accept the archbishopric while Robert, the arch- 
bishop, was still living ; however, his canonical profession was 
made to Stigand, the abovenamed archbishop of Canterbury, and 
not to Aldred, who ordained him. 

In addition to this, the archbishop of York, who ordained 
him, was by the agency of Stigand, and on account of the 
charges made by his followers, ordered to declare before the 
king and the nobles of the realm, that he from that time for- 
ward did not wish to claim any secular authority or eccle- 
siastical rights over him, either because he had been consecrated 
by him, or because before the consecration he had been a monk 
under him. 20 This ordination took place when he was more 
than fifty years of age, it being the twentieth year of the reign 
of king Edward, and the fifteenth of the indiction. 

In the year 1063, Harold, the valiant duke of Wessex, by 
the command of king Edward, after the Nativity of our Lord, 
took with him a small body of horse, and set out from Glou- 
cester, where the king was then staying, in great haste for 
Rhyddlan, 21 for the purpose of slaying Griffin, king of Wales, 
on account of the frequent ravages which he committed in the 
English territory, and the disgrace which he so frequently 
caused to his lord, Edward. But he, on learning beforehand the 
approach of Harold, embarked on board ship with his family, and 
with some difficulty made his escape. Harold, on finding that 
he had fled, set fire to his palace, and, burning his ships with 
their equipments, returned on the same day. But, about 
the Rogation Days, setting sail with a fleet from Bristol, he 
sailed round a great part of the coast of Wales, and was met by 
his brother, earl Tosti, with a body of horse, as the king had 
commanded, on which, joining their forces, they began to 
ravage those districts. The Welch being, consequently, com- 
pelled to do so, gave hostages, and made submission, and 

The 8th of September. 

20 When he was prior of the monastery of Worcester. 

21 In Flintshire. 



A. D. 1065. KEVEXGE OF DUNSTAN AND GLOKIEKN. 129 

promised that they would pay tribute, and outlawed their 
own king, Griffin. 

In the year 1064, Griffin, king of the Welch, was slain by 
his people on the nones of August, and his head, and the 
head of his ship with its ornaments, was sent to duke Harold, 
who afterwards presented them to king Edward. After this, 
king Edward gave the country of the Welch to his brothers, 
Blethogent and Rithwalan ; on which, to him, and to duke 
Harold, they took the oath of fealty, and that at their com- 
mand they would be ready for them both by land and by sea, 
and would obediently render all things that had been rendered 
before from that land by its former kings. 

In the year 1065, the venerable man, Egelwin, bishop of 
Durham, raised from his tomb the bones of Saint Oswin, for- 
merly king of Bernicia, in the monastery which is near Tyne- 
mouth, four hundred and fifteen years after his burial, and 
with great honor enclosed them in a shrine. 

Harold, the brave duke of "Wessex, in the month of July, 
ordered a great building to be erected in the country of the 
"Welch, at a place which is called Portaseith, 22 and many 
things for eating and drinking to be there collected, that his 
lord, king Edward, might be enabled to stay there some time, 
for the sake of hunting. But Caradoc, the son of Griffin, king 
of the South Welch, whom a few years previously Griffin, king 
of the North Welch, had slain on invading his kingdom, came 
thither on the day of Saint Bartholomew the Apostle, with 
all he could muster, and slew nearly all the workmen to- 
gether with those who inspected them, and carried off all 
the good things that were collected there. 

After this, on the fifth day before the nones of October, 
being the second day of the week, the thanes of Northumber- 
land, Dunstan, son of Agelnoth, and Gloniern, son of Eardulph, 
came from Gamelbarn to York, with two hundred soldiers; 
and, in revenge for the shameful death of the Northumbrian 
nobles, the thanes Cospatric (whom queen Egitha, for the 
sake of her brother Tosti, had ordered to be treacherously 
assassinated in the royal palace, on the fourth night of the 
Nativity of our Lord), and Gamel, the son of Orm, and 
Ulph, the son of Dolphin, whom, in the preceding year, earl 
Tosti had treacherously ordered to be slain at York, in his 

22 Portheswet, near Chepstow. 
VOL. I. K 



130 AlTNAiS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEff. A.D. 1066. 

own chamber, while a treaty of peace existed between them, 
as also by reason of the exorbitant tribute which he had 
unjustly levied from the whole of Northumbria, on the same 
day, first slew his Danish household servants, Amund and 
Kavenswearc, whom they stopped in their flight outside of 
the walls of the city, and, on the following day, two hundred 
men of his court, on the northern side of the river Humber, 
and then broke open his treasury, and, carrying off all that 
was there, took their departure. 

After this, almost all the people of that earldom, assembling 
together, met Harold, the duke of Wessex, and the other per- 
sons whom, at the request of Tosti, the king had sent to them for 
the purpose of making peace, at Northampton. First there, and 
afterwards at Oxford, on the day of the Apostles Saint Simon 
and Saint Jude, on Harold and many others attempting to 
reconcile them to earl Tosti, they all with one voice refused, 
and pronounced him an outlaw, together with all those who had 
encouraged him to enact unjust laws, and, after the feast of 
All Saints, with the aid of earl Edwin, expelled Tosti from 
England ; on which, together with his wife, he forthwith re- 
paired to Baldwin, earl of Flanders, and passed the winter 
at Saint Omer. By the king's command, Morcar was ap- 
pointed earl over the people of Northumbria. 

After these things, king Edward began gradually to sicken, 
and, on the Nativity of our Lord, held his court at London, as 
well as he was able, and with great glory caused the church, 
which he himself had erected from the foundation, in honor 
of Saint Peter the chief of the Apostles, to be dedicated on 
the day of the Holy Innocents. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 1066, king 
Edward the Peaceful, son of king Egelred, that honor to the 
English, departed this life at London, in the fourth year of 
the indiction, on the vigil of the Epiphany of our Lord, being 
the fifth day of the week, after having held the kingly autho- 
rity over the Anglo-Saxons twenty-three years, six months, 
and twenty-seven days ; and, on the following day, he was 
buried with royal honors, and most bitter was the grief of all 
then present, and attended with plenteous tears. 

After his burial, the viceroy Harold, son of earl Godwin, 
whom, before his decease, the king had appointed his succes- 
sor, was elevated to the throne by all the chief men of Eng- 



A.D. 1066. STORY OF KING EDWARD. 131 

land, and was on the same day, with due honor, consecrated 
king by Aldred, the archbishop of York. 

Respecting the miracles which God, who is ever wonderful 
and glorious in his Saints, deigned to work for Saint Edward, 
the king and confessor, during his life, a few words are here an- 
nexed. On a certain day, while the said king lay prostrate in 
prayer before the altar at Westminster, during the celebration 
of the mass, he saw in a vision, as though the king of the 
Danes had prepared a great ship, for the purpose of a hostile 
invasion of England ; but, when he was about to enter from 
a boat into the larger ship, -he slipped down between them 
and sank, immediately on which his ship went to pieces. On 
seeing this miracle, the blessed king Edward smiled, and gave 
exceeding thanks to God. On this, the bishop, who was cele- 
brating the mass, was afraid that the king had seen something 
about him in the celebration thereof to cause his laughter. 
Consequently, after the mass was finished, the bishop, having 
called together earl Harold and others of the king's nobles 
who were then present, anxiously asked the king why he had 
smiled during the celebration of the mass ; on which, the king 
related to him the vision he had seen ; and the day and hour 
being marked, they sent messengers to Denmark, and found 
that it had happened to the king of the Danes just as king 
Edward had predicted. 

Another story relative to the same king. One day, when the 
before-named Edward, king of the English, was on a journey, 
there met him John, the blessed Apostle and Evangelist, under 
the form of a poor man, and begged alms of him. As the king 
had no money at hand to give him, he took his ring from off his 
finger and gave it to him. Now, on the same day, the same 
blessed Evangelist appeared to a certain stranger, as he was 
going forth from the holy city of Jerusalem, and said to him, 
" Whence comest thou, and whither art thou going?" To 
which the stranger made answer," I am from England, and I am 
desirous of returning thither." The Apostle then said to him, 
' ' Dost thou know Edward, the king of England ? " On which he 
made answer, " My lord, I do know him." The Apostle then 
said to him, "Take this ring, and carry it to king Edward, 
and tell him that the Apostle John sends him back this ring, 
which he himself gave to him this day on the road as he 
was walking ; and may the good angel of the Lord accompany 

s 2 



132 ANNALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEIT. A.D. 1066. 

thee, and grant thee a prosperous journey, Amen." On this, 
taking the ring and bidding him farewell, he saw the Apostle 
no more. 

Now, on the same day, under the guidance of the Lord, to 
whom nothing is impossible, this stranger arrived in England, 
and, delivering the ring to the king, told him everything that 
had happened to him on the road, and how, on that day, he 
had returned from Jerusalem. Although this seemed to be 
impossible, still, in consequence of the assertions of sojourners 
who had been with him at Jerusalem, and who, a long 
time after this, returned into England, it was found to be 
the truth. 

On another occasion it befell the same king Edward, that, 
on a certain day, he was taken by the queen and earl 
Harold to his treasury, to see a large sum of money which 
the queen and earl Harold, without the knowledge of the 
king, had collected for his necessities (namely, four pennies 
from every hide of land throughout each province of England, 
in order that the king might, by the day of the Nativity of 
our Lord, purchase clothes for the necessities of the soldiers 
and his servants); having entered the treasury, the queen 
and earl Harold accompanying him, he beheld the devil seated 
upon the money; on which the king said to him, "What 
dost thou do here ? " Whereto the devil made answer, " I am 
here keeping guard over my money." Upon this, the king said 
to him, "I conjure thee by the Father, and the Son, and the 
Holy Ghost, tell me how it is that this money is thine." To 
this the devil made answer, and said, " Because it has been 
unjustly obtained out of the substance of the poor." During 
all this, those who attended him were standing astonished 
at hearing them talk, but seeing no one except the king ; 
who afterwards said to them, "Restore this money to those 
from whom it was taken;" and his commands were imme- 
diately complied with. 

Another story relative to this king. On a certain day of 
state, when Edward, the above-named king of the English, 
had been crowned at London and was clothed in royal vest- 
ments, and was going from his palace towards the monas- 
tery, 23 accompanied by a crowd of nobles, archbishops, bishops, 
clergy, and people, there sat in the way by which the king was 
23 Probably of Westminster. 



A.D. 1066. HABOLD LEVIES AIT ABMY. 133 

about to pass, a certain leprous man, full of running sores. 
Those who went before rebuked him, and, wishing to remove 
him thence, bade him hold his peace; on which, the king 
said to them, " Allow him to sit there." When the king had 
approached him, the leper thus addressed him, " I conjure thee, 
by the living God, to carry me on thy shoulders into the 
church';" upon which the king, bowing down his head, ordered 
the leper to be placed on his shoulders. And it came to pass, 
that, when the king moved on, and prayed to the Lord that 
He would restore the leper to health, his prayers were heard, 
and the leper was made whole from that hour, praising and 
blessing the Lord. 24 

Harold, as soon as he had begun to reign, proceeded to 
abolish all unjust laws and to enact just ones, to become the 
zealous patron of churches and monasteries, to venerate and 
encourage the bishops, abbats, monks, and clergy, to show 
himself pious, humble, and affable to all, and to hold evil-doers 
in detestation. For he gave general orders to the dukes, earls, 
sheriffs, and thanes, to seize all thieves, robbers, and dis- 
turbers of the realm, and himself used every exertion, for the 
defence of the country, both by sea and land. 

In the same year, on the eighth day before the calends of 
May, there appeared a comet, not only in England, but even, 
it is said, throughout the whole world. It made its appearance 
during seven days, and shone with extreme brightness; 
whence the saying ; 

In the year one thousand sixty-six 
A comet all England's gaze did fix. 21 * 

Shortly after this, earl Tosti, returning from Flanders, 
landed in the Isle of Wight, and, having compelled the 
islanders to find him tribute and provisions, took his depar- 
ture and collected plunder near the sea-shore, until he came to 
the port of Sandwich. On hearing this, king Harold, who was 
then staying at London, ordered a considerable fleet, and an 

24 With this king originated the supposed efficacy of the royal touch 
for king's evil ; which was supposed to be possessed by the royal family 
of England till the reign of queen Anne, the last who practised it. 

24 * This translation is about as good as the rhyming verses in the ori- 
ginal : 

Anno milleno, sexageno, quoque seno 
Anglorum metae crinem sensere cometae. 



134 AXXAXS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEX. A.T). 1066. 

army of horse, to be levied, and himself made preparations to 
set out for the port of Sandwich. When this was reported to 
earl Tosti, taking with him some of the mariners who were well 
inclined and some who were ill-wishers to him, he retreated, 
directing his course to Lindesey, where he burned a great 
number of towns, and put many men to death. 

On learning this, Edwin, earl of Mercia, and Morcar, earl 
of Northumbria, flew to their rescue with an army, and 
drove him out of that country. On his departure thence, 
he repaired to Malcolm, king of the Scots, and remained with 
him all the summer. In the meantime, king Harold came 
to the port of Sandwich, and there waited for his fleet, which, 
when it had assembled, came to the Isle of Wight, and, 
as William, duke of the Normans, the cousin of king Ed- 
ward, was making preparations to invade England with 
an army, all the summer and autumn he was awaiting his 
arrival, and, besides, kept a land force in suitable positions 
near the sea-shore. However, on the approach of the nativity 
of Saint Mary, their provisions failing, the fleet and the land 
force returned home. 

After this, Harold Harfager, king of Norway, and brother 
of Saint Olaf, came with a very strong fleet, amounting to 
more than five hundred large ships, and anchored suddenly at 
Tynemouth ; on which earl Tosti met him, as they had 
previously arranged, with his fleet, and, making all speed, 
they entered the mouth of the river Humber, and then, sailing 
against tide up the river Ouse, landed at a place which 
is called Kichale. When this became known to king Harold, 
he speedily moved his troops towards Northumbria ; but, be- 
fore the king could come thither, the two brothers, earls 
Edwin and Morcar, with a large army, had had an engagement 
with the Norwegians on the northern bank of the river Ouse, 
near York, on the vigil of Saint Matthew the Apostle, being 
the fourth day of the week ; and had at the first onset, man- 
fully fighting, slain great numbers. But, after the battle had 
lasted a long time, the English, being unable to sustain the 
attack of the Norwegians, and having lost a great number of 
their men, turned their backs, and far more were drowned in 
the river than slain in the battle. 

The Norwegians having gained the victory, and having 
taken one hundred and fifty hostages from the city of York, 



A.n. 1066. WIIXIAM THE ELDER. 135 

returned to their ships, having left there a hundred and fifty 
of their own men as hostages. But, on the fifth day after this, 
that is to say, on the seventh day before the calends of Octo- 
ber, being the second day of the week, Harold, king of the 
English, attended by many thousands of soldiers fully armed, 
arrived at York ; and, meeting the Norwegians at a place called 
Stamford Bridge, slew king Harold Harfager and earl Tosti 
with the edge of the sword, together with the greater part of 
their army, and, although it was most keenly contested, gained 
a complete victory : but to his son Olaf, and to Paul, earl of 
the Isle of Orkney, who had" been sent with part of the army 
to guard the ships, he gave liberty to return to their country 
with twenty ships and the remnant of their army, having 
first received from them hostages and oaths for their future 
good behaviour. 



WILLIAM THE ELDER. 

In the meantime, while these things were going on, and the 
king supposed that all his enemies were crushed, word was 
brought to him that William, duke of Normandy, had arrived 
with an innumerable multitude of-faorsemen, slingers, archers, 
and foolpaixd that he had levied strong bodies of auxiliaries 
from the whole of England, having landed at a place which 
is called Penvesca. 25 Upon this, the king with the greatest 
haste moved his army towards London ; and although he was 
well aware that in the two battles above-mentioned the 
bravest men of the whole of England had fallen, and that the 
centre of his army had not yet come up, he did not hesitate to 
meet the enemy with all possible speed in Sussex; and, at the 
distance of nine miles from Hastings, where he had pitched his 
camp, on the eleventh day before the calends of November, 
being Saturday, and the day of Saint Calixtus the pope and 
Martyr, he engaged with them, before the third part of his 
army was drawn up ; but, as the English had been drawn 
up in a confined spot, many withdrew from his ranks, and 
but very few remained with him with undaunted hearts. 

Still, from the third hour of the day 26 until nightfall, he 
made a most determined resistance against the foe, and 
15 Pevensey. * Nine in the morning. 



136 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1066. 

defended himself so bravely, and with such consummate 
valour, that the enemy could hardly get the better of him. 
But, alas ! after very great numbers had fallen on both sides, 
at twilight he himself fell ; the earls Girth and Leofwine, 
his brothers, also fell, and most of the nobles of England ; on 
which duke William with his men returned with all speed to 
Hastings. The length of Harold's reign was nine months 
and as many days. 

But in order that the origin may be known of the grounds 
on which William invaded England, the circumstances which 
had transpired a short time before this period shall be briefly 
related. 

When the disagreement arose between king Edward and 
earl Godwin, as previously mentioned, the earl was driven 
into exile with his family from England. Afterwards, on 
his endeavouring to effect a reconciliation with the king, in 
order that he might be allowed to return to his own country, 
the king would by no means consent thereto, unless he first 
received hostages as a guarantee of his own security. In 
consequence of this, Wulnoth, son of Godwin himself, and 
Hacun, son of his son Sweyn, were given as hostages, and 
sent to Normandy in charge of duke William the Bastard, 
the son of Robert, son of Richard, his 27 mother's brother. 
Sometime after this, when earl Godwin was dead, his son, 
Harold, asked leave of the king to go to Normandy, and obtain 
the liberty of his brother and nephew, who were kept there 
as hostages, and to bring them back with him to their own 
country ; on which the king made answer: "By me this shall 
not be done ; but that I may not appear to wish to prevent 
you, I permit you to go wherever you like, and to try what you 
can effect : still I have a presentiment that your efforts will 
end in nothing but injury to the whole kingdom of England 
and disgrace to yourself; for I know that the duke is not so 
devoid of intelligence as to be willing on any account to en- 
trust them to you, if he does not foresee some great profit 
to accrue therefrom to himself." 

However, Harold embarked on board of a ship, which, vith 

all on board of it, being driven by a violent tempest into u 

river of Ponthieu, which is called the Maia, according to thf> 

custom of the place he was claimed as a captive by the lord 

37 King Edward the Confessor. 



A.D. 1066. HAROLD ASSENTS TO WTLLIAM's WISHES. 137 

of that district. Harold, on being thrown into prison, 
having, however, bribed one of the common people with the 
promise of a reward, secretly gave him directions to inform the 
duke of Normandy of what had befallen him. On hearing this, 
William immediately sent messengers in all haste, and told the 
lord of Ponthieu that Harold and his people must be sent to him 
immediately, free from all harm, if he wished to enjoy his 
future friendship in the same degree as hitherto ; he, how- 
ever, being unwilling to send him, once more received a 
command from William that he must send Harold, otherwise 
he would find most assuredly, that "William, duke of Nor- 
mandy, would instantly come armed to Ponthieu for the pur- 
pose of taking him away with all his property, even to the 
utmost farthing. 

Alarmed by these threats, he sent Harold with his com- 
panions, on which he was most honorably received by duke 
William, who, on hearing why he had left his country, made 
answer that he would be successful if it rested with him. 28 He, 
therefore, kept Harold with him for some days, and showed 
himself very kind and courteous towards him, in order that by 
such conduct he might gain his feelings in support of his own 
objects. At length he disclosed to him what his designs were, 
and stated that king Edward once, when in his youthful days, 
he was staying in Normandy, with himself then a youth, pro- 
mised him upon his oath, that if he should become king of Eng- 
land, he would grant to him, in succession to himself, the here- 
ditary right to the kingdom; and, in addition to this, he 
said : "And if you will engage to aid me in this matter, and to 
procure for me the castle of Dover, with the well of water there, 
and will give your sister in marriage to one of my nobles, and 
promise to send her to me at the time that shall be agreed on by 
us, and also, to accept my daughter in marriage, then you 
shall both receive your nephew safe and sound immediately, 
and, your brother, when I come to reign in England ; and if, 
by your aid, I am firmly established in that kingdom, I pro- 
mise that every thing that in reason you shall ask of me, you 
shall obtain." 

Harold was sensible of danger either way, and did not 
see how he was to escape if he did not acquiesce in the 
wishes of William in every respect : he, therefore, gave his as- 

28 " Si in ipso non remaneret," hardly seems to be a correct reading 
here. 



138 ANNALS OF BOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1066. 

sent. But in addition to this, William, in order that everything 
might be definitively settled, having brought some relics of 
saints, led Harold to attest, by taking an oath upon them, that 
he would in deed fulfil everything that had been agreed upon 
between them. 

These matters being concluded, Harold received his nephew 
and returned to his country ; but when, in answer to the 
king's enquiries, he informed him of what had happened and 
what he had done, he answered, " Did I not tell you that I 
knew duke William well, and that, in consequence of your 
journey, great evils might result to this kingdom ? I foresee 
that, by this conduct of yours, great misfortunes will befall our 
country ; and I only pray that Divine Providence will grant 
that they come not in my day." 

Shortly after, king Edward departed this life, and, as he 
hj,d_app^in^d_^reviously_to_his death^ Harold_8uecfieded^^m 
inliheKingdqm,, "^nTHsT^ukfe-William "sent him word, that 
although^ violating his oath, he had not observed his promise 
in other respects, still, if he would marry his daughter he 
would put up with what he had done, but, if not, he would 
without doubt assert his right to the promised succession to the 
kingdom by force of arms. 

But Harold would neither say that he was ready to comply 
with the one alternative, nor that he feared the other ; at 
which, William being indignant, was inspired with great hopes 
of conquering England by reason of this unjust conduct of 
Harold. Having, therefore, prepared a considerable fleet, he 
sailed for England, and a severe engagement taking place, 
Harold was slain in battle, and William being victorious, ob- 
tained the kingdom. 

Some of the Franks still give an account of 29 the circum- 
stances of this battle who were there present. But although 
there were various chances of success on the one side and the 
other, still, there was such great slaughter and disorder 
caused by the Normans, that the victory which they gained 
must without doubt be ascribed to the judgment of God, who 
by punishing the crime of perjury shows that he is a God who 
abhors unrighteousness. 

On hearing of the death of king Harold, the earls Edwin 

29 " Adlmc" can hardly mean " at the present day," in allusion to oral 
testimony ; as our author lived nearly a hundred years after the time of 
William the Conqueror. 



A D 1067. WILLIAM KETTTKNS TO NOBMANDY. 139 

and Morcar, who with their men had withdrawn from the 
hattle, came to London, and taking their sister, queen Ald- 
githa, sent her to the city of Chester. Aldred, archbishop of 
York, and these earls, together with the citizens of London, and 
the mariners, were desirous to make the Clito Edgar, grandson of 
king Edmund Ironside, king, and promised that they would 
fight for him. But while many were making preparations to 
go forth to battle, the earls withdrew their aid from them, and 
returned home with their forces. 

In the meanwhile duke William laid waste the provinces of 
Sussex, Kent, Southampton, Surrey, Middlesex, and Hereford ; 
and did not cease burning towns and slaying men, till he 
came to the city which is called Beorcharn. 30 Here Aldred, 
the archbishop, Wulstan, bishop of Worcester, Walter, bishop 
of Hereford, the Clito Edgar, earls Edwin and Morcar, and 
five of the nobles of London, with many others came to 
him, and, giving hostages, made submission, and took the 
oaths of fealty to him. He also made a treaty with them, but, 
in spite of it, allowed his army to burn the towns, and plun- 
der them. 

On the approach of the festival of the Nativity of our Lord, 
be marched with all his army to London, that he might be 
crowned there ; and because Stigand, the primate of the whole 
of England, was charged with not having canonically received 
the pall, on the day of the Nativity, which in that year fell 
on the second day of the week, he was consecrated with due 
honor at Westminster, by Aldred, the archbishop of York ; but 
first, as the same archbishop requested him to do, before the 
altar of Saint Peter the Apostle, in the presence of the clergy 
and the people, he promised on oath, that he would be ready to 
defend the holy churches of God and their rulers, and that 
he would justly and with royal foresight rule over all the 
people subject to him, enact and observe just laws, and utterly 
discountenance rapine and unjust judgments. 

In the year 1067, on the approach of Lent, king William 
returned to Normandy, taking with him Stigand, archbishop 
of Canterbury, Agehioth, abbat of Glastonbury, the Clito 
Edgar, the earls Edwin and Morcar, Walter, a noble earl, son 
of earl Siward, Agelnoth, a native of Canterbury, and many 

30 Berkhampstead. 



140 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1068. 

others of the chief men of England, also his brother Odo, 
bishop of Bayeux, and William FitzOsbern, whom he had 
made earl of the province of Hereford ; and leaving garrisons 
in England, he ordered the fortresses throughout the country 
to be strengthened. 

In this year, "Wulsy, bishop of Dorchester, departed this 
life at "Winchester, but was buried at Dorchester. 

At this period, there was a certain very powerful thane, Edric 
surnamed "the Woodsman," 31 son of Alfric, the brother of Edric 
Streona, whose lands, because he disdained to surrender to the 
king, the men of the castle at Hereford, and Kichard the son 
of Scrob, frequently laid waste ; but as often as they attacked 
him, they lost many of their knights and esquires. There- 
fore, having called to his aid the kings of the Welch, namely 
Bleothgent and Biward, about the time of the Assumption of 
Saint Mary, the said Edric laid waste the province of Here- 
ford, as far as the bridge over the river Lug, 32 and carried off a 
great quantity of plunder. 

Afterwards, on the approach of winter, king William re- 
turned to England from Normandy, and imposed on the English 
an intolerable tribute, and then, going into Devonshire, hos- 
tilely attacked the city of Exeter, which the citizens and some 
English thanes held against him ; on which he laid siege to 
it, and speedily took it by storm. However, the countess 
Githa, the mother of Harold king of England, and sister of 
Sweyn king of Denmark, flying with many others from the 
city made her escape and went to Flanders ; but the citizens 
with assurances of friendship submitted to the king. 

In the year 1068, there were two popes at Kome, namely, 
the bishop of Parma, who was expelled, and the bishop of 
Lucca, who continued to be pope. 

After Easter, the countess Matilda came from Normandy to 
England, and on the day of Pentecost, Aldred, archbishop of 
York, consecrated her queen. After this, Marleswein and 
Cospatric, and the other nobles of Northumbria, in order to 
avoid the king's severity, and fearing lest like some others 
they might be placed in confinement, taking with them the 
Clito Edgar, his mother Agatha, and his two sisters Margaret 
and Christiana, went by ship to Scotland ; and, with the per- 

31 " Silvaticus :" probably corresponding to our surname " Atwood." 
He is more generally called Edric the Outlaw. 

32 The Avon. 



A 0.1069. UOKMANS SLAIIf AT DTOHAM. 141 

mission of king Malcolm, passed the winter there. On this, 
king William came with his army to Nottingham, and having 
strengthened the castle, proceeded to York, and fortifying the 
two castles there, placed in them five hundred soldiers, giving 
orders for the castles to be strengthened in the city of Lincoln 
and other places. 

While these things were going on, the sons of king Harold, 
Godwin and Edmund the Great, returning from Ireland landed 
in Somersetshire; where being met by Eadnoth, who had been 
master of the stables 33 to king Harold, with some troops, a battle 
was fought, in which he, with many others, was slain. Having 
gained the day, they collected considerable spoil in Devonshire 
and Cornwall, and then returned to Ireland. 

In the year 1069, being the third year of his reign, king 
William sent earl Robert Cummin against the Northumbrians 
of the country north of the Tyne ; for they had all united 
in one determination, not to submit to the rule of a foreigner, 
and had resolved either to slay him, or else, all of them, to 
fall by the edge of the sword. On his approach, Egelwin, 
bishop of Durham, met him, and warned him to be on his 
guard against treachery ; but he, thinking that no one dared 
this, despised the warning, and, entering Durham with a 
large body of soldiers, allowed his men to act with hostility 
in all quarters, even to slaying some peasants belonging 
to the church ; still, he was received by the bishop with all 
kindness and honor. But the Northumbrians hastening on- 
ward all night, at daybreak broke through the gates with 
the greatest violence, and slew the followers of the earl in 
every direction, they being quite unprepared for the attack. 
The contest was waged most fiercely, the soldiers being struck 
down in the houses and streets, and the combatants attacked 
the house of the bishop in which the earl was entertained ; 
but finding that they could not endure the darts of those who 
defended it, they burned the house together with those who 
were therein. So great was the multitude of the slain, that 
nearly every spot in the city was filled with blood, and out of 
seven hundred men only one escaped. This slaughter took 
place on the fifth day before the calends of February, being 
the fourth day of the week. 

33 " Stallarius." There is some doubt as to the correct meaning of 
this word 



142 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1069. 

In this year, shortly before the nativity of Saint Mary, the 
sons of Sweyn, king of Denmark, Harold, Canute, and their 
uncle earl Osborn, came from Denmark with two hundred and 
forty ships, and landed at the mouth of the river Humber. 
Here they were met by the Clito Edgar, earls Aide and Marle- 
swein, and many others, with a fleet which they had assembled; 
earl Cospatric also came with all the forces of the Northum- 
brians, and with one accord they determined to oppose the 
Normans. Being greatly distressed at their approach, Aldred, 
archbishop of York, was attacked with a severe illness and 
ended his life, as he had requested of God, in the tenth year 
of his archiepiscopate, on the third day before the ides of 
September, being the sixth day of the week ; he was buried 
in the church of Saint Peter, on the eighth day after, being 
Saturday, the thirteenth day before the calends of October. 

The Normans, who garrisoned the castles, fearing lest the 
houses which were in their vicinity, might be used by the 
Danes for the purpose of filling up the fosse, began to set 
them on fire ; and the flames, increasing, raged throughout all 
the city, and together with it, burned the monastery of Saint 
Peter. But the Divine vengeance most speedily exacted a 
heavy retribution at their hands ; for, before the whole city 
was destroyed, a Danish fleet came on the second day of the 
week to the aid of the besiegers, and the Danes making an 
attack upon the castles on the one side, and the Northumbrians 
on the other, stormed them on the same day ; more than three 
thousand of the Normans being slain, the Danes sparing the 
lives of William de Malet, who was then sheriff of the pro- 
vince, with his wife and two children, and of Gilbert de Ghent 
with a few others, repaired to their ships with their innumer- 
able forces, and the Northumbrians returned home. 

When king William was informed of this, being greatly 
enraged, he swore that he would pierce the whole of the 
Northumbrians with a single spear, and shortly afterwards, 
having assembled an army hastened with feelings of ex- 
treme irritation to Northumbria, and did not cease throughout 
the whole winter to ravage it, slay the inhabitants, and com- 
mit many other acts of devastation. 

In the meantime, sending a message to Osborn, the 
Danish earl, he promised that he would privately present him 



A.D. 1069. FLIGHT OF THE BISHOP OF DURHAM. 143 

with no small sum of money, and give his army free licence to 
seize provisions in the neighbourhood of the sea-shore, upon 
condition that, after the close of winter, they should depart, 
without any further hostilities. To these propositions Osborn, 
being greedy for gold and silver, to his great disgrace, as- 
sented. While the Normans, in the preceding year, were 
laying waste England, throughout Northumbria and some other 
provinces, but in the present and succeeding year, throughout 
almost the whole of England, but especially Northumbria and the 
provinces adjoining to it, a famine prevailed to such a degree, 
that, compelled by hunger, men ate human flesh, and that of 
horses, dogs, and cats, and whatever was repulsive to notions 
of civilization ; some persons went so far as to sell themselves 
into perpetual slavery, provided only they could in some way 
or other support a miserable existence ; some departing from 
their native country into exile, breathed forth their exhausted 
spirits in the midst of the journey. 

It was dreadful to behold human corpses rotting in the 
houses, streets, and high roads, and as they reeked with putre- 
faction, swarming with worms, and sending forth a horrid 
stenoh ; for all the people having been cut off, either with the 
sword or famine, or else having through hunger left their 
native country, there were not sufficient left to inter them. 
Thus, during a period of nine years, did the land, deprived of 
its cultivators, extend far and wide a mere dreary waste. Be- 
tween York and Durham there was not one inhabited town ; 
the dens of wild beasts and robbers, to the great terror of the 
traveller, were alone to be seen. 

While the king was doing these things in the neighbour- 
hood of York, Egelwin, bishop of Durham, and the chiefs of the 
people, being fearful that, on account of the death of the earl 35 
at Durham and the slaughter of the Normans at York, the 
sword of the king would involve both innocent and guilty in a 
like destruction, unanimously disinterred the holy and incor- 
ruptible body of the blessed father Cuthbert and took to flight, 
on the third day before the ides of December, being the sixth 
day of the week. They first rested at Girwine, 36 next at 
Bethlingtun, 37 the third time at Tughale, 38 and the fourth at 

35 Robert Cummin. 36 Jarrow, in Durham. 

57 Bedlington, in Northumberland. ** Tughall, in Northumberland. 



144 A2TN-ALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDKtf. A.D. 1069. 

Ealande. Here, towards nightfall, their further progress was 
impeded by the sea being at high water, when lo ! suddenly 
withdrawing, it left them free access, so that when they has- 
tened on, the waves of the ocean followed in the rear, at a 
similar pace, and when they sometimes moved more slowly, 
the waves did not overtake them by speeding on at a faster 
pace, but, as soon as they had touched the shore, behold ! the 
sea flowed back again and covered all the sands as before. 

In the meantime, the king's army, dispersing in all direc- 
tions, between the rivers Tees and Tyne, found nothing but 
deserted houses, and a dreary solitude on every side ; the in- 
habitants having either sought safety in flight, or concealed 
themselves in the woods and among the precipices of the 
hills. At this period also, the church of Saint Paul the 
Apostle, at Girwine, was destroyed by fire. The church of 
Durham was deprived of all its guardians and all ecclesiastical 
care, and had become like a desert, as the Scripture says, a 
refuge for the poor, the sick, and the feeble. Those who 
were unable to take to flight, turning aside thither, sank there 
under the influence of famine and disease. The resemblance 
of the cross, which was the only one of the church ornaments 
remaining there, (as on account of its large size it could not be 
easily removed by them in their haste) was robbed of its gold 
and silver, which were torn off by the Normans. 

On this, the king, who was not far off, hearing of the de- 
serted state of the church, and the spoliation of the crucifix, 
was very indignant, and gave orders for those to be sought for 
who had been guilty of it. Shortly after, he happened to meet 
these very persons, and on seeing them turn out of the pub- 
lic road, immediately felt convinced that these men were 
conscious of having committed some misdeed ; whereon, being 
seized, they immediately made discovery of the gold and silver 
which they had taken from off the crucifix. On this, he imme- 
diately sent them for judgment to the bishop and those who 
were with him, who were now returning from their flight ; 
but they, acquitting them of the charge, let them escape 
with impunity. For, upon the approach of spring, the king 
having returned to the country south of the Humber, bishop 
Egelwin, after having, with all his people, passed three months 
and some days at Ealande, returned to the church of Durham, 
with the treasure of the holy body of Saint Cuthbert. 



A.D. 1070. RAVAGES OF MALCOLM. 145 

In the year 1070, at the season of Lent, by the advice of 
William, earl of Hereford, and some others, king William or- 
dered his followers to search the monasteries throughout the 
whole of England ; and the money which, on account of his 
severity and extortion, the wealthier English had deposited 
there, he ordered to be taken from them. 

Bishop Egelwin, having returned from flight, as already 
mentioned, now meditated in his mind a perpetual exile. 
For, seeing the affairs of the English in a state of confusion on 
every side, and fearing that the sway of a foreign nation, to 
whose language and manners he was a stranger, would press 
with severity upon himself, he determined to resign his bishop- 
ric, and to provide for himself, as he best might, in a foreign 
land. Having, therefore, provided a ship, and put all neces- 
saries on board, he was waiting for a fair wind in the harbour 
of Wearmouth. 

At the same time there were some other ships there ; on 
board of which were the Clito Edgar with his mother Agatha, 
and his two sisters, Margaret and Christiana, Siward Barn, 
Marleswein, and Elfwin, son of Norman, and many besides; 
who, after the attack on the castles at York, on the return 
home of the Danes, dreading the vengeance of the king for 
having aided them, were preparing to fly to Scotland and 
waiting for a fair passage thither. 

At this period, a countless multitude of Scots, under the 
command of king Malcolm, passing through Cumberland, and 
making their way towards the east, fiercely laid waste the 
whole of Teesdale 39 and its neighbourhood, far and wide. 
Having come to a place which, in the English language, is 
called Hundredesfelde, and in the Latin " Centum Fontes " 
(the hundred springs}, and having slain there some of the En- 
glish nobles, the king, retaining with him part of his army, 
sent home the other part, with an infinite amount of spoil, by 
the road by which they had come. In doing this, his crafty 
design was, that the wretched inhabitants who, in their fear of 
the enemy, had for safety concealed themselves and their pro- 
perty in whatever hiding-places they could find, might sup- 
pose that the whole of the enemy's forces had departed, and 
that he might suddenly come upon them after they had, 
with a feeling of security, returned to their towns and homes ; 

29 The vicinity of the river Tees. 
VOL. I. L 



146 ANNALS OP ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1070. 

which, accordingly, happened to be the case. For, having laid 
waste part of Cleveland, he suddenly ravaged Heorternisse, 
and thence making a fierce incursion upon the lands of Saint 
Cuthbert, 40 deprived all of the whole of their property, and 
some even of their lives. 

In addition to this, he consumed the church of Saint Peter 
the Apostle, at Wearmouth, with flames which were kindled by 
his men in his own presence ; other churches also he burned 
to the ground, together with those who had taken refuge in 
them. While riding near the banks of the river, and from 
an elevated spot looking down upon the cruelties inflicted by 
his men upon the wretched English, and satiating his mind 
and his eyes with this sight of horror, word was brought to 
him that the Clito Edgar and his sisters, comely young women 
of royal blood, with many others, very wealthy fugitives from 
their country, had taken refuge in that harbour. On this, 
after interchanging courtesies with them, he kindly addressed 
them when they came, and gave to them and all their atten- 
dants, with the strongest assurances of peace, an asylum in 
his dominions for as long a period as they should think fit. 
Amid these depredations inflicted by the Scots, earl Cospatric, 
who, as already mentioned, had purchased the earldom of 
Northumbria of king William for a sum of money, having 
obtained the aid of some active allies, ravaged Cumberland 
with dreadful havoc ; and then, having laid waste the country 
with fire and sword, returned with a large quantity of 
spoil, and shut himself and his followers within the strong 
fortifications of Bebbanburgh ; 41 whence frequently sallying 
forth, he greatly weakened the enemy's strength. At this 
period Cumberland was subject to king Malcolm; not by right- 
ful possession, but in consequence of having been subjugated 
by force. 

Malcolm, on hearing what Cospatric had done (while he 
was still looking at the church of Saint Peter burning amid 
the flames kindled by his own men), could hardly contain him- 
self for anger, and commanded his men no longer to spare 
any individual of the English nation, but either to strike them 
to the earth and slay them, or, making them prisoners, carry 
them off, doomed to the yoke of perpetual slavery. The 
troops having received this sanction, it was dreadful even to 
40 In the north of Northumberland. 41 Bamborough. 



A.D. 1070. MALCOLM MARRIES MARGARET. 147 

witness the cruelties they were guilty of towards the English. 
Some aged men and women were decapitated with the sword ; 
others, like swine intended for food, were pierced through and 
through with lances ; infants were torn from the breasts of 
their mothers, thrown aloft into the air. and on falling, re- 
ceived upon the points of lances, sharp weapons being thickly 
planted in the ground. 

The Scots, more savage than wild beasts, took delight in these 
cruelties, as though a spectacle of games; and thus did the 
age of innocence, destined to attain heaven, breathe its last, 
suspended between heaven -and earth. But the young men 
and young women, and whoever besides seemed adapted for 
toil and labour, were driven away in fetters in front of the 
enemy, to endure a perpetual exile in captivity as servants 
and handmaids. Some of these, while running before those who 
drove them on, became fatigued to a degree beyond what their 
strength could endure, and, as they sank to the ground on the 
spot, the same was the place of their fall and of their death. 
While beholding these scenes, Malcolm was moved to compas- 
sion by no tears, no groans of the wretched creatures ; but, 
on the contrary, gave orders that they should be perseveringly 
driven onward in their course. 

In consequence of this. Scotland became filled with men- 
servants and maid-servants of English parentage ; so much so, 
that even at the present day not only not even the smallest 
village, but not even the humblest house is to be found with- 
out them. 

After the return of Malcolm to Scotland, bishop Egelwin 
having set sail with the view of proceeding to Cologne, a con- 
trary wind arose and drove him back upon the coast of Scotland, 
which also, after a speedy passage, brought thither the Clito 
Edgar with his above-named companions. On this, king Mal- 
colm, with the full consent of his relations, married Mar- 
garet, the sister of Edgar, a woman ennobled by her royal 
birth, but much more ennobled by her wisdom and piety, 
through whose zeal and untiling efforts the king himself, 
laying aside his barbarian manners, became more virtuous and 
more civilized. By her he had six sons Edward, Edmund, 
king Edgar, Ethelred, king Alexander, king David, and two 
daughters, Matilda, queen of the English, and Mary, who 
became the wife of Eustace, earl of Boulogne. 

L 2 



148 ANXALS OF KOGEB. DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1070. 

In the same year, a great synod was held at Winchester, on 
the octave of Easter, by command of king William, who was 
there present; it was also sanctioned by our lord Alex- 
ander, the pope, who gave the authority of the Apostolic See 
thereto, through his legates, Hcrmenfred, bishop of Sion, and 
the cardinal priests, John and Peter. At this synod Sti- 
gand, archbishop of Canterbury, was deprived of his arch- 
bishopric on three grounds, namely ; because he had wrong- 
fully held the bishopric of Winchester together with the 
archbishopric ; because, in the lifetime of archbishop Robert, 
he had not only held the archbishopric, but even for some 
time, at the celebration of the mass, had made use of his pall 
which remained at Canterbury, when he himself had been 
violently and unjustly expelled from England ; and because he 
had received the pall from Benedict, who had been excom- 
municated by the holy Church of Home, for having gained 
the papacy by means of bribery. His brother Agelmar, the 
bishop of East Anglia, 42 was also deprived there, as were also 
some abbats ; all which was done by the agency of the king, 
in order that as many of the English as possible might be 
deprived of their honors ; in whose place he might appoint 
persons of his own nation, for the purpose of strengthening 
his possession of the kingdom which he had recently acquired. 

For this reason, also, he deprived of their honors certain 
bishops and abbats, whom, as no evident reason existed, neither 
synods nor secular laws condemned ; and, placing them in con- 
finement, kept them there to the end of their lives, being 
merely influenced, as already mentioned, by suspicion on ac- 
count of the kingdom he had newly acquired. 

At this synod, also, while the rest, being sensible of the 
king's feelings, were afraid lest they should be deprived of 
their dignities, the venerable man, Wulstan, bishop of Wor- 
cester, resolutely demanded restoration of a considerable quan- 
tity of property belonging to his see which had been retained 
in his possession by archbishop Aldred, when he was removed 
from the see of Worcester to that of York, and which, after 
his death, had come into the king's hands ; and both asked 
for justice to be done by those who presided over the synod, 
and demanded it of the king. But the church of York, as it 
then had no pastor to speak for it, was dumb ; judgment was 
42 Bishop of Helmhatn, in Norfolk. 



A.D. 1070. LANFKANC MADE ARCHBISHOP. 149 

therefore given that the claim should remain in its present 
state until an archbishop was appointed, who might defend his 
church, and there would be a person to make answer to his 
charge ; so that, after the charges and answers had been con- 
sidered, judgment might be given with more fairness and cer- 
tainty. Accordingly, on the present occasion, the claim stood 
over for a time. 

On the day of Pentecost, in this year, the king, being then 
at Windsor, gave the archbishopric of the church of York to 
Thomas, a venerable canon .of Bayeux, and the bishopric of 
Winchester to Valceline, his own chaplain : and, by his com- 
mand, on the following day, Armenfred, the above-named 
bishop of Sion, held a synod, John and Peter, the cardinals 
before-mentioned, having returned to Rome. 

At this synod Agelric, bishop of the South Saxons, 43 was 
degraded in an uncanonical manner ; and shortly after, for no 
fault on his part, the king placed him in confinement at 
Mearlesberge. 44 A considerable number of abbats were also 
deposed ; after whose deposition, the king gave to his chaplains 
Arfract, the bishopric of East Anglia, 45 and to Stigand, that 
of the South Saxons ; to some of the Norman monks he also 
gave abbeys ; and, as the archbishop of Canterbury had been 
deposed, and the archbishop of York had recently died, by the 
king's command Valceline was ordained on the eighth day 
after Pentecost by the same Armenfred, bishop of Sion, the 
legate of the Apostolic See. 

On the approach of the feast of Saint John the Baptist, earl 
Osborn departed for Denmark with the fleet that had lain 
in the river Humber during the winter, but his brother, 
Sweyn, outlawed him on account of the money, which, con- 
trary to the wishes of the Danes, he had received from king 
William. At this period the most valiant man, Edric, sur- 
named the Woodsman, 46 was reconciled to king William. 
After this, the king summoned from Normandy Lanfranc, the 
abbat of Caen, a Lombard by birth, a man of the greatest 
learning in every respect, well skilled in all the liberal arts 
and in the knowledge of both divine and secular literature, 
and most prudent in counsel and in the management of tem- 
poral matters, and, on the day of the Assumption of Saint 

4:1 Bishop of Selsey. 4 * Marlborough. 

** Of Helmham. ' * Silvaticus 



150 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDES. A.D. 1071. 

Mary, appointed him archbishop of Canterbury, and, at the 
feast of Saint John the Baptist, being the Lord's Day, had him 
consecrated at Canterbury. His consecration was performed 
by Giso, bishop of Wells, and Walter, bishop of Hereford, who 
had both been ordained at Rome by pope Nicolas, at the time 
when Aldred, archbishop of York, received his pall. For 
these bishops had avoided receiving ordination from Stigand, 
who then held the see of Canterbury, as they knew that he had 
received the pall in an uncanonical manner. Herman, bishop 
of Salisbury, with some others, was also present at his con- 
secration, shortly after which, Lanfranc consecrated Thomas, 
archbishop of York. 

These matters completed, the claim of the venerable Wul- 
stan, bishop of Worcester, was again considered, Thomas 
having been now consecrated archbishop, to speak for the 
church of York ; and, a synod being held at a place which 
is called Pedreda, 47 before the king and Lanfranc, archbishop 
of Canterbury, and the bishops, abbats, earls, and principal 
men of England, by the aid of the grace of God, the matter 
was there concluded, although Thomas, the archbishop of York, 
and his supporters, used every possible device, though far 
from being based upon the truth, to lower the church of Wor- 
cester, and to subject her to the church of York, and strove in 
every way to make her a dependant thereof. However, by the 
just judgment of God, and the most positive evidence of writings 
much defaced and almost worn to pieces, Wulstan, the man 
of God, not only regained the possessions that he had claimed 
and demanded, but, also, by the gift of God and the con- 
cession of the king, obtained that extent of liberty which had 
been bestowed upon her by the first founders king Ethelred 
and Saint Hosher, earl of the Wiccii, and by Cenred, Ethel- 
bald, Offa, Saint Kenulph the father of Kenelm the Martyr, 
and their successors after them, and those who reigned over 
the whole kingdom of England, namely, Edward the Elder, 
Ethelstan, Edmund, Edred, Edgar father of king Edward the 
Martyr, and those who had succeeded them. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord, 1071, Lan- 
franc and Thomas went to Rome, and received the pall from 
pope Alexander. The earls Edwin and Morcar, finding that 
king William wished to place them in confinement, secretly fled 
47 Petherton, in Somersetshire. 



A.D. 1072. WILLIAM SETS OTTT FOB SCOTLAJTD. 151 

from his court, and for some time remained in open rebellion 
against him. However, on finding that their attempts were 
not crowned with success, Edwin determined to go to Malcolm, 
king of the Scots, but, being treacherously attacked on the road 
by his own people, was slain. Morcar and Hereward, however, 
a man of the greatest bravery, with many others, repaired by ship 
to tho Isle of Ely, intending to winter there ; whither Egelwin, 
bishop of Durham, and Siward, surnamed Barn, returning by 
sea from Scotland, also came. But, when the king heard of this, 
with the help of his sailors, he cut them off from all exit on the 
eastern side of the island, and, on the western side* ordered 
a bridge to be constructed two miles in length. On seeing 
that they were thus enclosed, they ceased making resistance, 
and all, with the exception of Hereward and a few who 
made their escape through the fens, surrendered to the king : 
who shortly afterwards placed bishop Egelwin in confinement 
at Abingdon, where the same winter he ended his life : but as to 
Earl Morcar and the rest, he distributed a part of them in vari- 
ous places of confinement throughout England, and having first 
deprived them of their hands or their eyes, let go the rest. The 
king then appointed Walcher, a member of the church of Liege, 
to the bishopric of Durham, and he was accordingly consecrated 
at Winchester. He had come to this country on the king's 
invitation, being a person of illustrious family, graceful man- 
ners, and endowed with the recommendations of divine and 
secular knowledge. Eilaf, one of the king's household ser- 
vants, very high in office, together with other men of rank, 
escorted him to York, where earl Cospatric met him by the 
king's command, and escorted the bishop as far as Durham ; he 
arrived at the church of his see at the period of Mid-Lent. 

In the year 1072, after the Assumption of Saint Mary, 
king William, having in his train Edric, surnamed the Woods- 
man, 48 set out for Scotland with a fleet and an army of horse, for 
the purpose of subjugating it ; for Malcolm, king of the Scots, 
had greatly offended him in having, as already mentioned, so 
dreadfully ravaged his territories the year before. But when 
the king of the English had entered Scotland, king Malcolm 
met him at a place which is called Abernithie, and did homage 
to him. 48 On his return thence, king William deprived earl 
Cospatric of his dignity, making it a charge against him that 
48 He is also called in history the Outlaw, and the Forester. 



152 AXXALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1072. 

he had counselled and aided those who had slain the earl 49 at 
Durham, and had taken part with the enemy when the 
Normans were slain at York. After his deprivation, Wai- 
theof was raised to the earldom, to which he was entitled both 
on his father's and his mother's side, being the son of earl Siward, 
by Elfrida, the daughter of Ealdred, who was formerly earl. 

At this period, that is to say, when the king was returning 
from Scotland, he built a castle at Durham, where the bishop 
and his people might enjoy security from the incursions of the 
enemy ; and, as some of the Normans disbelieved that the 
blessed Cuthbert either was a Saint, or that his body was kept 
there, at the feast of All Saints, while the bishop was cele- 
brating the mass, the king ordered his two chaplains to enter 
the sanctuary, and to open the tomb and examine, both by 
seeing and touching, whether the holy body was deposited there. 
For the king had previously declared that, if it was not there, 
all the elders should be put to death. Upon this, all being in 
great consternation, the chaplains were just about to perform his 
commands. Now at this period, the cold weather was very 
severe ; but, in the meantime, the king began to feel overpowered 
by an intolerable heat, and to perspire most copiously, and to be 
attacked with an excessive trembling; so, at once sending to his 
chaplains, he ordered them not to presume to touch the tomb. 

Immediately after this he mounted his horse, and ceased 
not to ride at its utmost speed till he reached the river Tees. 
From that time forward he held this Saint in the highest esteem, 
and confirmed the more favored laws and customs of that church, 
which it had received in time past, for perpetual observance, 
and in addition thereto, gave and granted, and by charter 
confirmed to God and Saint Cuthbert, and the prior and 
monks there serving God, for a pure and perpetual alms- 
giving, his royal manor consisting of the vill of Heming- 
burgh, with all the lands, of Brakenholm, with all the lands 
thereto adjoining, together with the church of the vill afore- 
said, and all things thereto pertaining in wood and plain, in 
moor and meadow, in forest and marsh, together with the 
water-mills and ponds, with mere 50 and mere, 51 and sac, 52 and 

49 Robert Cummin. 

50 The right of holding markets. 51 Probably right of piscary. 
52 The lord's right of trying litigated causes among his vassals, and 

levying fines. 



1 



A.D. 1074. HILDEBRAND ELECTED POPE. 153 

soke, 53 and tol, 5t and them, 45 and infangtheof, 56 and all the right 
boundaries thereof, together with all their rights and customs, 
as full}*, quietly, and freely, as ever Saint Cuthbert fully and 
quietly held his other lands, together with all the royal customs 
and liberties which the king himself held therein, when, after 
the conquest of England, he held the same in his own hands, and 
with the same boundaries, with which he himself, or Tosti 
before him, or Siward, had held the said manor. 

Bishop Walcher and earl Waltheof were afterwards on the 
most friendly and cordial terms, insomuch that, sitting toge- 
ther with the bishop, at the synod of the priesthood, he 
humbly and obediently would carry out whatever was en- 
joined by the bishop in his earldom, for the correction of 
Christian manners. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 1073, all 
points agreed, as to the course of the sun and moon, with the 
fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius, in which our Lord wag 
baptized, that is to say, the day of the Baptism was on the 
eighth day before the ides of January, being the Lord's day and 
Epiphany ; the second day of the week was the commence- 
ment of His Fast for forty days ; and thus, from the time of the 
Baptism of our Lord in the fifteenth year of the reign of 
Tiberius, there had been a revolution of two great cycles, that 
is to say, of one thousand and sixty-four years. 

In this year, William, king of the English, with the especial 
assistance of the English whom he had brought with him from 
England, subjugated the city which is called Mans, and the 
province 57 belonging thereto. The Clito Edgar came to Nor- 
mandy from Scotland by way of England, and was reconciled to 
king William. Earl Waltheof, sending a strong body of Nor- 
thumbrians, took a bloody revenge for the death of his grand- 
father earl Aldred ; for the swords of some men whom he had 
placed in ambush cut off the sons of Carl who had slain him, 
while they were at a banquet at Seteringetun. 

In the year 1074, Hildebrand, who was also called Gregory, 
archdeacon of Rome, was elected pope, and consecrated. The 

53 A somewhat similar right to the last. In the text it is erroneously 
printed " soschene," for " socam." 

54 The right to levy import duties. 

55 The right of a lord to follow his servants on the lands of another. 
6 ' The right of apprehending malefactors. a7 Of .Maine. 



154 AUNALS OF EOGEK DE HOVEDEW. A.D. 1074- 

pope holding a council, according to the decrees of Saint Peter 
the Apostle, and of Saint Clement and other holy fathers, by 
edict forbade the clergy, and especially those consecrated to the 
divine mysteries, 58 to have wives, or to cohabit with women, 
except such as the Nicene synod or other canons excepted. 
He also decreed that, in conformity with the sentence of Simon 
Peter, not only the buyer and seller of any office, such for instance 
as that of bishop, abbat, prior, dean, or titheman of a church, 
but whoever abetted them, should receive the condemnation of 
Simon Magus. 59 For the Lord hath said, "Freely have ye 
received, freely give." 

Three poor monks being sent by the Divine Spirit from 
the province of the Mercians, that is to say, from Evesham, 
came to York, in the province of the Northumbrians, and 
requested Hugh FitzBaldric, who at that time held the 
shrievalty, to provide them with a guide on their journey, as 
far as the place which is called Munkeceastre, 60 that is to say, 
the " city of the monks," which place is now called New- 
castle. Being escorted thither, and having staid there for 
some time, on finding there no ancient vestige of the servants 
of Christ they removed to Jarrow, where, the ruins hardly 
disclosing what it had been in ancient times, there were to be 
seen many monastic edifices with half-ruined churches ; here 
they were received with the greatest kindness by bishop 
Walcher, who supplied them with all necessaries. 

Aldwin was the chief of them, both by reason of ago 
and his exemplary manners, while Elfwine was the second, 
and Remifrid the third : by these three persons, three mon- 
asteries were refounded in the province of the Northum- 
brians ; one at Durham, near the hallowed and incorruptible 
body of the father Cuthbert, in honor of the holy Virgin Mary ; 
another at York, in honor of the same Mary, the mother of 
God, where this noble monastery, on its foundation, had for 
its first abbat Stephen, its second Richard, its third Geoffrey, 
the fourth being the present dignitary, Severinus. The third of 
these monasteries was restored at a place which was formerly 
called Streinschalh, that is to say, " the bay of the sea," and 
is now called Withebi ; 61 of which Benedict is the present abbat. 

Of late years, after the most dreadful devastations of the 

58 Those in priests' orders. 59 As being guilty of simony. 

60 The Saxon name of Newcastle-on-Tyne. 6l Whitbjr, in Yorkshire. 



A.D. 1074. ESCAPE OF TTTBGOT. 155 

pagans had with fire and sword reduced the churches and mon- 
asteries to ashes, Christianity being almost extinguished, there 
were scarcely any churches left, and those few covered with 
twigs and thatch ; but no monasteries had been anywhere re- 
built for two hundred years. Thus did belief in religion wax 
faint, and all religious observances entirely die away ; the name 
of a monk was a thing unheard-of by the people in the provinces, 
who were struck with amazement when by chance they beheld 
any one devoted to the monastic life, and clothed in the garb 
of a monk. But on the above-named three persons coming to 
dwell among them, they themselves also began to change their 
brutish mode of living for the better, to give them all possible 
assistance in restoring the sacred places, rebuilding the half- 
ruined churches, and even building new ones in the spots where 
they had previously existed. Many persons also abandoned a 
secular life, and assumed the monastic habit ; few, however, of 
these were provincials ; they were mostly persons from the 
remote districts of England, who, being allured by the report 
of their character, repaired thither, and zealously attached 
themselves to them. 

Of these, Turgot, afterwards bishop of the Scots, was one. 
He, being sprung from a family by no means among the lowest 
ranks of the English, was one among a number of hostages, who, 
when England was totally subjected to the Normans, had 
been placed in confinement in Lincoln castle, which was the 
place of safe keeping for the whole of Lindesey. Having 
bribed the keepers with a sum of money, he secretly, to the 
hazard of his friends, fled to certain Norwegians, who were 
then at Grimsby, loading a merchant-ship for Norway, on 
board which the ambassadors of king William, who were 
about to proceed to Norway, had procured a passage. 

When the ship, speeding on at full sail, had lost sight of 
land, behold ! the run-away hostage of the king came forth 
from the lower part of the ship, where the Norwegians had con- 
cealed him, in the sight of all, and caused astonishment among 
the ambassadors and their attendants. For he had been sought 
in every spot, and the king's tax-gatherers had made their 
search in that very ship ; but the cunning of those who con- 
cealed him had contrived to deceive the eyes of the searchers. 
Upon this, the ambassadors insisted upon their furling their 
sails, and by all means steering back the ship towards the 



156 AXTTALS OP EOGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1074. 

English shore, in order to take back the run-away hostage of 
the king. This was stoutly resisted by the Norwegians, whose 
wish it was that they should steer onward in the course they 
had so prosperously begun ; upon which a division arose, and 
prevailed to such a degree that each party took up arms against 
the other. But as the force of the Norwegians was superior, 
the boldness of the ambassadors very speedily subsided, and 
the nearer they approached to land, the more did they humble 
themselves to the others. 

Upon their arrival there, the runaway youth behaved him- 
self becomingly and modestly, showed himself grateful to the 
nobles and principal men, and came under the notice of king 
Olaf, who being of a very pious turn of mind, was in the 
habit of reading holy books, and giving his attention to litera- 
ture amid the cares of state. He would also frequently stand 
by the priest at the altar, and assist him in putting on the holy 
vestments, pouring the water upon his hands, and with great de- 
votion performing other duties of a similar nature. Accordingly, 
on hearing that a clerk had come over from England, a thing 
that seemed somewhat unusual at that period, he employed him 
as his own master in learning the Psalms ; in consequence of 
which he lived in extreme affluence, the bounty of the king and 
nobles flowing in upon him apace. His mind, however, was 
often smitten, in a spirit of compunction, with contempt for 
the world, and, whenever he was able, he would withdraw 
himself from the banquets of the revellers, and take delight 
in solitude, praying to God with tears that he would direct 
him in the paths of salvation. But, inasmuch as religious 
aspirations, when subjected to delay, frequently change, his 
mind by degrees fell away from this state, and in consequence 
of the success which attended his pursuits, the pleasures of 
this world had too great attractions for him. 

But he, who, when invited, was unwilling to come of his 
own accord, at a future time, by compulsion, entered the house 
of his heavenly Father. For some years after, he was returning 
home by ship with a large sum of money ; but when out at 
sea, the vessel was wrecked in a most violent storm, and his 
companions perishing, he lost the whole of his property, having, 
with some five or six others, with the greatest difficulty 
saved his life. Coming to Durham for the purpose of offering 
up his prayers, he informed bishop Walcher of every thing 



A.D. 1074. CONSPIRACY AGAINST WILLIAM. 1,5? 

that had happened to him, and stated to him that it was his 
fixed purpose to assume the monastic habit. On this the 
bishop received him with all humility, and, sending him to 
Aldwin, of whom mention has been made above, said : " It is 
my prayer and my command, that you will receive this my 
son, and, clothing him in the monastic habit, will teach him 
to observe the monastic rule of life." Aldwin on receiving him, 
submitted him to the regular probation, and when he had 
passed through that state conferred upon him the monastic 
habit, and so trained him by precept and example, that after 
his own decease, by order of bishop William, he succeeded him 
as prior of the church of Durham, which for twenty years, 
less twelve days, he zealously governed. But in the year 
when Ranulph was made bishop, who succeeded William, 
Alexander the Eighth, king of the Scots, having asked the 
assent of Henry, king of the English, thereto, he was chosen 
bishop of the church of Saint Andrew. 

In the same year in which pope Hildebrand held the above- 
named council, Roger, earl of Hereford, son of William, earl of 
the East Angles, contrary to the command of king William, 
gave his sister in marriage to earl Rodulph. The nuptials 
being celebrated with the utmost magnificence, amid a large 
concourse of nobles at a place in the province of Grantebridge, 62 
which is called Ixning, a great number there entered into a 
conspiracy against king William, and compelled earl Waltheof, 
who had been intercepted by them by stratagem, to join the con- 
spiracy. He, however, as soon as he possibly could, went to 
Lanfranc, the archbishop of Canterbury, and received absolu- 
tion from him at the holy sacrament, for the crime that he had, 
although not spontaneously, committed ; by whose advice, he 
also went to king William, who was at the time staying in 
Norway, and disclosing to him the whole matter from begin- 
ning to end, threw himself entirely upon his mercy. 

In the meantime, the chiefs above-mentioned, being deter- 
mined to promote the success of this conspiracy, repaired to 
their castles, and began, with their supporters, to use all pos- 
sible endeavours in encouraging the rebellion. But the vene- 
rable Wulstan, the bishop of Worcester, with a great body of 
soldiers, prevented the earl of Hereford from fording the river 
Severn and meeting earl Rodulph, with his army, at the place 

62 Cambridge. 



158 ASWALS OF .ROGER DE HOVEDEU. A.D. 1075. 

appointed. Wulstan was also joined by Egelwin, the abbat of 
Evesham, with, all his people who had been summoned to his 
assistance, together with Urso, the sheriff of Worcester, and 
"Walter de Lacy, with his troops, and a considerable multitude 
of the lower classes. But earl Rodulph having pitched his 
camp near Grantebridge, Odo, bishop of Bayeux, the king's 
brother, and Geoffrey, bishop of Constance, having collected a 
great body both of English and Normans and prepared for 
battle, opposed him. 

On seeing that his attempts were thus thwarted by the 
multitude that opposed him, he secretly fled to Norwich, and 
entrusting the castle to his wife and his knights, embarked 
on board ship, and fled from England into Brittany ; on which, 
being pursued by his adversaries, all of his men whom they 
could overtake they either put to death, or else inflicted upon 
them various kinds of punishments. After this, the nobles 
besieged the castle of Norwich, until, peace being made by the 
king's sanction, the countess, with her people, was allowed to 
leave England. These events having happened, in the autumn 
the king returned from Normandy, and placed earl Roger in 
confinement, and in like manner threw earl Waltheof into 
prison, although he had besought his mercy. 

Edgitha, the former queen of the English, died this year 
at Winchester, in the month of December, on which her body 
was, by the royal command, conveyed to London, and honor- 
ably buried at Westminster, near that of her lord, king Ed- 
mund. Here, at the ensuing Nativity of our Lord, the king 
held his court, and some of those who had uplifted their necks 
against him he banished from England, and others he mangled, 
by putting out their eyes, or cutting off their hands ; earls 
Waltheof and Roger, condemned by a judicial sentence, he 
committed to closer custody. 

In the year 1075, earl Waltheof, by command of long 
William, was unrighteously led outside of the city of Win- 
chester, and there cruelly decapitated with an axe, and buried 
in the ground on the spot; but in course of time, God so 
ordaining it, his body was raised from the earth, and carried 
with great honor to Croyland, and with great pomp buried in 
the church there. While he was still in possession of life in 
this world, on being placed in close confinement, he unceasingly 
bewailed what he had done amiss, and most zealously endea- 



A.D. 1077. VIOLENT ACTS OF EOBEET. 159 

voured to make his peace with God by means of watchings and 
prayers and fastings and almsgiving ; his memory men have 
tried to bury in the earth, but we are to believe that in truth 
he rejoices with the Saints in heaven, the above-named arch- 
bishop Lanfranc, of pious memory, having faithfully attested it, 
from whom, on making confession, he had received absolution. 
He asserted that he was innocent of the charge on which he 
was accused, namely, that of joining in the aforesaid con- 
spiracy, and that what he had been guilty of in other re- 
spects, he had, like a true Christian, bewailed with the tears 
of repentance ; and Lanfranc declared that he himself should be 
blessed, if, after the end of his life, he should be able, to enjoy 
his happy repose. After him, the care of the earldom of Nor- 
thumbria was entrusted to Walcher, bishop of Durham. 

After these transactions, the king led his army into Brittany, 
and besieged the castle of earl Eodulph, which is called Dol, 
until Philip, king of France, forced him to retire. 

At this period, as the secular clergy chose rather to submit 
to be excommunicated, than to put aside their wives, pope 
Hildebrand, in order that he might, if possible, chastise them 
by means of others, ordered in the following words that no 
person should hear mass performed by a married priest : 

" Gregory, the pope, who is also called Hildebrand, the 
servant of the servants of God, to all throughout the realms 
of Italy and Germany, who show due obedience to Saint 
Peter, the Apostolic benediction. If there are any priests, 
deacons, or sub-deacons, who are guilty of the crime of for- 
nication, we do on behalf of Almighty God, and by the authority 
of Saint Peter, forbid them entrance into the church, until 
such time as they shall amend and be repentant. But if any 
shall prefer to persist in their sinful course, no one of you 
is to presume to listen to them while officiating ; inasmuch as 
their blessing is changed into a curse, and their prayers into 
sinfulness, as the Lord beareth witness by his prophet, saying, 
' Your blessings I will curse,' " &c. 62 

In the year 1076, Sweyn, king of the Danes, a man greatly 
devoted to literature, departed this life, and was succeeded by 
his son, Harold. 

In the year 1077, Robert, the eldest son of king William, 
because he was not allowed to take possession of Normandy, 
which, before his arrival in England his father had given to 
6 - Mai. ii. '2. 



160 AXNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D.1080. 

him in the presence of Philip, king of the Franks, fled to 
France, and, with the aid of king Philip, frequently committed 
great depredations in Normandy, burning towns and slaying 
men, and thus caused no little trouble and anxiety to his 
father. 

In the year 1078, after the Assumption of Saint Mary, 
Malcolm, king of the Scots, laid waste Northumbria, as far as 
the great river Tyne; and having slain many persons and 
captured more, returned home with a large amount of spoil. 

In the year 1079, king William, while attacking his son 
Robert before the castle of Gerbohtret, which king Philip had 
given to. him, being wounded by him in the arm, was thrown 
from his charger, but immediately, on Robert recognizing 
his voice, he dismounted, and bade him mount his own horse, 
and so let him depart ; on which, many of his men having 
been slain, and some taken prisoners, and his son William 
and many others wounded, he took to flight. The venerable 
man Robert, who had received priests' orders, at the hands of 
the most reverend Wulstan, the bishop of Worcester, was 
ordained bishop of Hereford, at Canterbury, by Lanfranc, the 
archbishop. This took place on the fourth day before the 
calends of January, being the Lord's day. 

In the year 1080, 63 Walcher, bishop of Durham, a native of 
Lorraine, and a man distinguished for his virtues, was, with- 
out reason, murdered by the Northumbrians, at a place which 
is called Gatesheued, 64 that is to say, the " goat's head," on the 
day before the ides of May, being the fifth day of the week ; 
which act was done in revenge for Liulph, a man of noble birth 
and high rank. 

This person, by hereditary right, was entitled to many pos- 
sessions throughout England ; but, because in those times the 
Normans were incessantly giving loose in every direction to 
their savage propensities, he betook himself with all his family 
to Durham, as he was sincerely attached to the memory of 
Saint Cuthbert. His wife was Adgitha, daughter of earl Aldred, 
by whom he had two sons, Ucthred and Morcar. The sister of 
this Adgitha was Elfleda, the mother of earl Waltheof ; for 
which reason that earl entrusted his little cousin, Morcar, to 

63 This event is placed by Roger of Wendover in the year 1075. He 
gives a very different account of the circumstances attending it. 

64 Gateshead. 



A.n. 1080. LIULPH MTJEDEEED BZ LEOFWINE. 161 

the monks of Jarrow, to be nurtured by them in the love 
of God. At this time earl Waltheof himself was at Tyne- 
mouth ; which place, together with the little child, he placed 
at the disposal of the monks. Liulph, the child's father, was 
greatly beloved by the bishop ; so much so, that without his 
advice he would by no means transact or dispose of the more 
weighty questions of his secular business. For this reason 
his chaplain, Leofwine, 65 whom he had raised to such a pitch 
of favour that hardly anything in the bishopric and earldom 66 
was done without his opinion being first consulted, was in- 
flamed by the stings of envy, and being, in consequence of 
his elevation, greatly inflated with excessive pride, arrogantly 
set himself in competition with the above-named Liulph. 

In consequence of this, he treated some of his judgments and 
opinions with the utmost contempt, and used every possible 
endeavour to render them of no effect ; in addition to which, 
he would frequently wrangle with him before the bishop, 
even using threats, and often provoke him to anger by the use 
of contemptuous expressions. On a certain day, when Liulph 
had been invited by the bishop to take part in his counsels, 
and had given his opinion as to what was legal and just, 
Leofwine obstinately opposed him, and exasperated him by the 
use of contumelious language. Because Liulph on this occasion 
answered him more sharply than usual, Leofwine withdrew 
himself hastily from the court of justice, and, calling aside 
Gilbert (to whom, being his relative, the bishop had entrust- 
ed the earldom of Northumbria to manage as his deputy), 
earnestly entreated him to avenge his wrongs and put Liulph 
to death as soon as he possibly could effect it. 

Gilbert immediately yielded to his iniquitous requests, and, 

having assembled together his own men at arms, together with 

* those of the bishop and the said Leofwine, proceeded on a certain 

night to the house where Liulph was then staying, and most 

65 The name of this person, who is called Leobin by William of Malmes- 
bury, affords a singular illustration of the extreme incorrectness of the 
text. In the same page it is written '* Leodwinus," " Leothwinus," 
"Leolwinus," "Leofwinus," and " Leolfwinus." This faultiness, how- 
ever, is far from being confined to proper names. 

66 It has been already stated that, after the unfortunate end of earl 
Waltheof, the earldom of Northumberland was given in charge to the 
bishop of Durham. Bracton informs us that the bishop of Durham had 
as full power in the county of Durham as the king had in his own palace. 

VOL. I. M 



162 ANNALS OP BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1080. 

iniquitously slew him and nearly all his household, in his own 
house. On hearing of this, the bishop heaved a sigh from the 
inmost recesses of his heart ; and, taking his hood from off his 
head, and throwing it on the ground, immediately said in 
mournful accents, to Leofwine, who was then present, " By 
your factious designs, and most short-sighted contrivances, 
Leofwine, these things have been brought about. Therefore, 
I would have you know for certain, that both myself, and your- 
self, and all my household, you have cut off by means of the 
sword of your tongue." 

On saying this, he instantly betook himself to the castle, 
and immediately sending messengers throughout all Northum- 
bria, commanded all to be informed that he was not an ac- 
complice in the death of Liulph, but that, on the contrary, he 
had banished Gilbert, his murderer, and all his associates, 
from Northumbria, and would be prepared to exculpate 
himself before a court of ecclesiastical jurisdiction. After this, 
having interchanged messages, he and the relatives of those 
who were slain, having mutually given and received assurances 
of peace, appointed a place and day on which to meet and 
come to a better understanding. On the appointed day they 
met at the place named, but as the bishop declined to plead 
his cause in the open air, he entered the church there, to-' 
gether with his clergy and those of his knights who were of 
higher rank, and while a council was being held, several 
times sent out of the church such of his own followers as he 
thought fit, for the purpose of making peace with them. 
The people, however, would by no means accede to his re- 
quests, for they believed it to be a matter beyond a doubt that 
Liulph had been slain by his command ; for, the night after 
the death of his relative, 68 Leofwine had not only entertained 
Gilbert and his associates at his house, in a friendly and hos- 
pitable manner, but even the bishop himself had shown him 
favour and hospitality just as before. 

In consequence of this, all th ose of the bishop' s party who were 
found outside of the church were first slain, only a few escaping 
by flight ; on seeing which, the bishop ordered his relative, the 

63 " Propinqui sui." This is probably an incorrect reading. We have 
been previously informed that Gilbert was a relative of the bishop ; but it 
does not appear that Liulph was related to the bishop or to Gilbert. It 
may, however, mean " of his neighbour." 



A.D. 1081. THE EMPEBOB DEPOSES POPE HILDEBEAND. 163 

above-named Gilbert, whose life was sought, to go out of the 
church, in order that his death might satisfy the fury of the 
enemy. On going out, some knights followed him close for 
the purpose of defending him, but being instantly attacked 
by the enemy on all sides with swords and lances, they were 
killed in an instant ; however, they spared two English thanes, 
in consequence of their being of the same blood with them- 
selves. They also slew Leofwine, who had so often given 
the bishop advice to their disparagement, with some others of 
the clergy, directly they came. out. 

For when the bishop understood that their fury could by no 
means be appeased, unless Leofwine, the head and author of 
all this calamity, was slain, he begged him to go out of the 
church ; and when he could by no means prevail upon him to do 
so, the bishop himself went to the door of the church, and 
begged that his own life might be spared, and on their refusal, 
covered his head with the border of his garment and went 
out of the door, and instantly fell dead, pierced by the swords 
of the enemy. After him they ordered Leofwine to come 
forth, and, upon his refusal, set fire to the roof and walls of 
the church ; on which, preferring to finish his life rather by 
being burnt than being slain with the sword, he endured the 
flames for some time ; but, after he had been half roasted 
alive, he sallied forth, and, being cut to pieces, paid the 
penalty for his wickedness and died a shocking death. 

To avenge the horrible deaths of these persons, king Wil- 
liam, in the same year, ravaged Northumbria, sending thither 
Odo, bishop of Bayeux, with a large body of soldiers. In the 
autumn of the same year, the same king William sent his son, 
Robert, against Malcolm, king of the Scots ; but after he had 
proceeded as far as Egelbereth, he returned without completing 
his object, and founded Newcastle upon the river Tyne. 

William succeeded to the bishopric of Durham on the fifth 
day before the ides of November, and on the fourth day before 
the nones of January, was consecrated at Gloucester, by Thomas, 
the archbishop of York. 

At Pentecost, in this year, the emperor Henry, being at 
Mentz, determined upon the deposition of pope Hildebrand. 
and, on the nativity of Saint John the Baptist, appointed 
Wibert, bishop of the city of Ravenna, pope in his stead. 

In the year 1081, the emperor Henry marched with an 

M 2 



164 ANNALS OP KOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1083. 

army to Rome against the pope, but, having laid siege to the 
city, was unable to effect an entrance. 

In the year 1082, after much slaughter and rapine had 
ensued between the emperor Henry and pope Hildebrand, 
on the night of Palm Sunday, a great number of persons were 
slain. King William placed in confinement in Normandy his 
brother, Odo, bishop of Bayeux. 

In the year 1083, the emperor Henry stormed the city of 
Home, and having taken it, established Wibert in the Apos- 
tolic See ; on which, Hildebrand retired to Benevento, and 
lived there till the day of his death, and Henry returned to 
Germany. 

A disgraceful quarrel took place between the monks, and 
Turstin, the abbat, of Glastonbury, a man unworthy to be 
named, and possessed of no prudence,, whom king William, 
taking from the monastery of Caen, had appointed abbat of 
that place. Among other doings, in his folly, he treated the 
Gregorian chaunt with contempt, and attempted to compel the 
monks to leave it off, and learn the chaunt of one William, 
of Feschamp, and sing it ; this they took to heart, because 
they had, both in this particular and in the other offices of 
the church, grown used to the practices of the Roman Church. 
Upon a certain day, when they did not expect it, he rushed 
into the chapter-house, with an armed body of soldiers, and 
pursued the monks, who in their extreme terror had fled into 
the church, even to the altar ; and there the soldiers, piercing the 
crosses, and images, and shrines of the Saints with darts and 
arrows, even went so far as to slay one monk while embrac- 
ing the holy altar, who fell dead pierced with a spear ; an- 
other also fell at the verge of the altar, transfixed with 
arrows ; on which, being compelled by necessity, the monks 
stoutly defended themselves with the benches and candle- 
sticks belonging to the church, and, though grievously wounded, 
succeeded in driving all the soldiers beyond the choir. The 
result was, that two of the monks were killed and fourteen 
wounded ; some of the soldiers were also wounded. 

Upon this, an inquisition was held, and as the principal 
fault lay clearly on the abbat' s side, the king removed him, 
and replaced him in his monastery in Normandy. A number 
of the monks were also, by the king's command, dispersed 



A.D. 1083. CHABTEB OF AECHBISHOP THOMAS. 165 

among the bishoprics and abbacies, and there kept in confine- 
ment. After the king's death, the same abbat repurchased 
the abbey from his son, king William, for a sum of five hun- 
dred pounds of silver, and wandering about for some years 
among the possessions of that church, at a distance from the 
monastery itself, just as was befitting a homicide, died in misery. 
The monks assembled 69 at Durham, by command of king "Wil- 
liam the Younger, on the seventh day before the calends of 
June, being the sixth day of the week. 

On the fourth day before the nones of November, being the 
fifth day of the week, queen Matilda departed this life in Nor- 
mandy, and was buried at Caen. 

" Thomas, 70 by the grace of God archbishop of York, to the . 
bishops and abbats, both those who now hold the said offices in 
England also as those who shall succeed them hereafter, and 
to all the archbishops, his successors for ever in the see of York, 
greeting : Inasmuch as it is our office to perform the duties of 
religion to all, so in especial are we bound to pay pious respect 
to those Saints of God, from whose bounty it is manifest 
that we have received especial benefits. Therefore, we having 
been chastened with the scourge of God, and having been 
parched in an incredible manner during a period of two 
years with weakness from the attacks of fever ; and whereas 
all the physicians declared that it was evident that death 
alone would be the termination of our sufferings, and that there 
were no means by which they might counteract the evil effects 
of this prolonged weakness. Wherefore, being warned in a 
vision, groaning and weeping I passed a night at the tomb of 
Saint Cuthbert, where, being wearied out with disease and 
fatigue, I was overcome with sleep ; upon which Saint Cuth- 
bert appeared to me in a vision, and touching each of my 
limbs with his hands, rendered me, when I awoke, whole 
from all infirmity ; and whereas, at the same time, he com- 
manded me to be duteous to him in all respects, and requested 
that all things whatsoever in my diocese he or his should pos- 
sess, should be free and discharged from all burdens whatso- 

69 This seems to allude to the monks of Glastonbury, who had been 
driven from the abbey by William the First, and placed in confinement ; 
otherwise, the event is not inserted in its proper place. 

70 There is probably an omission here, nothing being stated by way of 
introduction to this letter. 



166 ANNALS OP EDGES DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1083. 

ever ; and inasmuch as, having been aided by the mercies of 
the blessed confessor, I have been the more duteous to him, 
as it was more especially my bounden duty to pay him the 
greatest homage. And whereas William, bishop of Durham, has 
brought a letter of pope Gregory the Seventh, from the Aposto- 
lic See, to the council of king William sitting at Westminster, 
and, with the consent of all, has obtained leave to remove the 
secular clergy from his church and substitute monks therein. 
Wherefore, greatly rejoicing at all these things, according to the 
precept of the abovenamed pope, and according to the command 
of our lord king William, and out of the love I am bound to owe 
to Saint Cuthbert, with the consent and permission of the chap- 
ter of York, and with the confirmation of the whole synod, I 
have given and granted, and by this present deed confirmed, 
and have afterwards, with my own hand, presented at the altar 
unto Saint Cuthbert, the letter underwritten, which is ad- 
dressed to Saint Cuthbert and his bishop, and all the monks 
his servants Know then, all persons, both present and to come, 
that I, Thomas, archbishop of York, in obedience to the pre- 
cept of pope Gregory the Seventh, and with the ratification of 
our lord king William, and with the attestation thereto of the 
whole council of England, and with the consent of the chapter 
of York, do give and do grant unto God and Saint Cuthbert, and 
to all his bishops in succession, and to all the monks who shall 
be there in time to come, that all churches whatsoever, which at 
the present time they may happen to possess in my diocese, or 
which hereafter they shall canonically obtain by royal grant 
or gift of the faithful, or which they shall build upon their own 
lands, they shall hold free and entirely acquitted for ever 
by me and all my successors, of all claims which belong to me 
or to my successors. Wherefore, I will and command that 
they shall hold all their churches in their own hands, and pos- 
sess them without molestation, and freely place in them their 
own vicars, who shall only consult me and my successors as to 
the faithful cure of souls, but them as to all other alms-deeds 
and benefits ; and further, I do grant, confirm, and command, 
that they, as well as their vicars, shall be for ever free and 
acquitted from all synodals, 71 and from all aids, imposi- 

71 Payments made to the bishop by his clergy at the time of his visi- 
tation. 



A.D. 1085. WILLIAM CONFEES BISHOPRICS. 167 

lions, rents, exactions, or hospices, 72 both as regards myself 
and my deans and archdeacons, as well as the vicars and 
servants of us all. I do also forbid, under penalty of ex- 
communication, that any person shall annoy them or their 
clergy, upon any pretence whatever, or compel them to go to 
synods or chapters, unless they shall be willing so to do of 
their own accord. But if any one shall have any complaint 
against them or theirs, let him repair to the court of Saint Cuth- 
bert at Durham, that he may there receive such redress as he 
is entitled to. For, all the liberties and dignities which I or 
my successors shall be entitled to in our own churches or in 
our lands, we do freely grant for ever unto them and Saint 
Cuthbert in all their churches and lands, and without any 
deceit or gainsaying, I do, on behalf of myself and my succes^ 
sors, confirm the free and quiet possession thereof." 

In the year 1084, pope Hildebrand, who was also called 
Gregory, departed this life. William, king of the English, 
levied upon every hide of land throughout England the suin 
of six shillings. 

In the year 1085, Edmund, abbat of Pershore, a man of re- 
markable virtue, departed this life on the seventeenth day be- 
fore the calends of July, being the Lord's day. In the same 
year, Canute, son of Sweyn, king of the Danes, prepared, with 
a strong fleet and the aid of his father-in-law, Robert, earl 
of Flanders, whose daughter he had married, to invade Eng- 
land ; whereupon, king William, having levied many thousand 
soldiers throughout the whole of Gaul, foot and archers, and 
taking some from Normandy, in the autumn returned to 
England, and dispersing them throughout the whole king- 
dom, commanded the bishops, abbats, earls, barons, sheriffs, 
and royal bailiffs to supply them with provisions. But when 
he learned that his enemies were checked, 73 he sent back part of 
his army, and part he retained with himself throughout the 
whole of the winter, and held his court at Gloucester during the 
Nativity of our Lord ; in which place he gave bishoprics to 
his three chaplains, namely, that of London to Maurice, that of 
Thetford to William, amUhat of Chester to Robert. 

72 " Hospitio." A right on the part of certain persons to demand en- 
tertainment in religious houses. 

73 Because there was a mutiny in the Danish fleet, which ended in the 
king being slain by his soldiers. 



168 ANNALS OP EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1087. 

In the year 1086, king William caused the whole of England 
to be described, of how much land each of his barons was pos- 
sessed, how many knights' fees, how many carrucates, how 
many villains, how many animals, and even how much ready 
money, each person possessed, throughout the whole of his 
kingdom, beginning from the highest down to the lowest, and 
how much rent each property could return : ' 4 the whole of 
the country being in a state of disturbance in consequence of 
the numerous murders occasioned thereby. After this, in the 
week of Pentecost, at Westminster, where he was holding his 
court, he knighted his son Henry, and shortly after ordered 
the archbishops, bishops, abbats, earls, barons, and sheriffs, 
with their soldiers, to meet him at Salisbury, on the calends 
of August ; and on their coming thither, he compelled their 
knights to swear fealty to him against all men. 

At this period, the Clito Edgar, having obtained leave of the 
king, passed over the sea with two hundred soldiers, and 
went to Apulia. His sister, Christiana, entered a monastery 
which has the name of Romsey, and assumed the habit of a 
nun. In the same year there was a murrain among animals, 
and a great pestilence in the air. 

In the year 1087, the relics of Saint Nicolas were trans- 
ferred from Myra to the city of Bar. In this year, Aldwin, 
prior of Durham, departed this life. A raging fire consumed 
many cities, and the church of Saint Paul, together with the 
largest and best part of London. 

On Saturday, the sixth day before the ides of July, the 
Danes, in a certain church, conferred the honor of martyrdom 
on their king, Canute. In this year, Stigand, bishop of Chi- 
chester, ScoLLand, abbat of Saint Augustine's, Alfy, abbat of 
Bath, and Turstine, abbat of Pershore, departed this life. 
In the same year, before the Assumption of Saint Mary, king 
William entered France with an army, and burned with fire 
a city which is called Mantes, and all the churches therein, 
and two recluses, and then returned into Normandy. But, 
upon his return, a dreadful pain in the intestines attacked 
him ; and, becoming weaker and weaker every day, when, as 
his illness increased, he saw that the day of his death was ap- 
proaching, he released from confinement his brother, Odo, the 
bishop of Bayeux, earls Morcar and Roger, Siward, surnamed 
< 4 These returns were entered in what is called Doomsday-Book. 



A.D. 1087. WILLIAM THE TOUHTGER SUCCEEDS. 169 

Barn, and Wulnoth, the brother of king Harold, whom he 
had kept in confinement from his childhood, and all besides 
whom he had imprisoned, either in Normandy or England. 
After this, he gave the kingdom of England to his son 
William, and, to his eldest son, Robert, who was then in exile 
in France, he left the dukedom of Normandy. And then, being 
fortified with the heavenly viaticum, 15 after having reigned 
over the English nation twenty years, ten months, and twenty- 
eight days, he parted with his kingdom and his life, on the 
fifth day before the ides of September, and, having been there 
interred, rests at Caen, in the church of Saint Stephen the 
Proto-martyr, which he had built from the foundation, and 
amply endowed. 

WILLIAM THE YOUNGER 

On this, his son, William, repaired to England with all haste, 
taking with him Morcar and Wulnoth, but, shortly after his 
arrival at Winchester, he consigned them to the same strict 
confinement as before ; after which, on the sixth day before 
Jhe calends of October, being the Lord's day, he was consecrated 
king at Westminster, by Lanfranc, archbishop of Canterbury. 
Then, returning to Winchester, he distributed the treasures of 
his father, as he himself had commanded, throughout England ; 
that is to say, to some of the principal churches ten golden 
marks, to some six, and to some less. To each of the churches 
situate in country places 76 he ordered five shillings to be given, 
and crosses, altars, shrines, text-books, 77 candlesticks, chalices, 
pipes, 78 and various ornaments, embellished with gold, silver, 

75 The consecrated wafer, administered to the dying, "in articulo 
mortis." 

76 The words are " in villis sitis." The allusion is to the parish churches 
throughout the country. 

17 This seems the best translation for " textos." which means the book 
of the Gospels, which was generally adorned with gold and jewels, and 
kept in the treasury of the monastery, and laid on the altar on Saints'- 
days and Sundays. 

78 " Fistulas." Allusion is made to the pipes which (in the early centu- 
ries of the church, when the Holy Eucharist was administered to the 
laity in both kinds,) were used by the communicants for the purpose of 
sucking the wine out of the cup. The object of this seems to have 
been that, by the use of several pipes, more than one might partake of it 
at the same time. 



170 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1088. 

and precious stones, to be distributed among the most deserv- 
ing churches and the monasteries. 

His brother Robert, also, on his return to Normandy, 
bounteously divided among the monasteries, churches, and 
the poor the treasures which he found, in behalf of the soul 
of his father ; and, after having knighted them, allowed 
Dunecald, the son of Malcolm, king of the Scots, and Ulph, 
the son of Harold, the former king of the English, whom he 
had released from confinement, to depart. 

In the year 1088, a great dissension arose among the nobles 
of England. For a portion of the Norman nobility was in 
favour of king William ; but the other, and larger part es- 
poused the cause of Robert duke of Normandy, and desired 
to invite him to govern the kingdom, and either deliver up 
William alive to his brother, or, putting him to death, de- 
prive him of his kingdom. The chiefs in this execrable affair 
were Odo, bishop of Bayeux, who was also earl of Kent, 
Geoffrey, bishop of Constance, Robert, earl of Mortaigne, 80 
Roger, earl of Shrewsbury, and the chief men of eminence 
throughout the whole kingdom, with the exception of arch- 
bishop Lanfranc. This abominable deed they privately discussed, 
during Lent, and, immediately after Easter, began to ravage 
the country each in his own neighbourhood, and plunder and 
pillage it, at the same time providing their castles with fortifi- 
cations and provisions. Geoffrey, bishop of Constance, and 
Robert de Mowbray repaired to Bristol, where .they had a very 
strong castle, and laid waste all the country as far as the place 
which is called Bathan. 81 ' 

The nobles also of Hereford and Shrewsbury, with a 
multitude of people from Wales, proceeded as far as Worces- 
ter, laying waste and destroying with fire everything before 
them. They intended, also, to have taken the church and the 
castle, which latter was at that period entrusted to the charge 
of the venerable bishop Wulstan. When the bishop heard of 
this he was greatly distressed, and, considering what plan he 
should adopt, had recourse to his God, and entreated Him to 
look down upon His church and His people, thus oppressed 
by their enemies. While he was meditating upon these 
things, his household sallied forth from the castle, and took 
and slew five hundred of them, and put the rest to flight. 

?9 V. r. Duncan. Half-brother of William the First. 8 Bath. 



A.D. 1088. ODO STHtEENDERS PEVENSEY CASTLE. 171 

Roger Bigot entered the castle of Norwich, and spread devas- 
tation throughout the country." 2 Bishop Odo, through whom 
these evils had arisen, proceeded into Kent, and laid waste 
the royal vills, and ravaged the lands of all those who pre- 
served their fealty to the king and gained possession of the 
castle of Rochester. 

On hearing of these things, the king caused the English to 
be assembled together, and, pointing out to them the treachery 
of the Normans, entreated them to give him their assistance, 
on condition that, if they should prove faithful to him in 
this emergency, he would grant them better laws, such as they 
should make choice of; he also forbade all unjust taxes, and 
returned to all their woods and right of venison ; but, whatever 
he promised, he soon withdrew. The English however, then 
assisted him faithfully. Accordingly, the king assembled 
his army for marching on Rochester, where he supposed his 
uncle, bishop Odo, was ; but, when they came to Tunbridge, 
they found the castle closely shut against the king. How- 
ever, the English, boldly storming it, destroyed the whole 
castle, and those who were in it surrendered to the king. 
After this, the king with his army directed his course towards 
the castle of Pevensey ; for bishop Odo had withdrawn from 
Rochester and fled to that castle, whither the king, with a 
large army, followed him, and besieged the castle for six 
entire weeks. 

While these things were going on in England, Robert, duke 
of Normandy, had assembled a considerable force, and was pre- 
paring to send it to England, intending shortly to follow, as 
though making sure of England through the agency of bishop 
Odo and the others, who were his partisans there. But Wil- 
liam the Younger had now taken measures of defence by sea 
with his cruisers, which slew many of them on their passage 
to England, and sank others at sea ; so much so, that no 
man can tell the number of those who perished. 

During the period of these transactions at sea, bishop Odo, 
and those who were with him, being compelled by hunger, 
surrendered the castle of Pevensey, and promised, on oath, 
that they would leave England and not enter it again, except 

82 The words after " Norwich " here are adopted from the Anglo- 
Saxon Chronicle ; as the text has " et omnes vicit in malum," words 
which admit of no sense whatever, and are clearly erroneous. 



172 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1090. 

with the leave of king William ; they also engaged that they 
would first deliver up the castle of Rochester. But, when 
Odo had come to Rochester with the king's men, who, on 
the king's behalf, were to receive possession of the castle, 
he was immediately placed in confinement together with them, 
by those who were in the castle. Some persons assert that 
this was done by the cunning contrivance of the bishop. How- 
ever, in this castle there were some valiant knights, and almost 
all the nobility of Normandy. There was also there, Eustace 
the Younger, earl of Boulogne, and many of the nobles of 
Flanders. When the king heard of this, he came with his 
army to Rochester, and laid siege to the city ; upon which, 
after a short time, those who were in it surrendered; and 
thus the bishop, who was almost a second king of England, 
irrecoverably lost his dignity. But, on arriving in Normandy, 
he immediately received charge of the whole province 83 from 
duke Robert. William, bishop of Durham, and many others 
also, took their departure from England. 

In the year 1089, Lanfranc, the archbishop of Canterbury, 
departed this life, on the ninth day before the calends of July, 
being the fifth day of the week. In the same year, on the 
third day before the ides of August, being Saturday, about the 
third hour of the day, there was a very great earthquake 
throughout England. 

In the year 1090, William the Younger, king of England, 
with the intention of taking Normandy from his brother Robert 
and subjecting it to his own dominions, first took the castle 6f 
Walter de Saint Valery, and the castle which has the name 
of Albemarle, and, afterwards, several other castles, and placed 
knights in them, who committed ravages throughout Nor- 
mandy. On seeing this, and discovering the faithlessness of 
his own people, duke Robert sent ambassadors to Philip, king 
of the Franks, his liege lord, who thereupon came into Nor- 
mandy, and the king and the duke laid siege to one of the 
castles which was garrisoned by his brother's troops. On this 
being told to king William, he secretly sent a considerable 
sum of money to king Philip, and, entreating him to desist from 
besieging it, succeeded in his object. 

83 These words are succeeded by the following detached sentence, 
" cujus ordinem causae libellus in hoc descriptus ostendit." It is evidently 
corrupt, and capable of no exact translation ; though it probably means, 
" the reasons for which will appear from what is previously stated." 



A. D. 1091. MALCOLM INVADES NOHTHT7MBRIA. 173 

In the year 1091, king William the Younger went over to 
Normandy in the month of February, with the design of 
taking it from his brother Robert ; but, while he was there, 
peace was made between them by treaty, on condition that 
the duke should with good faith deliver up to the king 
the earldom of Eu, 84 Feschamp, the abbey of Mount Saint 
Michael, and Keresburg, 85 with the castles which had revolted 
from him, and that the king should reduce to subjection to 
the duke the province of Maine and the castles of Normandy, 
which were then making resistance to him. It was also 
agreed that the king should -restore their lands in England 
to all the Normans who had lost them by reason of their 
fidelity to the duke, and should also give to the duke as much 
land in England as was then arranged between them. In 
addition to this, they came to an understanding that if the 
duke should die without a son lawfully born in wedlock, the 
king should be his heir ; and, in like manner, if the king 
should happen to die, the duke should be his heir. Twelve 
barons on the king's side and twelve on the duke's guaranteed 
this treaty by oath. 

In the meantime, while these matters were being treated of, 
their brother Henry, 86 having raised all the troops he could, 
with the aid of some of the monks in the place, took posses- 
sion of Mount Saint Michael, laid waste the king's lands, 
and took prisoners some of his men, and spoiled others. In 
consequence of this, the king and the duke, assembling an army, 
besieged the Mount during the whole of Lent, and had frequent 
skirmishes, and lost some men and horses. But the king, 
growing wearied of the protracted siege, retired without 
coming to terms, and, shortly after, dispossessed the Clito 
Edgar of all the honors which the duke had conferred upon 
him, and banished him from Normandy. 

In the meantime, in the month of May, Malcolm, king of 
the Scots, invaded Northumbria with a large army. If he 
could only find provisions, his object was to make further 
inroads and commit acts of violence upon the people of Eng- 
land. But God ordained it otherwise ; and, therefore, he was 
impeded in his designs. The king, on hearing of this, re- 

84 Called "Owe" in the text. 85 Cherbourg. 

86 Of course he would naturally be displeased at the little regard paid 
to his interests in the compact then being made. 



174 AUNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDE1T. A.D. 1091. 

turned to England with his brother Robert in the month of 
August, and shortly after, set out for Scotland with a con- 
siderable fleet and an army of horse, with the object of waging 
war against Malcolm; on coming to Durham, he restored 
bishop William to his see, three years on that very day after he 
had left it ; that is to say, on the third day before the ides of 
September. 

But before the king had reached Scotland, a short time pre- 
vious to the feast of Saint Michael, nearly the whole of his 
fleet was lost, and many of his horse perished through hunger 
and cold ; after w.hich, king Malcolm met him with his army in 
the province of Loidis. 87 On seeing this, duke Robert sent for 
the Clito Edgar, whom the king had banished from Normandy, 
and who w as then staying with the king of the Scots, and, by 
his assistance, made peace between the two kings, upon the un- 
derstanding that Malcolm should pay homage to him, as he had 
paid homage to his father, and that king "William should re- 
store to Malcolm the twelve towns which he had possessed in 
England under his father, and pay yearly twelve golden marks. 
But the peace that was made between them lasted only a short 
time. The duke also reconciled the king to Edgar. 

On the ides of October, being the fourth day of the week, 
a violent flash of lightning struck the tower of the church of 
Winchelcomb, and made a wide opening in the wall, close to 
the roof ; it split asunder one of the beams, and giving a severe 
-blow to the image of Christ, 88 hurled the head to the ground, 
and broke the right thigh. The image, also, of Saint Mary, 
which stood near the cross, was struck by the flash, and fell 
to the ground ; after which, there followed a great smoke, with 
an excessive stench, which filled the whole church and lasted 
until the monks of the place, chaunting psalms, had gone round 
the buildings of the monastery with holy water and incense, 
and relics of the Saints. 

In addition to this, on the sixteenth day before the calends of 
November, being the sixth day of the week, a violent whirl- 
wind, coming from the south, blew down more than six hun- 
dred houses in London, and a considerable number of churches. 
It attacked the church which is called Saint Mary at Arches, 
and killing two men there, lifted the roof with the rafters aloft, 
and after carrying it to and fro in the air, at length fixed six of 
K ~ Leeds. ^ On a crucifix. 



AD. 1092. ILLNESS OF KING WILLIAM. 175 

the rafters in the same order in which they had been originally 
inserted in the roof, so deep in the ground, that of some of 
them only the seventh, of some the eighth part, was visible ; 
and yet they were seven or eight and twenty feet in length. 

After this, the king returned from Northumbria through 
Mercia into Wessex, and kept the duke with him till nearly 
the Nativity of our Lord, but was not willing to fulfil the 
treaty that had been made between them. The duke being 
greatly annoyed at this, on the tenth day before the calends of 
January, returned to Normandy with the Clito Edgar. 

At this period, according to the reports in England, there 
were two so-called popes of Rome, who, disagreeing as to 
their right to the title, divided the church of God into two 
parties; these were Urban, who was formerly called Odo, 
bishop of Ostia, and Clement, whose former name was 
Wibert, archbishop of Ravenna ; this matter, not to speak of 
other parts of the world, had so greatly occupied the attention 
of the church of England for many years, that from the time 
that Gregory, also called Hildebrand, departed this life, up to 
the present period, it had refused to pay obedience or make 
submission to any pope ; Italy and France, however, acknow- 
ledged Urban as the vicar of Saint Peter. 

In the year 1092, the greater part of the city of London 
was destroyed by fire. On the nones of April, being the 
second day of the week, Osmund, bishop of Salisbury, with 
the assistance of Valceliine, bishop of Winchester, and of John, 
bishop of Bath, dedicated the church which he had built with- 
in the castle of Salisbury. Bishop Remigius also, who, with 
the sanction of king William the Elder, had changed the seat of 
his bishopric from Dorchester 91 to Lincoln, wished to dedicate 
the church which he had built there, and which was well worthy 
of the bishop's chair, as he perceived that the day of his 
death was close at hand. But Thomas, the archbishop of York, 
firmly opposed him, and asserted that the church was built in 
his province. King William the Younger, however, in con- 
sideration of a sum of money which Remigius gave him, gave 
orders to the bishops of nearly the whole of England to 
meet together on the seventh day before the ides of May and 
consecrate the church ; but, two days before the time appointed, 

91 In Oxfordshire. 



176 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1093. 

by the secret dispensation of God, bishop Remigius departed 
from this world, and the dedication of the church stood over 
for the present. After this, the king set out for the province of 
Northumbria,and rebuilt the city which in the British language 
is called Carleil, 92 and in Latin, Lugubalia, and erected a castle 
there ; for this city, with some others in those parts, had been 
destroyed two hundred years before, by the pagan Danes, 
and had remained desolate from that time until the present 
period. 

In the year 1093, king William the Younger was attacked 
by a severe illness at a royal town which is called Alvestan, on 
which he repaired with all haste to Gloucester, and there lay ill 
throughout the whole of Lent. Thinking that he should shortly 
die, at the suggestion of the barons, he promised the Almighty 
to correct his mode of living, no longer to sell churches or put 
them up for sale, but to protect them with his kingly power, 
to destroy unrighteous laws, and to enact righteous ones. The 
archbishopric of Canterbury, which he had kept in his own 
hands, he gave to Anselm, the abbat of Bee, who was then in 
England, and the bishopric of Lincoln to his chancellor, Robert, 
surnamed Bloet. 

A new church was commenced to be built at Durham, on the 
third day before the calends of August, being the fifth day of 
the week, bishop William, and Malcolm, the king of the Scots, 
and the prior Turgot, on that day laying the first stone of the 
foundation. On the day of the feast of Saint Bartholomew the 
Apostle, 93 Malcolm, the king of the Scots, came to Gloucester, 
to meet king William the Younger, as had been previously 
arranged between their ambassadors, in order that, according 

92 Carlisle. Holinshed has the following remark upon a passage in 
Matthew of "Westminster, " Here have I thought good to advertise you 
of an error in Matthew of Westminster, crept in either through misplacing 
the matter by means of some exemplifier, either else by the author's mis- 
taking his account of years, as 1072 for 1092, referring the repairing of 
Carlisle unto William the Conqueror, at what time he made a journey 
against the Scots in the said year 1072. And yet not thus contented ; to 
bewray the error more manifestly, he affirmeth. that the king exchanged 
the earldom of Chester with Rafe or Ranulf de Micenis, alias Meschines, 
for the earldom of Carlisle, which the said Meschines held before, and 
had begun then to build and fortify that town ; whereas it is certain that 
Ranulf de Meschines came to enjoy the earldom of Chester by way of 
inheritance." > V. r. The ides. 



A.D. 1093. RAVAGES OF THE SCOTS. 177 

to the wish of some of the chief men of England, peace might 
be renewed and there might exist a lasting friendship between 
them; they separated, however, without coming to terms. 
For "William, in his excessive haughtiness and pride, con- 
temptuously refused to see Malcolm or to treat with him. In 
addition to this, he also wished to force him to make redress 
in his own court- solely according to the judgment of his own 
barons, but Malcolm utterly declined to do so, unless the con- 
ference were held upon the confines of the two kingdoms, where 
the kings of the Scots had been in the habit of making redress 
to the kings of England, and in conformity with the opinion of 
the nobles of both kingdoms. Shortly after these events, a very 
wonderful sign appeared in the sun. 

In the same year, Roger, earl of Shrewsbury, Guido, abbat 
of Saint Augustine's, and Paulinus, abbat of the church of 
Saint Alban, departed this life. This Paulinus, having by 
means of the violent conduct of earl Robert, 94 effected an en- 
trance into the church of Tynemouth, in spite of the pro- 
hibition of the monks of Durham, who had been the possessors of 
it, was there attacked with an illness, and died on his way home 
at Seteringtun. 94 * On the day of the feast of Saint Brice, 95 
Malcolm king of the Scots, and Edward, his eldest son, were 
slain in Northumbria with their men, by the soldiers of Robert 
earl of Northumbria ; in whose death the judgment of God is 
distinctly visible, from the fact that he and his men perished in 
the same province which he had been in the habit, at the dic- 
tation of avarice, of laying waste. 

For, on five occasions he had afflicted it with dreadful ravages, 
and had carried off its wretched inhabitants in slavery ; the first 
time in the reign of king Edward, when Egelwin was bishop 
of Durham, at the period when Tosti, the earl of Northumbria, 
had gone to Rome ; the second time in the reign of king 
William, the above-named Egelwin being still bishop, on 
which occasion, Cleveland was laid waste ; the third time, in 
the reign of the same king William, when Walcher was 
bishop of Durham, at which period he proceeded as far as the 
river Tyne, and after having slaughtered multitudes of men 
and burned many places, re turned with a large amount of booty ; 

94 De Mowbray. 

w * Called Colewich by Roger of Wendover, who calls the abbat Paul. 

95 Thirteenth of November. 

TOL. I. N 



178 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1093. 

the fourth time, in the reign of king William the Younger, 
when William was hishop of Durham, on which occasion, with 
an innumerable army, he came as far as Chester, 96 with the full 
intention of proceeding further ; hut a small body of troops 
uniting against him, he returned with all speed from very 
fear. 

The fifth time, having collected all the troops he possibly 
could, he invaded Northumbria, with the intention of reducing 
it to utter desolation, but was slain near the river Alne, 97 
by Morell, 98 a most valiant knight, together with his eldest 
eon, Edward, whom he had appointed his successor in the 
kingdom. A portion of his army died by the sword of the 
enemy, and those who escaped the sword were drowned in 
the inundations of the rivers, which were at that time unusu- 
ally swollen by the winter rains. The body of this king and 
most blood-thirsty butcher, there being none of his own people 
to cover it with earth, two of the country-people placed in a 
cart, and buried it at Tynemouth ; and thus it came to pass that 
in the very place where he had deprived multitudes of life, 
liberty, and possessions, by the judgment of God, he himself 
lost his life and possessions. 

On hearing of his death, Margaret, queen of the Scots, was 
affected with such violent grief, that she suddenly fell ex- 
tremely ill ; immediately upon which, sending for the priests, she 
entered a church, and having confessed to them her sins, caused 
herself to be anointed with oil, and to be provided with the 
heavenly viaticum, entreating the Lord with most urgent and 
repeated prayers, that he would not allow her any longer to re- 
main in this world of misery. Her prayers were heard, for on 
the third day after the king's death, she was released from the 
bonds of the flesh, and, as we have reason to believe, passed 
to the joys of everlasting salvation. For, during her life, she 
shewed herself a most devoted follower of piety, justice, peace, 
and charity ; assiduous in her prayers, she mortified her body 
by watching and fasting, enriched churches and monasteries, 
and loved and honored the servants and handmaids of God ; 
she broke bread to the hungry, clothed the naked, gave lodging, 

96 Chester-le-street, in Durham. 

97 In the vicinity of Alnwick, in Northumberland. 

** V. r. Merkell. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says that he was steward 
to earl Robert. 



A D. 1091. DUKE ROBERT RENOUNCES THE TREATY. 



179 



food, and raiment to all strangers who came to her, and loved 
God with all her heart. 

After her death, the Scots chose" as their king, Dufenald, 
the brother of king Malcolm, and expelled from Scotland all the 
English who belonged to the royal court. On hearing of this, 
Duncan, the son of king Malcolm, who was at that time in 
the service 1 of king William, requested him to give him his 
father's kingdom ; and, on his prayer being granted, swore fealty 
to him, and immediately repaired with all haste to Scotland, 
accompanied by a multitude of English and Normans, and, 
expelling his uncle, Dufenald, 2 from the kingdom, reigned 
in his stead. Shortly after, some of the Scots meeting together, 
cut off nearly the whole of his men ; on which, with a few 
others, he made his escape. However, they afterwards allowed 
him to reign over them, on condition that he should no more 
introduce Englishmen or Normans into Scotland, or allow 
them to serve under him. 

At this period, a meeting was held of nearly all the bishops 
of England, among whom Thomas, the archbishop of York, 
held the chief place ; and on the second day before the nones of 
December they consecrated Anselm, abbat of Bee, archbishop 
of Canterbury. In the same year, William, earl of Eu, being 
overcome by his inordinate greediness for money, and allured 
by the magnitude of the honors promised him, revolted from 
his natural lord, Kobert, duke of Normandy, to whom he had 
sworn fealty, and, coming to England, after acting the part 
of a guilty seducer,* acknowledged himself a subject of king 
William. 

In the year 1094, Robert, duke of Normandy, by ambassa- 
dors, informed king William that he should renounce the treaty 

* " The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle also mentions this election. Upon the 
passage, Mr. Ingram, the Translator, observes, " From this expression, it 
is evident that, though preference was naturally and properly given to 
hereditary claims, the monarchy of Scotland, as well as of England, was 
in principle elective. The doctrine of hereditary, of divine, of indefeasible 
right, is of modern growth." 

1 " Militabat." The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says that he had been 
given by his father as a hostage to king William. 

2 The name which we call " Donald." 

1 '* Ut seductor maximus." He had probably seduced others from their 
loyalty to duke Robert; if, indeed, the reading here is correct, which is very 
doubtful. 

2 



180 AXXALS OF ROGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1094. 

which they had made ; he also called him a perjured and per- 
fidious man, if he should refuse to observe the compact which had 
heen made between them in Normandy. In consequence of this, 
about the calends of February, the king went to Hastings, and 
while staying there, caused the church of Battle 4 to be dedi- 
cated in honor of Saint Martin ; there he also deprived Here- 
bert, 5 bishop of Thetford, of his pastoral staff; for he had 
secretly intended to go to pope Urban, to seek absolution from 
him, on account of the bishopric which he had purchased for 
himself, and the abbey he had bought for his father, Ro- 
bert, 5 * from king "William, for a thousand pounds. After 
this, at mid-Lent, the king went over to Normandy, and, a 
truce being agreed on, held a conference with his brother, but 
parted from him without coming to terms. 

After this, they again mot in the field of Mars ; when those 
who, on oath, were to effect a reconciliation between them, 
laid all the blame on the king ; on which he would neither 
admit his fault, nor observe the treaty. Being greatly em-aged 
in consequence, they separated without coming to terms. 
The duke took his departure for Rouen, but the king returned 
to Eu, and there took up his quarters, and levied soldiers 
on every side ; to some of the Norman nobles he gave gold, sil- 
ver, and lands, and to some he promised them, in order that they 
might revolt from his brother Robert, and subject themselves, 
together with their castles, to his sway. Having accomplished 
all these matters to his wish, he distributed his soldiers among 
the castles which he had either previously held, or had then 
gained possession of. 

In the meantime, he took the castle which is called Bures, and 
of the duke's knights which he found therein, some he sent in 
captivity to England, and some he kept in confinement in Nor- 

4 Battle Abbey, which had been commenced by William the Conqueror. 

5 This was Herbert de Losinga ; whose letters, which were supposed 
to be lost, have recently been discovered. Roger of Wendover gives a 
different version of this story ; he says, " In 1094, Herebert, surnamed 
Losinga, was abbot of Ramsey, but be now by purchase procured himself 
to be made bishop of Thetford ; but afterwards, in penitence for his crime 
lie went to Rome, where he resigned his simoniacal staff and ring into 
the hands of the pope ; but by the indulgence of the Holy See, he re- 
ceived the same back again, and returning home, transferred his see to 
Norwich, where he established a congregation of monks." 

5 * His father was, probably, one of the secular clergy. 



A.D. 1094. 



WAR AGAINST THE WELCH. 



181 



mandy; and, harassing his brother in every way, used his 
utmost exertions to deprive him of his patrimony. Accordingly, 
Kobert, being compelled by necessity, brought his liege lord, 
Philip, king of the Franks, into Normandy with an army ; on 
which the king laid siege to the castle of Argenton, and on the 
very same day, without any bloodshed, took seven hundred of 
the king's knights, together with twice as many esquires, 6 toge- 
ther with all the garrison of the castle, and ordered them to 
be kept in close confinement, until each should ransom him- 
self, after which, he returned to France. 

Duke Robert, however, besieged a castle which is called 
Holm, until William Peverel and eight hundred men who 
defended it surrendered to him. "When this became known 
to the king, he sent messengers to England, and ordered 
twenty thousand foot soldiers to be sent to Normandy to his 
assistance ; who being assembled at Hastings, for the pur- 
pose of crossing the sea, by the king's orders, Ranulph took 
from them the money that had been given them to purchase 
provisions, namely, ten shillings from each man, and, ordering 
them to return home, sent the money to the king. In the 
meantime, the whole of England was afflicted with oppressive 
and unceasing taxes, and a great mortality of the people both 
in this and the following year. 

In addition to this, first the people of North Wales, and 
then those of South Wales, throwing off the yoke of servitude 
by which they had been long oppressed, and lifting up their 
necks, struggled to regain their liberty. Accordingly, a great 
multitude having assembled together, they stormed the castles 
that had been founded in West Wales, and, in the provinces 
of Chester, Shrewsbury, and Hereford, burned the towns on 
every side, carried off plunder, and slew multitudes of English 
^nd Normans. They also stormed the castle in the Isle of 
Anglesey, and reduced it to subjection. 

In the meantime, the Scots treacherously slew their king, 
Duncan, and some other persons, by the advice and entreaty of 
Dufenald, and then chose him again for their king. Shortly 
after, king William returned to England, on the fourth day 
before the calends of January, to wage war against the Welch, 
and immediately proceeded with his army into W'ales, where 
he lost many men and horses. 

6 " Scutariis." 



182 ANNALS OF EOGEB, DK HOVEDEN. A.D. 100.) 

In the year 1095, at the middle of the seventh hour, on the 
night of Saturday, the eighteenth day of the month of January, 
Wulstan, the bishop of Worcester, was removed from this world ; 
a venerable man, and one of most exemplar) 7 life, who from his 
youth had entirely devoted himself to his religious duties, and 
who, bent upon gaining the glory of the heavenly kingdom, 
with great devotion and humility of mind had carefully 
served God with the utmost zeal, and departed after many 
struggles of pious agony. This took place in the year, from the 
first day of the world, according to the assured account con- 
tained in the Holy Scriptures, five thousand two hundred and 
ninety-nine, 7 in the four hundred and seventy-sixth year of the 
present great year 8 from the beginning of the world, in the 
one thousand and eighty-fourth from the Passion of our Lord 
according to the Gospels, in the one thousand and sixty-sixth 
year according to the Chronicle of Bede, in the thousand and 
sixty-first year according to Dionysius, 9 in the year from the 
arrival of the Angles in Britain seven hundred and forty-five, 
from the arrival of Saint Augustine four hundred and ninety- 
eight, from the death of Saint Oswald the archbishop, one hun- 
dred and three, in the thirty- second year of the eleventh great 
Paschal cycle, in the five hundred and tenth year of the tenth 
from the beginning 10 of the world, in the fourth year of the 
second Solar cycle, 11 in the third year of the Bissextile cycle, 
in the third year of the second Nineteen year cycle, in the tenth 
year of the second Lunar cycle, 12 in the fifth year of the Hen- 
decad, 13 in the third year of the cycle of Indie tion, in the 
eighteenth lustrum of his age, and in the third year of the 
seventh lustrum 14 of his pontificate. 

In a wondrous manner, at the very hour of his departure, 
he appeared in a vision to his friend, Robert, the bishop of 
Hereford, to whom he was especially attached, at a town 

7 According to the computation mostly used in the middle ages, our 
Saviour was born A.M. 4204. 

8 This seems to be a cycle of nearly eleven years. 

9 Dionysius, the Areiopagite ; whose supposed writings were much read 
in the middle ages. 

10 This is, probably, a cycle of five hundred and thirty-two years, 

11 The cycle of the sun, or of Sundays, is a period of twenty-eight years. 

12 This would almost appear to be really the same cycle as the last ; as 
the cycle of the moon, or of nineteen years, or of the golden number, is 
the same thing. Possibly the figures are incorrectly stated. 

13 A cycle of eleven years. 

14 These lustra consist of five vears each. 



A.D. 1093. ATTEMPT OX KING WiLLIAll's LIFE. 183 

called Cricklade, and ordered him to make haste to "Worces- 
ter, to bury him. The ring, also, with which he had received 
the pontifical benediction, God would allow no one to draw 
from off his finger, lest, after his death, the holy man should 
appear to have deceived his friends, to whom he had frequently 
foretold that he would not part with it, either in his lifetime or 
at the day of his burial. 

On the day before the nones of April, it seemed at night as 
though stars were falling from heaven. "Walter, bishop of 
Albano, legate from the Holy Church of Some, being sent by 
pope Urban, came to England "before Easter, to bring the pall 
to king William, for which he had sent the year before ; which, 
according to order, was, on the Lord's day, being the fourth 
day before the ides of June, taken by him to Canterbury, and 
laid upon the altar of our Saviour, and then assumed by 
Anselm, and suppliantly kissed by all, as a mark of reverence 
to Saint Peter. 

On the sixth day before the calends of July, being the third 
day of the week, Robert, bishop of Hereford, a man of extreme 
piety, departed this life. The above-named "Wulstan, bishop 
of "Worcester, appeared to him in a vision, on the thirty-second 
day after he had departed from this world, and sharply rebuked 
him for his negligence and heedlessness, admonishing him to 
use his best endeavours to amend both his own life and those 
of his flock, with the utmost vigilance : if he did this, he af- 
firmed that he would soon obtain pardon of God for all his 
sins, and added, that he would not long retain his seat in the 
chair in which he then sat, but that, if he should choose to be 
more vigilant, he would be enabled to rejoice with himself in 
the presence of God. For both of these fathers had been most 
zealous in their love of God, and most attached to each other ; 
therefore we have reason to believe that he who was the first to 
take his departure from this world unto God, felt an anxiety 
for his most beloved friend, whom he had left in this world, 
and used his best endeavours that he might, as soon as possible, 
together with himself, rejoice in the presence of God. 

At this period, Robert de Mowbray, earl of Northumbria, 
and William de Eu, with many others, attempted to de- 
prive king William of his kingdom and life, and to make 
Stephen de AJbemarle, his aunt's son, king, but were dis- 
appointed. For, on learning this, the king levied an army 



184 ANNALS OF KOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1095. 

throughout the whole of England, and, during two months, be- 
sieged the castle of the above-named earl Robert, at Tynemouth; 
and, having in the mean time taken a certain small fortress, he 
captured almost all the earl's bravest soldiers, and placed them 
in confinement, and then, laying siege to the castle, took it, and 
placed in custody the earl's brother, and the knights whom he 
found there. After this, over against Bebbanbirg, 14 * that is 
to say, the city of Bebba, whither the earl had fled, he erected 
a castle, and called it "Malvoisin," 15 and, having placed 
soldiers therein, returned to the country south of the Humber. 

After the king's departure, the garrison of Newcastle 16 pro- 
mised oarl Robert that they would allow him to enter it if he 
came secretly. Being overjoyed at this, he went forth on a 
certain night for that purpose, with thirty knights ; on learn- 
ing which, the knights who garrisoned the castle followed him, 
and, through messengers, made known his departure to the 
garrison of Newcastle. Not aware of this, on a certain Sun- 
day, he made the attempt to carry out his plans, but failed, 
having been thus detected ; on which, he fled to the monastery 
of Saint Oswin, the king and martjT ; 1? where, on the sixth 
day of the siege, he was severely wounded in the thigh, while 
fighting with his adversaries, many of whom were also 
wounded, and many slain. Some of his men were also 
wounded, but all were captured, and he himself took refuge in 
the church ; from which, being dragged forth, he was placed in 
confinement. 

In the meantime the Welch stormed the castle of Mont- 
gomery, and slew there some of the men of Hugh, earl of 
Shrewsbury ; at which the king being exasperated, he imme- 
diately commanded an expedition to be directed against it ; and, 
after the feast of Saint Michael, led an army into Wales, and 
there lost many men and horses. On his return thence, he 
ordered earl Robert to be taken to Bamborough, and his eyes 
to be put out, unless his wife and his neighbour, Morel, 18 would 
surrender the castle. Compelled by this necessity, they forth - 

14 * Bamborough. 15 " Bad neighbour." 

is N ov i castelli " must mean the fortress of Newcastle, which had 
been lately erected, and not the new castle of Malvoisin, although Holin- 
shcd seems so to understand it ; the present passage will not, however, 
admit of that construction being put upon it. 17 At Tynemouth. 

18 The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says that this Morel was his steward. 
" Propinquus " may possibly mean " relative " here. 



A.D. 1095. POPE URBAN PREACHES A CRUSADE. 185 

with surrendered the castle. The earl, being placed in close 
confinement, was led to Windsor ; on which, Morell disclosed 
to the king the causes of the conspiracy taking place. 

In the year 1096, William, bishop of Durham, died at 
Windsor, the royal palace, on the fourth day before the nones 
of January, being the second day of the week, but was buried 
at Durham, in the chapter-house there, on the northern side, 
having on the south the body of bishop Walcher; in the 
middle rests the body of Turgot, formerly bishop of the Scots, 
and prior of that church. 

On the octave of the Epiphany, a council was held at 
Salisbury, and the king ordered William de Eu, who had been 
conquered in single combat, to be deprived of his eyes and 
his virility, and William Deandri, his sewer, his aunt's 
son, who had been privy to his treason, he ordered to be 
hanged ; earl Odo of Champagne, who was the father of the 
above-named Stephen, and Philip, son of Roger earl of Shrews- 
bury, and some others, who had a guilty knowledge of the 
plot, he placed in confinement. 

In this year, pope Urban came into France, and a synod 
was held at Clermont, 19 during Lent. He exhorted the Chris- 
tians to set out for Jerusalem, for the purpose of waging war 
against the Turks, Saracens, Turcopoles, 19 * Persians, and other 
pagans, who at that period had overrun Jerusalem, and, having 
expelled the Christians, were in possession of Juda3a. Imme- 
diately after his exhortation, at the same synod, Raymond, 
earl of Saint Gilles, and many others with him, assuming 
the emblem of the cross of Christ, engaged to undertake this 
pilgrimage in the cause of God, and to do what he had invited 
them to do : on hearing of which, other Christians in Italy, 
Germany, France and England, vying with each other, made 
preparations for the same expedition. The chiefs and leaders 
of these were Adimar, bishop of Puy, with a great number of 
other prelates, Peter the Hermit, Hugh the Great, brother to 
Philip, king of the Franks, Godfrey, duke of Lorraine, 
Stephen, count of Chartres, Robert, duke of Normandy, 
Robert, earl of Flanders, the two brothers of duke Godfrey, 

19 This council at Clermont, in Auvergne, continued from the 18th to 
the 28th of November, A.D. 1095, and not in 1096. 

19 * Turcopoles are supposed to have been the children of Christiau 
mothers and Turkish fathers. 



186 ANHALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1097. 

namely, Eustace, earl of Boulogne, and Bald win, Raymond, tlie 
above-named earl, and Boamond, the son of Robert Guis- 
card ; and with these followed an immense multitude of people 
of all languages. 

On the seventeenth day before the calends of July, being 
the Lord's day, Sampson was consecrated bishop of Worcester, 
in the church of St. Paul, at London, by Anselm, the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury. After this, Robert, duke of Normandy, 
having determined to set out for Jerusalem with the rest, 
sent ambassadors to England, and requested his brother Wil- 
liam to renew the treat}' of peace between them, and to lend 
him ten thousand marks of silver and receive from him the 
dukedom of Normandy as a security ; upon which, the king, 
being desirous to comply with his request, gave orders to the 
nobles of England that each one should, to the best of his 
ability, supply him with money with all possible haste. Ac- 
cordingly, the bishops, abbats, and abbesses, broke up the golden 
and other ornaments of the churches ; the earls, barons, and 
sheriffs stripped their soldiers and villains, and supplied the 
king with no small amount of gold and silver. In the month 
of September the king crossed the sea and made peace with 
his brother, giving him six thousand six hundred and sixty- 
six pounds of silver, and receiving from him Normandy in 
pledge. 

In the year 1097, "William, king of the English, returned 
to England at the season of Lent, and, after Easter, set out a 
second time 20 for Wales, with an army of horse and foot, 
with the intention of destroying all persons of the male sex. 
However, he was unable to take or slay hardly any of them, but 
lost some of his own men, and a great number of horses. 
After this, he sent the Clito Edgar to Scotland, with an army, 
in order that, after expelling his uncle, Dufenald, who had 
usurped the throne, he might make his cousin Edgar, the son 
of king Malcolm, king in his stead. 

On the thirteenth day before the calends of July, being 
Saturday, the Christians took the city of Nice. On the third 
day before the calehds of October, and the fifteen days fol- 
lowing, a comet appeared. Some persons at this period affirmed 
that they had seen in the heavens a wonderful sign, like a fire 
burning in the shape of a cross. 

* This was his third expedition. See under the years 1094 and 1095, 



A.D. 1098. ANTIOCH TAKEN BY THE CHUISTIAXS. 187 

Shortly after this, a misunderstanding arose between the 
king and Anselm, the archbishop of Canterbury, because, from 
the time he was made archbishop, he had not been allowed to 
hold a synod and correct the evils which had sprung up 
throughout England ; on which he crossed the sea, and re- 
muining for a time in France, afterwards proceeded to pope 
Urban at Rome. About the time of the feast of Saint 
Andrew, the king set out from England for Normandy. On 
the second day before the calends of January, Baldwin, abbat 
of the monastery of Saint Edmund, a man of exemplary piety 
and of French extraction, departed this life. 

In the year 1098, on the third day before the nones of 
January, being Sunday, Valcelline, the bishop of Winchester, 
departed this life. In the spring of this year, William the 
Younger, king of the English, subdued the city which is called 
Le Mans, and by force reduced a great part of that province 
to subjection. In the meantime, Hugh, earl of Shrewsbury, 
and with him Hugh, earl of Chester, made a descent upon the 
island of Mevania, which is usually called Anglesey, with a 
body of troops, and slew many of the Welch whom they 
there captured, and of others they cut off the hands or feet, 
and then, depriving them of their virility, put out their eyes. 
A certain priest also, named Kenred, a man of advanced age, 
from whom the Welch had received advice in their affairs, 
they dragged out of his church, and, having deprived him of 
his virility and put out one of his eyes, cut out his tongue ; 
but, on the third day after, by the Divine mercy, his speech was 
restored to him. 

At this period, Magnus, king of Norway, son of king 
Olaf, the son of king Harold Harfager, wishing to add the 
islands of Orkney and Anglesey to his realms, came thither, 21 
with a few ships ; but, on his making an attempt to land, 
Hugh, earl of Shrewsbury, accompanied by a great number of 
armed knights, met him on the sea-shore ; and, according to 
general report, being struck by an arrow from the king's own 
hand, was slain on the seventh day after he had exercised his 
cruelty on the above-named priest. 

On the third day before the nones of July, being the fourth 
day of the week, the city of Antioch was taken by the Chris- 
tians ; a few days after which, the spear with which, while 
21 To the isle of Anglesey. 



188 ANNALS OJF HOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1099. 

suspended on the cross, the Saviour of the world was pierced, 
was, through the revelation of the Apostle Andrew, the most 
nxeek of the Saints, discovered in the church of Saint Peter the 
Apostle. Being encouraged on finding this, on the fourth day 
before the calends of July, being the second day of the week, the 
Christians, carrying it with them, marched forth from the 
city, and, engaging with the pagans, put to flight Corbaran, 
the commander of the soldiers of Soldan, the king of Persia, and 
the Turks, Arabs, Saracens, and many other nations, at the 
edge of the sword, and, after slaying many thousands, by the 
aid of God gained a complete victory. 

Throughout the whole of the night of the fifth day before 
the calends of October in this year, there was an extraordi- 
nary brightness. In the same year, the bones of Canute, the 
king and martyr, were raised from the tomb, and, with due 
honor, placed in a shrine. Roger, the duke of Apulia, having 
assembled a great army, laid siege to the city of Capua, which 
had revolted against his authority. Pope Urban, attended, 
according to his command, by Anselm, the archbishop of Can- 
terbury, set out for the council which he had appointed to be 
held at Bar, on the calends of October. At this council, many 
points of the Catholic faith were discoursed upon by the suc- 
cessor of the Apostles, with great eloquence. Here also, a 
question being mooted on the part of the Greeks, who wished 
to prove, on the authority of the Evangelists, that the Holy 
Ghost proceeded only from the Father, the above-named 
Anselm treated and discoursed and explained so admirably 
on the subject, that there was no one at the meeting who 
did not pi'onounce himself satisfied thereby. 

In the year 1099, in the third week after Easter, pope 
Urban held a great council at Home, at which he excommuni- 
cated all laymen who gave investiture to churches, and all who 
received investiture from the hands of laymen, as well as all 
those who consecrated persons for the duties of the office so 
bestowed. He also excommunicated those who, to gain eccle- 
siastical honors, did homage to laymen; affirming that it 
seemed most shocking that hands which had attained a dis- 
tinction so high that it was granted to none of the angels, 
namely, by their touch, 22 to create the God who created all 

22 " Siguaculo ;" probably in allusion to marking with the sign of the 



A. I) 1100. WILLIAM KILLED BY TYEELL. 189 

things, and in the presence of God the Father, to offer up his 
own self for the salvation of the whole world, should he re- 
duced to such a pitch of disgraeefulness or folly as to become 
the handmaids of those hands which by day and night are 
denied by obscene contact, or, used to rapine and the unrighteous 
shedding of blood, are stained thereby ; upon which, all shouted 
with one consent, " So be it ! So be it !" and thereupon the council 
was concluded. After this, the archbishop 24 proceeded to Lyons. 

William the Younger, king of the English, returned to Eng- 
land from Normandy, and, .at Pentecost, held his court at 
London, and gave the bishopric of Durham to Ranulph, whom 
he had appointed manager of the affairs of the whole kingdom ; 
and, shortly afterwards, he was consecrated there by Thomas, 
archbishop of York. 

On the 'ides of July, being the sixth day of the week, Jeru- 
salem was taken by the Christians ; and, soon after, on the 
eleventh day before the calends of August, Godfrey, duke of 
Lorraine, was elected king by the whole army. On the 
fourth day before the calends of August, being the fifth day of 
the week, pope Urban departed this life. On the second day 
before the ides of August, being the same day of the week, 
the Christians fought a very great battle before the city of 
Ascalon, with Lavedal, 25 the commander of the army and 
second in rank in the whole kingdom of Babylon, 26 and, by 
the exceeding bounty of Christ, gained a wondrous victory. 
Paschal, a venerable man, who had been ordained priest 
by pope Hildebrand, having been elected pope by the Eoman 
people, was consecrated on the following day. On the third 
day before the nones of November, the sea overflowed the land, 
and swept away a great number of towns and men, and oxen 
and sheep innumerable. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 1100, pope 
Clement, who was also named Wibert, departed this life. 

William the Younger, king of the English, while engaged 
in hunting in the New Forest, which in the English language 
is called Itene, 27 was struck by an arrow incautiously aimed 
by Walter, a Frank, surnamed Tyrell, and died, in conse- 

2i Probably Anselm. Roger of Wendover says that his bap- 

tismal name was Emyreius, and that he was an Armenian, the son of 
Christian parents ; aud that on his apostatizing, he changed his name for 
that of Elafdal. Persia. n More properly Utine. 



190 ANNALS OF KOGEB DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1100. 

quence, on the fourth day before the nones of August, being 
the fifth day of the week, in the eighth year of the indic- 
tion. The body was carried to Winchester, and buried at 
the old monastery there, in the church of Saint Peter. And 
not undeservedly did this befall him, for, as popular rumour 
affirmed, this was undoubtedly the great might of God and 
his vengeance. For, in ancient times, that is to say, in the 
days of king Edward and the other kings of England, his 
predecessors, that same district flourished most abundantly 
in inhabitants, and worshippers of God, and churches, but, by 
the command of king William the Elder, the people being 
driven away, the houses half destroyed, and the churches pulled 
down, the land was rendered fit only for the habitation of 
wild beasts; and this, according to general belief, was the 
cause of the mishap ; for it was the fact that, some time be- 
fore, Richard, the brother of this same king William the 
Younger, lost his life in the same forest ; and a short time 
previously, his cousin Richard, son of Robert duke of Nor- 
mandy, while hunting there, was pierced by an arroAv dis- 
charged by one of his knights, of which wound he died. In 
the place, also, where the king fell, in former times a church 
had been built, but, as previously stated, in his father's time, 
it was levelled with the ground. 

In the days of this king, as in part already mentioned, 
there were many portentous signs beheld in the sun, moon, and 
stars ; the sea, also, frequently flowed beyond its usual limits 
on the shore, and swept away men and animals, towns, and a 
vast number of houses. In a village which is called Berk- 
shire, 28 just before the king's death, blood flowed from a spring 
during a period of three weeks. 29 The devil, also, showed 
himself frequently, in a frightful shape, to many Normans in 
the woods, and made many communications to them respect- 
ing the king and Ranulph and some other persons. Nor is this 
to be wondered at, for in their time almost all equity on part 
of the laws was silent, and all grounds for justice being sup- 
pressed, money alone held sway with the men in power. In 
fine, at this period, some persons paid more obedience to the 
royal wishes than to justice ; so much so, that Ranulph, con- 

23 Some words are evidently omitted in the text. William of Malmes- 
bury says that this took place at the village of Finchampstead, in the 
county of Berks. w William of Malmesbury says fifteen days. 



A.D. 1100. BAXCLPH is nrrursoNED. 191 

trary to ecclesiastical law and the prescribed rules of his order 
(for he was a priest), first put up to sale abbacies, and then 
bishoprics, the holders of which were dead, having lately re- 
ceived the presentations from the king, to whom he paid 
yearly no small sum of money. The influence of this man 
became so extensive, and so greatly did his power increase 
in a short space of time, that the king appointed him judge 
and general manager of the whole kingdom. 

Having secured this extent of power, in every quarter 
throughout England he mulcted some of the richest and most 
wealthy by taking from them their property and lands. The 
poorer classes he unceasingly oppressed by heavy and unjust 
taxes, and, in many ways, both before he received his bishopric 
and after, persecuted both great and small in common, and 
ceased not to do so up to the period of the king's death. For 
on the very day on which the king met with his death, he 
held in his own hands the archbishopric of Canterbury and 
the bishoprics of Winchester and Salisbury. 



HENRY THE FIIIST. 

King "William reigned fourteen years all but twenty-eight 
days, and was succeeded by his younger brother, Henry. 
Shortly after, on the nones of August, he was consecrated king 
at Westminster, by Maurice, the bishop of London ; and, on 
the day of his consecration, he set free the holy church of 
God, which had been sold and let to farm in his brother's time; 
he did away with all bad customs and iniquitous exactions by 
which the kingdom of England was unrighteously oppressed ; 
he also established unbroken peace in his kingdom, and com- 
manded that it should be maintained. To all in common he 
restored the laws of king Edward, together with those amend- 
ments to them which his father had made : but the forests, 
which he had made and held, he retained in his own hands. 

Not long after this, on the seventh day before the ides of Sep- 
tember, he placed Eanulph, the bishop of Durham, in confine- 
ment in the Tower of London, and recalled Anselm, arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, from Gaul. 

In the meantime, Robert, earl of Flanders, and Eustace, earl 
of Boulogne, returned home first, and after them Robert, duke of 



192 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEBEN. A.D. 1101. 

Normandy, with the wife whom he had married in Sicily. 
Shortly after this, Henry, king of the English, assembled the 
elders of England 30 at London, and took to wife Matilda, the 
daughter of Malcolm, king of the Scots, and of queen Margaret, 
and sister of the kings Edgar, Alexander, and David; on 
which she was consecrated queen, and crowned hy Anselm, 
archbishop of Canterbury, on the Lord's day, being the day of 
the feast of Saint Martin. 

Thomas, archbishop of York, a man whose memory was 
revered, and of exemplary piety, affable, and beloved by all, 
departed this life at York, on the Lord's day, being the ftmr- 
teenth day before the calends of December, and was succeeded 
by Gerard, the bishop of Hereford. 

In the year 1101, Louis, king of the Franks, visited the 
court of king Henry at London, at the time of the Nativity of 
our Lord. On the calends of February, Ranulph, the bishop 
of Durham, escaped from confinement, by means of extreme 
artfulness, and, crossing the sea, went to Robert, duke of Nor- 
mandy, and persuaded him to make a hostile invasion of Eng- 
land. In addition to this, many of the powerful men in this 
country sent ambassadors to him, and begged him to come 
with all haste, offering him the crown and the kingdom. On 
the eighth day before the ides of June, the 'city of Gloucester, 
together with the principal monasteiy there and many others, 
was destroyed by fire. 

In consequence of the above representations, Robert, duke 
of Normandy, having collected a vast number of knights, archers, 
and foot, assembled his ships at a place which, in the Norman 
language, is called Treport ; 31 on learning which, king Wil- 
liam gave orders to his sailors to watch the seas, that no one 
might approach the English territory from the country of 
Normandy, and, having collected an innumerable army through- 
out the whole of England, he himself pitched his camp not 
far from Hastings, in Sussex ; for he considered it a matter of 
certainty that his brother would land in that neighbourhood. 

But duke Robert, acting on the advice of bishop Ranulph, 
so wrought upon some of the king's sailors, by making them 
promises of different kinds, that, forsaking the fealty which 
they owed the king, they went over to him, and acted as 
his guides to England. All things, therefore, being in readi- 

30 The Witenagemote. 31 V. r. Ultreport. 



A. D. 1102. CONDUCT OF EARL EGBERT DE BELESME. 193 

ness, together with, his army, he embarked, and, about the 
time of the feast of Saint Peter ad Vincula, landed at a 
place called Portesmudh, 31 and immediately moving on his 
army towards Winchester, encamped in a suitable spot. On 
learning his arrival, some of the chief men of England at 
once, as they had previously arranged, went over to him, while 
others, concealing their sentiments, remained with the king. 
But the bishops, the common soldiers, and the English, with 
resolute determination, sided with him, and were unanimously 
prepared to go forth to battle in his cause. 

However, the more prudent men on both sides, having held 
a discreet conference among themselves, made peace between 
the brothers on the following terms : that the king was to pay 
yearly to the duke three thousand marks of silver and restore 
gratuitously to all the ancient dignities in England which they 
had lost in consequence of their fidelity to the duke ; and in 
like manner, the duke was to restore them to those, who, for 
the king's cause, had lost their dignities in Normandy, without 
any recompense. On these terms being made, the king's army 
returned home, and part of the duke's returned to Normandy, 
while part remained with him in England. 

In this year, Godfrey, king of Jerusalem, son of Eustace the 
elder, earl of Boulogne, who had been previously the most 
powerful duke of Lorraine, departed this life, and rests entombed 
in the church of Golgotha. After his death, the Christians 
unanimously elected his brother, Baldwin, their king. At 
this period, Robert de Belesme, earl of Shrewsbury, the son 
of earl Roger, commenced (with the view of opposing king 
Henry, as the event proved,) to repair with a broad and high 
wall the castle which Agelfleda, lady of the Mercians, in the 
reign of her brother Edward the Elder, had formerly built on 
ihe western side of the river Severn, at a place called Bridge j 33 
ne also began to build another in Wales, at a place which is 
called Carrocove. 

In the year 1102, the above-named earl Robert de Belesme, 
who also at that time ruled over the earldom of Ponthieu, and 
was possessed of a considerable number of castles in Nor- 
mandy, strongly fortified the city of Shrewsbury and the castle 
there, as also the castles of Arundel and of Titchil, 34 with 

33 Portsmouth. V. r. Morcsmutli. M Now Bridgenorth. 

84 Tickhill, in Yorkshire. 

VOL. I. 



194 ANXALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A-D. 1102. 

provisions, engines of war, arms, knights, and foot-soldiers, 
against king Henry. He also hastened, by every possible me- 
thod, working day and night, to complete the walls and towers 
of the castles of Bridge and Carrocove ; the Welch also, and 
his own men, he encouraged by gifts of honors, lands, horses, 
and arms, and by various other presents, to become more zeal- 
ous and faithful to himself, and more ready to do what he 
wished. 

These attempts, however, and his efforts were very soon 
stopped short. For his plots and intentions being, by means 
of certain information, discovered, the king pronounced him 
a public enemy. On this, at once assembling all the Welch 
and the Normans he possibly could at that moment, he and 
his brother Arnold laid waste part of the borough of Staf- 
ford, and carried away thence into Wales many beasts of 
burden and animals, together with some of the people. The 
king, however, without delay, laid siege first to his castle of 
Arundel, and, having erected castles around it, retired. He 
then ordered Robert, bishop of Lincoln, to lay siege to the 
castle of Tickill ; while he himself, with an army levied 
throughout the whole of England, besieged the castle of 
Bridge, and ordered his people to construct engines of war 
and erect a castle there. In the meantime, by some trifling 
presents, he easily prevailed upon the Welch, in whom earl 
Robert placed great confidence, to disregard the oaths they 
had sworn to him, and entirely forsake him, and join in the 
attack against him. The consequence was, that, within thirty 
days, the city and all the castles were surrendered ; and, having 
now subdued his enemy, Robert the king, ignominiously expelled 
him from England, and, shortly after, condemned his brother 
Arnold to a like fate, as a reward for his perfidious conduct. 

After these events, king Henry being at London, with all 
the chief men of his kingdom, both ecclesiastics and those of 
the secular order, at Westminster he invested two of his clergy 
with bishoprics, appointing Roger, his chancellor, bishop of 
Salisbury, and Roger, his chief of the larder, bishop of Here- 
ford. Here, also, Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury, held a 
great synod, upon matters relating to the Christian reli- 
gion, the following prelates sitting there with him : Gerard, 
archbishop of York, Maurice, bishop of London, William, 
bishop elect of Winchester, Robert, bishop of Lincoln, Samson> 



A.D. 1103. DISCOED BETWEEN HENS? AND AXSELM. 



195 



bishop of "Worcester, Robert, bishop of Chester, John, bishop 
of Bath, Herbert, bishop of Norwich, Ralph, bishop of 
Chichester, Gundulph, bishop of Rochester, and the two 
who had lately received investiture, Roger and the second 
Roger. Osborn, 35 bishop of Exeter, being kept away by his 
infirmities, was unable to take part in the synod. At this 
synod, many abbats of French extraction, and some English, 
were deposed and deprived of their dignities, which they had 
unrighteously acquired, or had led a disgraceful life while 
enjoying them; namely, Guido, abbat of Pershore, Aldwin, 
abbat of Ramsey, the abbat of Middleton, Bodric, abbat of 
Burgh, Richard, abbat of Ely, and Robert, abbat of Saint 
Edmund's. 

The above-named Roger, bishop elect of Hereford, was at- 
tacked with a malady, at London, and died; upon which, 
the queen's chancellor, Reinelm by name, was, with a similar 
investiture, substituted in his place. Henry, the king of the 
English, this year, gave Mary, the sister of queen Matilda, in 
marriage to Eustace, earl of Boulogne. 

In the year 1103, a great disagreement arose between king 
Henry and archbishop Anselm, because the archbishop would 
not consent to the king conferring the investiture of churches, 
nor hold communion with those to whom the king had pre- 
viously presented churches, as the successor of the Apos- 
tles had forbidden him and all others to do so. For this 
reason, the king ordered Gerard, the archbishop of York, to con- 
secrate the bishops on whom the king himself had conferred 
investiture; 37 namely, "William Giffard, and Roger, who had 
been his chaplain, 38 and to whom he had lately given the 
bishopric of Salisbury. Accordingly, Gerard obeyed the king's 
command ; but, in the cause of justice, William Giffard dis- 
regarded it, and rejected the benediction of archbishop Gerard. 
In consequence of this, by the king's sentence, he was stripped 
of everything, and banished from the kingdom ; the others, 
however, remained unconsecrated. 

Shortly before this, Reinelm had returned to the king the 
bishopric of Hereford, because he was sensible that he had 
offended God, in having received the investiture of a church 
from the hand of any layman. After this, at Easter, the king 

33 V. r. Osbert. x In Dorsetshire. 3 ' By the rintj and crozier. 
38 He has previously said that he was the king's chancellor. 

2 



196 ANNALS OF EOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1104. 

held his court at Winchester ; where, after receiving many 
injuries and divers affronts which he put up with, arch- 
bishop Anselm, at the king's request, set out for Rome on the 
fifth day before the calends of May, as had been arranged 
between him and the king, having in his company William, 
the bishop elect of Winchester, and some abbats who had been 
deprived of their abbeys, namely, Richard, abbat of Ely, and 
Aldwin, abbat of Ramsey. 

Robert, duke of Normandy, came over to England to confer 
with the king, his brother ; and, before he left England, 
gave up to him the three thousand marks of silver which the 
king, according to treaty, was to pay him each year. In the 
province which is called Berkshire, at a place the name of 
which is Hamstede, blood was seen 39 by many to spring out of 
the earth. 

In the same year, on the third day before the ides of August, 
there was a violent storm of wind, which did such great mischief 
to the fruits of the earth throughout England that those who 
were then living had never seen the like at any previous time. 

In the year 1104, the venerable men, Walter, abbat of 
Evesham, and Serlo, abbat of Gloucester, departed this life ; 
the former on the thirteenth day before the calends of February, 
the latter on the third day before the nones of March. At 
Pentecost, king Henry held his court at Westminster. In the 
same year, on the seventh day before the ides of June, being 
the third day of the week, four circles of a white color were 
seen around the sun, at about the sixth hour, one circle within 
another, just as though they had been painted there. All 
were astonished who saw this, as they had never before seen 
the like. In this year William, earl of Mortaigne, was de- 
prived of all the lands he possessed in England. It is not 
easy to describe the misery which at this period the land of 
England endured, by reason of the king's exactions. 

In consequence of the unbelief of certain abbats, in the 
pontificate of bishop Ranulph, the body of Saint Cuthbert the 
bishop was shown, and was, by Ralph, abbat of Seez, 41 after- 

39 This seems to be a repetition of the remarks mentioned under the 
year 1100, the name of the place being added. The Saxon Chronicle 
mentions it under this year ; William of Malmesbury, as taking place in 
the reign of king William. 

41 A town in Normandy. 



A.D. HOG. STRANGE APPEABAIfCE OF A STAE. 197 

wards bishop of Kochester, and after that, archbishop of 
Canterbury, and the brethren of the church of Durham, by 
clear proofs, found uncorrupted, together with the head of 
Saint Oswald, the king and martyr, and the relics of Saint 
Bede, and many others of the Saints, in the presence of earl 
Alexander, the brother of Edgar, king of the Scots, and after- 
wards king. This disinterment took place four hundred and 
eighteen years five months and twelve days after his burial ; 
being the sixth year of the reign of king Henry, and the sixth 
of the bishopric of Kanulph, and being from the beginning of 
the world, according to Bede and the Hebrew version, in the 
year five thousand three hundred and eight/ 2 and according to 
the Seventy 43 interpreters, in the year six thousand three hun- 
dred and eight. 

In the year 1105, Henry, king of the English, crossed the 
sea ; and nearly all the chief men among the Normans, on his 
arrival, disregarding the duke, their liege lord, to whom they 
had sworn fealty, ran after the king's gold and silver, which he 
had brought from England, and delivered up to him the castles 
and fortified cities. He burned Bayeux, together with the 
church of Saint Mary there, and took Caen from his bro- 
ther ; after which, he returned to England, as he was unable 
to reduce the whole of Normandy to subjection, and in order 
that, supported by a large sum of money, he might return 
in the following year, and deprive his brother thereof, and ren- 
der subject to himself the part that remained. However, 
William de Mortaigne, wherever he had the power, did injury 
to the king's property and men, on account of his own estates 
which he had lost in England. 

In the year 1106, Robert, duke of Normandy, came to 
England, for the purpose of conferring with his brother, king 
Henry, whom he met at Northampton. On this occasion the 
duke begged him to restore the places he had taken from him 
in Normandy; with which request the king refusing to comply, 
the duke, being greatly enraged, crossed the sea to Normandy. 

In the first week of Lent, on the evening of the calends of 
March, being the sixth day of the week, a star of unusual 
appearance became visible, and, during twenty-five days, in 

42 According to the computation now used, A.M. 5108. 
* 3 The Septuagint. 



198 ANNALS OF HOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1103. 

the same manner, and at the same hour, was seen to shine 
between the south and the west. It seemed itself to be of small 
size and dim, but the brightness which was produced by it 
was very brilliant, and a train of light, just like a large beam, 
darted from the east and north into the star. Some affirmed 
that, at this period, they had seen more stars of unusual ap- 
pearance. On the day of our Lord's Supper were seen two 
moons, shortly before daybreak, one in the east, the other in 
the west, both of them full ; the same day being the fourteenth 
day of the moon. 

In this year there was a shocking quarrel between Henry, 
emperor of Germany, and his son Henry; so much so, that 
they met in battle, and the father was slain by the son, after 
having reigned fifty years ; upon which he was succeeded by 
his son the above-named Henry. Before the month of August, 
Henry, king of the English, crossed the sea and went to Nor- 
mandy, on which nearly all the chief men of the Normans made 
submission to him, with the exception of Robert de Belesme 
and William de Mortaigne, and a few others, who adhered to 
duke Robert. At the Assumption of Saint Mary, Henry, king 
of the English, came to Bee, where he and archbishop Anselm 
holding a conference, became reconciled ; and not long after, by 
the command and request of the king, the said archbishop 
returned to England. After this, the king assembled his army, 
and proceeding to a certain castle of the earl of Mortaigne, 
which is called Tenchebrai, laid siege to it. In the mean- 
time, while the king was thus engaged, his brother Robert 
came upon him with his army, on the vigil of Saint Michael, 4 * 
and with him Robert de Belesme and William, earl of Mor- 
taigne. A battle then taking place, king Henry gained the 
victory. On this occasion Robert, duke of Normandy, Wil- 
liam, earl of Mortaigne, and Robert de Stuteville, with Wil- 
liam Crispin and many others, were taken prisoners, while 
Robert de Belesme escaped by flight. In consequence of this 
success, king Henry subdued the whole of Normandy, and 
rendered it subject to his will, informing archbishop Anselm 
thereof by letter. 

In the year 1108, Edgar, king of the Scots, departed this 
life, on the sixth day before the ides of January, and was 
succeeded by his brother Alexander. Normandy having now 
44 Michaelmas eve. 



A.D. 1108. A3BEEMEXT AS TO INVESTITURE. 199 

been reduced to subjection by the king, Eobert, duke of Nor- 
mandy, and William, earl of Mortaigue, being first sent over 
to England as prisoners, the king himself returned to his king- 
dom before Easter. On the calends of August there was a 
meeting held at London of all the bishops, abbats, and nobles 
of the kingdom ; and, during three days, in the absence of 
archbishop Anselm, there was a full discussion held between 
the king and the bishops upon the investitures of churches. 
Some of them urged, that the king ought to make them after 
the example of his father and brother, and not according to the 
precepts of and in obedience to the successor of the Apostles. 
But pope Paschal, standing firm in the opinion which had been 
promulgated from the papal chair, had conceded everything 45 
which pope Urban had forbidden to be received as investi- 
tures, and by these means had made the king agree in his 
view on the subject of investiture. 

After this, in the presence of Anselm, a great multitude 
being present, the king asserted and decreed that, from that 
time forward, no person should ever be invested in a bishopric 
or abbey by the king, or by any lay hand, in England, by the 
gift of the pastoral staff or of the ring ; while Anselm conceded, 
that no person elected to a prelacy should be refused conse- 
cration to the dignity so received by reason of the homage 
which he should perform to the king. Gerard, archbishop of 

45 This passage, which might seem somewhat obscure, is probably explain- 
ed by the more full account given by Roger of Wendover of what passed 
when Anselm and the deposed abbats appeared before the pope. " Pope 
Paschal received Anselm kindly ; and, on a day appointed, William de 
Warewast, clerk and proctor for the king of England, brought forward 
his cause, and, amongst other things, firmly asserted that he would never 
resign the investiture of churches, even if he were to lose his kingdom, 
and confirmed this assertion with words of threatening import. To this 
the pope replied, ' If, as you say, your king would not give up the 
donation of churches to save his kingdom, neither would I, to save my life 
let him keep it.' Thus the king's business terminated, and archbishop 
Anselm began to intercede with the pope for the degraded bishops and 
abbats, that he would give them a dispensation to recover their lost dig- 
nities. Then the Holy See, which is never wanting to any one, if any- 
thing of a white or red colour passes between the parties, manfully restored 
the aforesaid bishops and abbats to their former dignities, and sent them 
back with joy to their own habitations." The allusion to the white or 
red colour refers to the power of silver or gold at the papal court, which 
was then open to great corruption. 



200 AXNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEJT A.D. 1108. 

York, placing Ms hand in the hand of Anselm, as he himself 
desired, promised, upon his faith, that he would pay the same 
obedience and be in the same subjection to him and his suc- 
cessors in the archbishopric, as he had promised to him when 
about to be consecrated by him to the see of Hereford. 

Walter Giffard, bishop elect of Winchester, Roger of Salis- 
bury, Reinelm of Hereford, William of Exeter, and Urban 
of Glamorgan, in Wales, came to Canterbury at the same time, 
and were consecrated together by Anselm, on the third day 
before the ides of August, being the Lord's day, the following 
suffragans of his province assisting him in his duties : Ge- 
rard, archbishop of York, Robert, bishop of Lincoln, John, 
bishop of Bath, Herbert, bishop of Norwich, Robert, bishop of 
Chester, Ralph, bishop of Chichester, and Ranulph, bishop ot 
Durham. There was no one then living, who could remember in 
past times so many pastors being elected and consecrated at 
one time in England, except in the days of Edward the Elder, 
when archbishop Plegmund consecrated seven bishops to seven 
churches in one day. 

In the same year, Maurice, bishop of London, Richard, ab- 
bat of Ely, Robert, abbat of Saint Edmund's, Milo Crispin, 
Robert Fitz-Haimon, Roger Bigot, and Richard de Rivers 
departed this life. 

In the year 1108, Gundulph, bishop of Rochester, died on 
the nones of March. Henry, king of the English, for the pur- 
pose of protection, enacted a law that, if any one should be 
detected in the act of theft or larceny, he should be hanged. 
He also enacted that base and spurious coin should be guarded 
against with such strictness, that whosoever should be detected 
coining spurious money, should lose his eyes and the lower 
part of his body without any ransom ; and, inasmuch as, 
very frequently, while pennies were being coined, 46 they were 
bent, or broken, and then rejected, he ordered that no penny 
or obol, 47 which he also ordered to be made of a round form, 
or even farthing, if it was a good one, should be rejected. 
From this provision much good resulted to the whole king- 

45 " Eligebantur" is the word used here, probahly by mistake for 
" elidebantur," which may allude to the process of coining by ham- 
meiing out. 

47 Probably a small silver coin of three carats in weight. 



A. D. 1108. CHASTITY ENFORCED UPON THE PRIESTHOOD. 201 

dom, because the king thus exerted himself in secular matters 
to retrieve the troubles of the land. 

In this year, Gerard, archbishop of York, departed this 
life, in whose place was elected Thomas, the cousin of 
Thomas, his predecessor. Philip, king of the Franks, de- 
parted this life, and was succeeded by his son Louis. Arch- 
bishop Anselm, at the king's request, consecrated Eichard, the 
bishop of London elect, in his chapel at Paggaham, being as- 
sisted in the performance of this duty by William, bishop of 
Winchester, Roger, bishop of" Salisbury, Ralph, bishop of 
Chichester, and WilHam, bishop of Exeter, having first re- 
ceived from him the usual profession of obedience and subjec- 
tion. After this, coming to Canterbury on the third day be- 
fore the ides of August, he consecrated Ralph, abbat of Seez, 
a religious man, bishop of Rochester, in succession to Gun- 
dulph, William, bishop of Winchester, Ralph, bishop of Chi- 
chester, and Richard, bishop of London, assisting him in the 
performance of that duty; which same Richard, after the 
custom of his predecessors, on the same day presented a hand- 
some gift to his mother church of Canterbury. 

These are the provisions relative to archdeacons, priests, 
deacons, subdeacons, and secular clergy of whatever degree, 
which, in the year of our Lord's Incarnation 1108, Anselm, 
archbishop of Canterbury, and Thomas, archbishop elect 
of York, and all the other bishops of England, in the pre- 
sence of the glorious king Henry, with the assent of his 
earls and barons, enacted : " It is hereby decreed, that 
priests, deacons, and subdeacons, shall live in chastity, and 
shall have no women in their houses save only those who are 
connected with them by close relationship, according to the 
rulo which the holy Synod of Nice has laid down. But those 
priests, deacons, and subdeacons who have, since the prohibi- 
tion pronounced by the synod held in London, either retained 
their wives or married others, if they wish any longer to 
celebrate the mass, let them so entirely put them away from 
themselves as not to let them enter their houses ; nor are they 
themselves to go into the houses of such women, or knowingly 
to meet them in any house ; nor are any women of this descrip- 
tion to live upon lands belonging to the church. But if for any 
proper reason it is necessary for either party to communicate 
with the other, having two lawful witnesses, let them converse 



202 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1109. 

together outside of the house. And if, upon the testimony of 
two or three lawful witnesses, or by the public report of the 
people of the parish, any one of them shall be accused of having 
violated this enactment, he shall clear himself, if he is a priest, 
by bringing six proper witnesses of his own order ; if a deacon, 
four ; if a subdeacon, two. But as for him, who shall not thus 
clear himself, he shall be deemed to be a transgressor of this 
holy enactment. And as for those priests who, despising the 
divine altar and the holy canons, have preferred to live with 
women, let them be removed from the holy office, deprived 
of all ecclesiastical benefices, and placed without the choir, 
being pronounced infamous ; and he who, being a rebel and con- 
tumacious, shall not leave the woman, and shall presume to 
celebrate the mass, if, when called upon to make satisfaction, 
he shall neglect to do so, is to be excommunicated. The same 
sentence embraces the archdeacons and all the secular clergy, 
both as to leaving these women and avoiding cohabitation with 
them, and the severity of the punishment if they shall trans- 
gress these statutes. All archdeacons shall also swear that they 
will not receive money for tolerating the transgression of 
this enactment, nor suffer priests whom they know to be 
keeping women to chaunt the mass, or to have substitutes ; 48 
deans also shall swear to the same effect. The -archdeacon, or 
deacon, or dean, who shall refuse to take oath to this effect, 
is to lose his archdeaconry or deanery. As to those priests, 
who, leaving the women, shall make choice to serve God and 
the holy altars, let them cease during forty days from the per- 
formance of their duties, and in the meantime employ sub- 
stitutes in their places, such penance being imposed on them 
as to their bishops shall seem fit." 

In the year 1109, Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury, de- 
parted this life at Canterbury, on the eleventh day before 
the calends of May, being the fourth day of the week, and on 
the following day, which was the Supper of the Lord, was 
buried with great honor. About the time of the Rogation 
Days, Henry, king of the English, returned to England, and 
at Pentecost held his court at Westminster ; where Thomas, 
archbishop elect of York, was consecrated at London, 48 * on the 
fifth day before the calends of July, by Richard, bishop of 

48 Vicaros." equivalent to (t curates." 4S * Westminster is generally 
considered by these writers as forming part of London. 



A.D. 1111. 



SEVERE PLAGUE AXD FAMINE. 



203 



London, and afterwards on the calends of August, being 
Sunday, received, at York, from the hands of Cardinal Ulric, 
the pall which the pope had sent him, and on the same 
day consecrated Turgot, prior of Durham, to the bishopric 
of Saint Andrew's in Scotland, which is called Cenrimunt. 
In the same year, king Henry changed the abbacy of Ely 
into an episcopal see, and made Hervey, bishop of Bangor, 
bishop of that see. In the month of December a comet was 
seen, near the milky circle, making its way with its train 
towards the southern part of the heavens. 

In the year 1110, Henry, king of the English, gave his daugh- 
ter in marriage to Henry, king of Germany. In the same 
year, different prodigies appeared throughout England. A very 
great earthquake took place at Shrewsbury. The river at 
Nottingham, which is called the Trent, was dried up for the 
space of a mile from morning until the third hour of the 
day, so much so, that men walked with dry feet upon its bed. 
On the sixth day before the ides of July, a comet appeared, 
and was seen to shine for a period of three weeks. 

In the year 1111, Henry, king of Germany, came to Rome, 
and taking pope Paschal prisoner, placed him in confinement, 
but shortly after, when they were celebrating the festival of 
Easter on the Campus Martius at the bridge on the Salarian 
road, 49 was reconciled to him. In this year died Baldwin, 
earl of Flanders, and was succeeded by his son Baldwin. 
Henry, king of the English, removed the people of Flanders 
who inhabited Northumbria, with all their chattels into Wales, 
and gave them orders to colonize the district which bears the 
name of Ros. 50 

The new monastery which had been built within the walls 
f Winchester, through the influence of William, bishop of 
Winchester the king ordered to be rebuilt without the walls, 
and shortly after crossed the sea. 

In the same year there was a most severe winter, a dread- 
ful famine, a plague among men, and a murrain among animals, 
both wild and domestic ; there was also a very great mortality 
among birds. 

49 A road near Rome, so called from having been used by the Sabines, 
when fetching salt from the sea. 

40 The town of Denbigh. Henry either feared that these Flemings 
would coalesce against him with the Scots, or placed them there for 
the purpose of acting as a check upon the Welch, 



204 ANNALS OF EOGEK DE EOVEDEN. A.D. 1114. 

In the year 1112, on the third day before the nones of May, 
being Sunday, Samson, the twenty-fifth bishop 51 of Worcester, 
departed this life. In October, Henry, king of the English, 
placed earl Robert de Belesme in confinement at Cherburg. 

In the year 1113, the city of Worcester was, on the calends 
of July, destroyed by fire, with the principal church and all 
the others, and the castle. One of the monks, a person of the 
greatest utility to the monastery, together with two servants 
and fifteen citizens, perished in the flames. In the month of 
July, Henry, king of the English, returned to England, and 
bringing with him earl Robert de Belesme from Normandy, 
placed him in close custody at Wareham. On the fourth day 
before the nones of October, two men of exemplary virtue 
departed this life ; Thomas, the prior, and Coleman, a monk, of 
the venerable church of Saint Mary at Worcester, men of noble 
extraction. On the fifth day before the calends of January, 
being the Lord's day, Teulph, the king's chaplain, received the 
bishopric of Worcester at Windsor. 

In the year 1114, on the eighth day before the ides of 
January, Matilda, daughter of Henry, king of the English, 
was married to Henry, the emperor of the Romans, at Mentz, 
and consecrated empress. On the sixth day before the calends 
of March, being the third day of the week, Thomas the 
Younger, archbishop of York, departed this life. When he 
was first taken ill, his medical men told him that he could 
not recover, except by means of carnal knowledge of a woman ; 
on which he made answer, " Shame upon a malady which 
requires sensuality for its cure !" and being thus chosen by the 
Lord while of virgin purity closed his temporal life. On the 
sixth day before the calends of May, being the Lord's day, 
Ralph, bishop of Rochester, was elected at Windsor arch- 
bishop of Canterbury. On the third day before the nones of 
May, being the third day of the week, the city of Chichester, 
together with the principal monastery, was, through culpable 
carelessness, destroyed by fire. 

On the day of the Assumption of Saint Mary, Turstin, the 
king's chaplain, was, at Winchester, elected to the archbishopric 
of York, and Arnulph, abbat of Burgh, was chosen bishop of 
Hereford. Henry, king of the English, after leading an 
army into Wales, before the feast of Saint Michael crossed the 

41 He is by mistake called " Archiepiscopus," " archbishop." 



A.D. 1115. HENBY EETtTKKS TO ENGLAND. 205 

sea. In this year, the river which hears the name of Medway, 
for a distance of some miles, receded so far from its hed, on 
the sixth day before the ides of October, that in the very mid- 
dle of it not even the smallest vessel could make the slightest 
way. On the same day, the river Thames was also sensible of 
a similar decrease ; for between the bridge and the royal tower, 83 
and even under the bridge, so greatly was the water of the 
river diminished, that an innumerable multitude of men and 
boys forded it on foot, the water scarcely reaching to their 
knees. This ebb of the tide continued from the middle of the 
preceding night until dark on the following night. We have 
heard also on good authority that on the same day a similar 
low tide happened at Girvemuthe 53 and other places throughout 
England. 

In the year 1115, there was a most severe winter, so much 
so, that nearly all the bridges throughout England were broken 
by the ice. The emperor Henry, after besieging the city 
of Cologne and losing many of his men in a pitched battle, 
made peace, which he ratified by oath at the city of Neuss. 54 
On the fifth day before the calends of July, being the Lord's 
day, Ealph, archbishop of Canterbury, received the pall 
from Anselm, 55 the legate of the holy Roman Church, at Canter- 
bury, and on the same day was consecrated with great honor ; 
at which place, also, were assembled the bishops of the whole 
of England. Teulph, bishop of Worcester, departed this life, 
and was succeeded by Wilfrid, bishop of Saint David's, in 
Wales ; up to this time, the bishops of that see had been 
Welchmen, but he was succeeded by Barnard, the queen's 
chancellor. On the octave of the Apostles Saint Peter and Paul, 
a great council, was held at Chalons, by Conon, a cardinal of the 
Eoman church, at which he excommunicated those bishops who 
were not present at the council, and degraded some ; some 
abbats also he deprived of their staffs and removed from 
their offices, forbidding them the performance of ecclesiastical 
duties. 

In the month of July, Henry, king of the English, returned 
to England. Turgot, formerly prior of the church of Durham, 

5 - The Tower of London. 

53 He probably means the vicinity of Jarrow ; in allusion to the large 
inlet of shoaly water, now called Jarrow Slake. 

64 A town or city of Germany, not far from Cologne. 

55 He was nephew to archbishop Anselm,theu lately deceased. 



206 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1116. 

and afterwards bishop of the Scots, 56 having returned to Durham, 
there departed this Hfe. About the period of the feast of All 
Saints, Reinelm, bishop of Hereford, died, and was succeeded 
by Gosfrid, the king's chaplain. On the day of Saint Stephen 
the Martyr, Ralph, archbishop of Canterbury, ordained at 
that place Arnulph, abbat of Burgh, bishop of Rochester, 
and Gosfrid, the king's chaplain, bishop of Hereford. 

In the year 1116, during the spring, Griffin, the son of 
Rees, 56 * carried off considerable booty into Wales, and burned 
some castles, in consequence of which, Henry, king of 
England, was unwilling to allow him to possess a particle of 
the lands of his father. On the fourteenth day before the 
calends of April, the earls and barons of the whole of England 
met at Salisbury. Here a trial took place relative to a dis- 
pute which had continued during a whole year, between 
Ralph, archbishop of Canterbury, and Turstin, archbishop 
elect of York. The latter, on being requested by the arch- 
bishop to do what was his duty to the church of Canterbury, 
and after the ecclesiastical usage, receive his benediction, made 
answer that he would willingly receive the benediction, but 
would on no account make the profession 58 which he required. 
On this, king Henry, perceiving that Turstin persisted in his 
obstinacy, openly protested that he must act after the manner 
of his predecessors, both as to making the profession, as also in 
other matters pertaining to the dignity of the church of 
Canterbury of ancient right, or else give up the archbishopric 
of York altogether, as well as the benediction ; on hearing 
which, without previous consideration, Turstin renounced the 
archbishopric, and promised the king and the archbishop that he 
would not claim it again as long as he lived, nor would make 
any charge relative thereto, whoever might be substituted 
in his place. 

At this time, Owen, king of the Welch, was slain. Henry, 
king of the English, crossed the sea. attended by Turstin, 
the archbishop elect of York, who hoped to obtain re-instal- 
ment into the see, and by the king's command receive the 
benediction from the archbishop, without the profession being 
exacted of him. The above-named Anselm, the legate of 
the Roman church who had brought the pall from Rome to the 
archbishop of Canterbury, returned from Rome about the month 

56 Of Saint Andrews. 56 * 111 Welch, Griffin ap Rice. M Of sub- 
jection to the see of Canterbury. 



A.D 1118. DEATH OF POPE PASCHAL. 207 

of August, and came to Normandy to king Henry, bringing 
letters from the successor of the Apostles, which directed him 
to act in England on behalf of the Apostolic see. This being 
soon spread abroad throughout the whole of England, by the 
advice of the queen and some of the nobles, Ralph, the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, after the nativity of Saint Mary, crossed 
the sea, and went to the king whom he found staying at 
Rouen, and after having carefully conferred with him on the 
business on which he had come, taking each matter in its 
proper order, by the king's advice set out on his way to Rome. 

In the year 1117, by the command of king Henry, the new 
works at Cirencester were begun. In Lombardy, a great 
earthquake took place, and, according to the testimony of those 
who knew the fact, lasted for a period of forty days, during 
which time many buildings fell to the ground ; and, a thing 
marvellous to be seen and spoken of, a certain town, of 
very considerable magnitude, was suddenly moved from its 
original site, and is at the present day to be seen by all at a 
place far distant. While some men of patrician rank at 
Milan were discoursing on matters of state, sitting beneath a 
certain tower, a voice from outside resounded in the ears of 
all, calling one of them by name, and begging him to come 
out immediately ; on his delaying, a person appeared, and 
with entreaties, begged the man who had been called, to come 
forth ; on doing which, the tower was suddenly overthrown, and 
in its dreadful fall buried all who were there. 

On the calends of December, there was great thunder and 
lightning, which was followed by a vast deluge of rain and 
hail ; on the third day before the ides of the same month, the 
moon appeared at first of the colour of blood, after which it 
became overshadowed. Robert, bishop of Chester, died. 
' In the year 1118, pope Paschal of holy memory departed 
this life, on the fourteenth day before the calends of February ; 
and in his place was appointed one John, a native of Gaeta, 
who, changing his name, was called Gelasius. From his in- 
fancy he had been brought up as a monk, at the monastery of 
Monte Casino, and after he had grown up had assiduously 
fulfilled the duties of chancellor, during the ministration of 
the venerable successors of the Apostles, Desiderius, Urban, 
and Paschal. 

Henry, king of Germany, who was also emperor of Rome, 



208 ANNALS OF JtOGER DE HOVEDEff. A.D. 1118. 

on hearing that the pope was dead, flew to Rome, and nomi- 
nated the bishop of Braga, who had been excommunicated at 
Beneventum by the same pope the previous year, to be pope, 
changing his name from Bourdin to Gregory ; on which Gelasius 
retired from the city. On the day before the calends of May, 
Matilda, queen of the English, departed this life at West- 
minster, and was becomingly buried at the monastery there. 
At this period, many of the Normans, forsaking the fealty 
which they had sworn to king Henry, and having no fear of 
retribution, betook themselves to Louis, king of the Franks 
and his principal men, who were the enemies of their natural 
lord. In this year died Robert, earl of Mellent. 

The above-named pope Gelasius came by sea to Burgundy, 
and his arrival soon became known throughout Gaul. On 
the seventeenth day before the calends of February, he sent 
a letter throughout Gaul to the archbishops, bishops, abbats, 
secular clergy, and principal men, complaining that he had 
been expelled with violence by the emperor from Home, and 
that the bishop of Braga, an excommunicated person, had been 
thrust into the Apostolic See ; at the same time, exhorting 
them to prepare themselves by their assistance in common to 
avenge the cause of the mother Church. These letters hav- 
ing been circulated throughout the provinces, all the men 
of influence were aroused, together with the middle classes, 
to go to meet the successor of the Apostles, and prepared 
with every possible effort to be present at the council, which 
he declared he would hold at Rheims at the time of Mid-Lent. 

In this year, a certain church having been dedicated at a 
town in England, called Momerfield, by Geoffrey, bishop of 
Hereford, as the people were returning home who had at- 
tended the dedication, after the serenity of the weather 
which had previously prevailed, on a sudden a most vio- 
lent tempest arose, attended with thunder ; some persons 
were struck with lightning and perished, while unable to 
get away from a place in which they had taken shelter. 
They were five in number, namely, three men and two 
women, one of which last was struck by a thunderbolt and 
killed, while the other woman was shockingly smitten from 
the navel down to the soles of her feet, and perished, enveloped 
in flames ; the men alone with difficulty escaped with their 
lives, while their five horses were destroyed by the lightning. 



A.D. 1119. COUNCIL AT KHEIMS. 209 

In the year 1119, pope Gelasius died at Clugny, and was 
buried there ; and in his place the cardinals and other Ro- 
mans who had followed him, elected Guido, archbishop of 
Vienna, and gave him the name of Calixtus. While these 
transactions were going on in Burgundy, the Apostolate of the 
Roman Church was administered by the above-named Gregory. 
In consequence of the elevation of these two to the papacy, 
the world was shaken and divided into two factions, some 
giving their adhesion to the one, and some to the other ; by 
reason whereof, the church was stricken with great scandal. 
On the fourth day before the nones of February, Geoffrey, 
bishop of Hereford, and, on the tenth day before the calends 
of September, Herbert, bishop of Norwich, departed this life. 
On the fourth day before the calends of October, being the 
Lord's day, at about the third hour of the day, a great earth- 
quake took place at many places throughout England. 

On the thirteenth day before the calends of November, 
'pope Calixtus held a general council at Rheims ; at this council 
there was a vast concourse of archbishops, bishops, abbats, 
and chief men of the various provinces, together with an im- 
mense multitude of the clergy and common people. There 
were counted there four hundred and twenty-four staffs of 
persons with pastoral honors ; among whom was Turstin, the 
archbishop elect of York, who having with difficulty obtained 
the king's permission, had come thither in reference to his own 
business. But the king had previously sent his ambassador 
to the successor of the Apostles, for the purpose of telling him, 
among other things, not to consecrate the archbishop elect 
of York, or command or allow him to be consecrated by any 
other person than the archbishop of Canterbury, as used to be 
the custom. In answer to which, the successor of the Apostles 
replied : " Let not the king imagine that I would act in rela- 
tion to the matter upon which he treats in any other way 
than he wishes, even though his request should be an un- 
reasonable one : nor, indeed, has my inclination ever led me 
to wish to debase the ancient dignity of the church of Canter- 
bury." 

Moreover, on the morning of the Lord's day preceding 
the day of the appointed council, Turstin, having made 
preparations for his consecration to the archbishopric, the 
deputies of the archbishop of Canterbury charged that his 

VOL. i. p 



210 ANNALS OF SOGEE DE H.OVEDEN. A.D. 1119. 

consecration ought to be performed by the archbishop of Can- 
terbury, according as the ancient usage and that observed up 
to the present time required ; in answer to which, the succes- 
sor of the Apostles replied : " It is our wish to do no injustice 
to the church of Canterbury, but maintaining its dignity, we 
will do that which we purpose." Nevertheless, Turstin was 
consecrated by the successor of the Apostles, Ranulph, the bishop 
of Durham, who had been sent by the king to prevent his 
consecration, not having yet arrived; he, however, arrived 
some time after. 

On the following day the council was held, and all persons 
taking their seats in the order of their ecclesiastical rank, and 
Louis, king of the Franks, and many other men of the highest 
station being there seated, by the consent of all the fathers, the 
statutes of enactment and of prohibition 59 were renewed, of 
which these are the five heads. "The laws which, by the sanction 
of the holy fathers, have been established in relation to simo- 
niacal sin, Ave do also, by the judgment of the Holy Ghost and 
the authority of the Apostolic See, confirm. If any one there- 
fore, shall, either by himself or by any person suborned there- 
to, buy or sell any bishopric, abbacy, priory, archdeaconry, 
presbytery, provostship, prebend, altar, or any ecclesiastical 
benefices, dignities, ordinations, consecrations, dedications of 
churches, clerical tonsure, seat in the choir, or any eccle- 
siastical duties, let both seller and buyer be subject to the 
peril of losing their dignities, offices, and benefices ; and, 
unless he shall repent, let him be pierced by the point of 
anathema, and in every way cut off from the church of God, 
which he has injured. The investiture of bishoprics, abba- 
cies, or any ecclesiactical possessions whatsoever, we do utterly 
forbid to be performed by lay hands ; whoever, therefore, of 
the laity shall henceforth presume to give investiture, let him 
be subject to the penalties of anathema : and further, let him 
who has received such investiture be utterly, without hope of 
recovery thereof, deprived of the honor with which he has been 
invested. The universal possessions of the churches we do 
decree to be unshaken and inviolate for everlasting. But if any 
one shall take them away, or seize them, or by tyrannical power 
withhold the same, let him be smitten everlastingly with 
anathema, according to that decree of Saint Symmachus, which 
69 " Statuta de statuendis, et rescidenda de rescidendis." 



A. D. 1119. THE EMPERORS CONTEST WITH THE POPE. 211 

begins, ' Let no bishop, no priest, no member of the clergy 
whatsoever, part with ecclesiastical dignities or benefices to 
any one, as though of hereditary right.' This, also, we do 
enjoin in addition thereto, that no payment shall be demanded 
for receiving baptism, chrism, holy oil, and burial. To priests, 
deacons, and subdeacons, we do utterly forbid the society 
of wives and concubines. And if any persons of this cha- 
racter shall be found, let them be deprived both of their 
ecclesiastical offices and benefices ; and if they do not even 
then correct their uncleanness, let them be deprived of all 
communion with Christians." 60 

These decrees were sent to the emperor Henry, as he was 
not far distant, first from the council by persons of rank, and 
then by the successor of the Apostles himself, in order that, be- 
fore the breaking up of the council, it might be ascertained 
whether, in the churches throughout his kingdom and each 
province subject to him, he would consent to canonical elec- 
tions, that is to say, bishops and abbats being chosen by 
the church ; and whether, to free consecrations, as is the case 
where those who are elected are consecrated where and by 
whom it is befitting; 61 and whether he would also consent 
that no lay person whatsoever should claim a right to the inves- 
titure in ecclesiastical matters, so that those elected might, 
through investiture with the pastoral staff and ring, enter 
through the door, that is, through Christ. 

To these requests he made answer, that he would give up 
none of these particulars that belonged to him of right, and 
which the ancient customs of his ancestors had conferred upon 
him. At length, however, being prevailed upon by the authority 
of the general council, he conceded the first three points ; but 
the last, namely, the right of investiture in ecclesiastical matters, 
he would not concede ; in consequence of which, on the pope 
returning to the council, sentence of excommunication was 
pronounced against him. Some who were present at the 
council being indignant at this, the successor of the Apostles 
gave his commands that those who were offended thereat, 
should go forth and separate themselves from the society of 
their brethren, quoting the example of those seventy who, 
being offended as to eating the flesh of our Lord and 

60 Under the penalties of anathema. 

61 According to the rules of the church. 

P2 



212 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1119. 

drinking his blood, 62 returned home, and no longer walked 
with him; and " inasmuch as," he said, "he who gathereth 
not with the Lord, scattereth ; and he who is not with him, 
is against him, and that tunic which is not sewn together 
but woven, namely, the Holy Church, those who think 
with us are unwilling to have rent asunder, while those who 
differ from us are striving to rend it asunder." The successor 
of the Apostles having spoken to this effect, forthwith all 
were brought round to the same opinion, and sentence of ex- 
communication was fulminated against the emperor Henry. 

At length, some days after the council had broken up, Henry, 
king of the English, being offended at archbishop Turstin, 
because he had caused himself to be consecrated without his 
consent, and not in the way that ancient usage required, for- 
bade him to return to any place in his dominions. After this, 
pope Calixtus came to Gisors, where the king of the English 
came to meet him, for the purpose of holding a conference. 
Many things were treated of between them, on account of 
which it was right that such great personages should meet ; and, 
among the rest, the king obtained the pope's consent that he 
would grant him all the liberties his father had possessed in 
England and Normandy, and especially that he would allow no 
one to fill the office of legate at any time in England, unless 
he himself (on any important difference arising which could 
not be put an end to by the bishops of his kingdom) requested 
this to be done by the pope. All these points being settled for 
the present, the pope requested the king to become reconciled 
to Turstin, and in consideration of his love towards himself, 
his restoration to the archbishopric to which he himself 
had consecrated him. But the king confessed that he had 
vowed upon his faith that he would not do so, as long as he 
lived ; to which the pope made reply : "I am the successor 
of the Apostles, and, if you do what I ask, will release you 
from the stringency of this oath." " I will discuss the 
matter," said the king, "and notify to you the result of 
my determination." Upon this, the pope withdrew, and 
the king, by messengers, gave him this answer upon the 
subject : "I will admit Turstin to the archbishopric upon 
condition, that he pay that obedience to the church of Canter- 
bury which his predecessors did, otherwise, so long as I reign, 
62 In allusion to St. John, vi. 66. 



A.D. 1120. HOMAGE PAID TO HENBY's S03T. 213 

he shall not preside over the see of York." Matters being 
thus concluded, the successor of the Apostles took his depar- 
ture, and Turstin remained in France. 

William, the son of king Henry and queen Matilda, a youth 
seventeen years of age, this year took to wife the daughter of 
the earl of Anjou. Baldwin, earl of Flanders, died of the effects 
of a wound which he had received at Eu. 

In the year 1120, Henry, king of the English, and Louis, 
king of the Franks, after many losses on both sides, on a day 
appointed, held a conference ; at which, peace having been 
made by mutual consent, by the command of king Henry, his 
son, William, did homage to the king of the Franks, and 
received under him the principality of Normandy ; and thus, 
the kings departing in peace, the whole of the seditions which 
had raged throughout Normandy were suppressed, and those 
who had raised their arms against their lord, king Henry, 
having bowed their necks to his dominion, returned to obe- 
dience. And, inasmuch as archbishop Turstin had shown 
himself both vigilant and active in effecting a reconciliation 
between the kings, in consequence of his usefulness, he ren- 
dered the king's feelings more inclined to sanction his return. 
In addition to this, as the king was preparing to return to 
England, a letter came directed to him from the successor of 
the Apostles, enjoining him to receive archbishop Turstin, 
and. all other pretexts and excuses set aside, to restore him to 
his see. But in reply to this precept, the king deferred until 
his return to England what answer to give, in order that, 
having assembled his council there, he might consider with 
more mature deliberation what was to be done. 

By the king's command, the chief men of Normandy did 
komage to his son William, a youth then just eighteen years 
of age ; they also swore fealty to him, confirming it by oath. 
After this, all who had rebelled against him being either con- 
quered or reconciled, and every thing prosperously concluded 
according to his wish, the fifth year after he had gone thither 
being not yet completed, the king returned to England by ship 
in better spirits than usual. To his son and all his retinue he had 
given a ship, a better one than which there did not seem to be 
in all the fleet, but as the event proved, there was not one more 
unfortunate ; for while his father preceded him, the son fol- 
lowed somewhat more tardily, but with a still more unhappy 



214 ANNALS- OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1121. 

result. For the ship, when not far from land, while in full sail, 
was driven upon the rocks which are called Chaterase, and 
being wrecked, the king's son, with all who were with him, 
perished on the sixth day before the calends of December, 
being the fifth day of the week, at nightfall, near Barbeflet. 63 
In the morning, the king's treasures which were on board the 
ship, were found on the sands, but none of the bodies of 
those lost. 

There perished with the king's son, his illegitimate brother, 
earl Eichard, together with the king's daughter, 64 the wife of 
Rotrou ; Richard, earl of Chester, with his wife, the king's 
niece, and sister of earl Tedbald, the king's nephew. There 
also perished Othoel, the governor of the king's son, Geof- 
frey Riddell, Robert Maldint, 65 William Bigot, and many other 
men of rank ; also several noble women with no small num- 
ber of the king's children ; besides one hundred and forty sol- 
diers, with fifty sailors and three pilots. A certain butcher was 
the only person who made his escape, by clinging to a plank 
of the wrecked vessel. The king having had a fair voyage, 
on reaching England, thought that his son had entered some 
other port ; but on the third day he was afflicted with the sad 
tidings of his death, and at first, from the suddenness of the 
calamity, fainted away, as though a person of weak mind ; 
but afterwards, concealing his grief, in contempt of fortune he 
resumed his kingly spirits For this son being the only one 
left him by lawful wedlock, he had named him heir to the 
kingdom in succession to himself. 

In the year 1121, at the Purification of Saint Mary, having 
assembled the council of the whole of England at Windsor, 
Henry, king of the English, took in marriage Adeline, the 
daughter of Godfrey, duke of Lorraine. Richard, the king's 
chaplain, was elected bishop of Hereford, and Robert Peche, 66 
another royal chaplain, bishop of Coventry. Herbert, almo- 
ner of Saint Peter's at Westminster, was chosen abbat of that 
place. Edwin, a monk of the church of Canterbury, having 
been elected in the preceding year bishop of Saint Andrew's 
in Scotland, gave up his intention of ruling that see and re- 

63 Harfleur. 

64 Mary, the wife of Rotrou, earl of Perche. 

65 A misprint for Mauduit. 

66 V. r. Peccator in English, "sinner ;" a curious name for a king's 
chaplain. 



A.D. 1121. LETTEB OF POPE CALIXTTTS. 215 

turned to his former place. William Deschapelles, bishop of 
Chalons, departed this life on the fifteenth day before the 
calends of February, having assumed the monastic habit eight 
days before his death. 

There came a letter from pope Calixtus, relative to Tur- 
stin, directed to king Henry and Ralph, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, in which he interdicted the latter from all sacerdotal and 
episcopal duties; and both in the mother church of Canterbury, 
and in the principal church at York, together with its provinces, 
forbade the celebration of all divine offices together with the 
burial of the dead, except the baptism of infants and the abso- 
lution of the dying, 67 unless within one month after the re- 
ceipt of that letter, Turstin should be, without exacting the 
profession of obedience, restored to his archbishopric. 

In the same year, after Easter, pope Calixtus departed from 
the city with a large body of men, and besieged the city of 
Sutri, until he took both Bourdin the anti-pope and the place 
itself, as the subjoined letter will more plainly show. 

"Calixtus the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his 
dearly beloved brethren and sons, the archbishops, bishops, ab- 
bats, priors, and others, both clergy and laity, the faithful ser- 
vants of Saint Peter throughout the Gauls, health, and the 
apostolic benediction. Because the people have forsaken the law 
of the Lord, and walk not in his judgments, the Lord visits their 
iniquities with a rod, and their sins with stripes. But retain- 
ing the bowels of paternal affection, those who put trust in his 
mercy he does not repel ; though for a long time, their sins 
so requiring, the faithful of the church have been disturbed 
by Bourdin, that idol of the king of Germany ; some indeed 
have been taken captives, and others through starvation in 
f rison have been afflicted unto death. Lately, however, after 
celebrating the feast of Easter, when we could no longer pas- 
sively endure the complaints of the pilgrims and of the poor, 
we left the city with the faithful servants of the church, and 
laid siege to Sutri, until the Divine power delivered the before- 
named Bourdin, the enemy of the church, who had there made a 
nest for the devil, as well as the place itself, entirely into our 
hands. We beg your brotherly love therefore, with us to 
return thanks to the King of kings for benefits so great, and 

67 The original is " poenitentias niorientium ;" in allusion to the 
administration of the " viaticum." 



216 ANNAL8 OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1123. 

that you will remain most firmly in your obedience to the Ca- 
tholic church, and in your duty to God, as you will receive 
from Almighty God, through His grace, the recompense for so 
doing, both here and hereafter. We beg also, that this our 
letter be sent from one to the other, all negligence laid aside. 
Done at Sutri, on the fifth day before the calends of May." 

In this year, the daughter of Fulk, earl of Anjou, for- 
merly the wife of William the son of king Henry, who had 
been drowned, was, at the request of her father, sent back 
by the king to her own country. The sons of the king 
of the Welch, on hearing of the death of Richard earl of 
Chester, burning two castles and slaying many men, laid 
waste, with great ravages, some places in that earldom. King 
Henry, being indignant at this, having levied an innumerable 
army throughout all England, marched for the purpose of 
ravaging Wales ; but, on his arrival at Snawedun, 68 the king 
of the Welch was reconciled to the king, appeasing him by 
presents and hostages, and, shortly after, the army returned 
home. At this period, king Henry having, by digging, made 
a long trench from Torkesey as far as Lincoln, by turning into 
it the river Trent made a passage for shipping. Ranulph, 
bishop of Durham, also began a castle at Norham, on the banks 
of the river Tweed. On the vigil of the Nativity of our 
Lord, an unusual wind blew down not only houses, but even 
towers built of stone. 

In the year 1 122, king Henry was at Windsor during the 
festival of the Nativity, at Easter, at Northampton, and during 
Pentecost, at Windsor ; whence he proceeded to London and 
Kent, and afterwards to Durham, in Northumbria. In the 
same year, died Ralph, archbishop of Canterbury, and John, 
bishop of Bath. 

In the year 1123, during the festival of the Nativity, king 
Henry was at Dunstable, and thence proceeded to Berkhamp- 
stead. Here, a certain chancellor of the king, Ranulph by 
name, who had been afflicted with a malady for twenty years, 
but who had always gloried at court in his wickedness, being 
ready for all crimes, oppressing the innocent, and plundering 
the lands of many, while escorting the king to entertain 
him at his house, on coming to the top of a hill whence his 
castle could be seen, was so elated in spirits that he fell off 
68 The mountain of Snowdon. 



A. D. 1126. EARL OF MEIXENX TAKEN PBISONEB. 217 

his horse, and a monk galloped over him ; 69 in consequence 
of which he was so crushed that he ended his life in a few 
days. The king went thence attended by Robert, bishop of 
Lincoln, on his road to Woodstock ; where the bishop being 
attacked by a sudden malady, lost his speech, and, being car- 
ried to an inn, soon afterwards breathed forth his spirit. 70 
This happened on the tenth day of the month of January. 

In the year 1124, at the feast of the Purification, the king 
gave the archbishopric of Canterbury to William de Curbuil, 
prior of the canons of Chiche. 71 After this, at Easter, king 
Henry, when at Winchester, gave the bishopric of Lincoln to 
Alexander, the nephew of Roger, bishop of Salisbury, justiciary 
of all England ; he also gave the bishopric of Bath to Godfrey, 
the queen's chancellor, and about Pentecost, crossed the sea ; 
on which a dispute arising, the earl of Mellent revolted from 
him ; whereupon the king laid siege to his castle, the name of 
which is Pontaudemer, and took it. 

In the year 1125, great success smiled on the king; for 
William de Tankerville, the king's chamberlain, fighting a 
pitched battle with him, took the above-named earl of Mel- 
lent prisoner, together with Hugh de Montfort, his brother- 
in-law, and Hugh FitzGervaise, and delivered them to the 
king ; on which he placed them in confinement. In the same 
year died Teulph, bishop of Worcester, and Ernulph, bishop 
of Rochester. 

In the year 1126, king Henry remained during the whole 
of the year in Normandy, and there gave the bishopric of 
Worcester to Simon, the queen's clerk, and that of Chiches- 
ter to Sefrid, abbat of Glastonbury. William, archbishop t>f 
69 The corresponding passage in Roger of Wendover's account is : 
A monk of St. Alban's, whose lands he had unjustly seized on, involun- 
tarily galloped over him." 

" This circumstance is mentioned more fully in the Anglo-Saxon 
Chronicle. *' It fell out on a Wednesday, being the fourth day before the 
ides of January, that the king rode in his deer-park, and Roger, bishop 
of Salisbury, was on one side of him, and Robert Bloet, bishop of Lin- 
coln, on the other : and they rode there talking. Then the bishop of 
Lincoln sank down, and said to the king, ' My lord king, I am dying;' 
and the king alighted from his horse and took him between his arms, and 
bade them bear him to his inn, and he soon lay there dead." 

71 St. Osythe, in Essex. Ingram says that this priory was re-built A.D. 
1118, for canons of the Augustine order, and that there are considerable 
remains of it. 



218 ANNALS OF EOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1126. 

Canterbury, also gave the bishopric of Rochester to John, his 
archdeacon. At Easter, John of Crema, a Roman cardinal, came 
over to England, and, after visiting the bishoprics and abbeys, 
not without great presents, at the nativity of Saint Mary. held 
a solemn synod at London, where a great mishap befell him. 

for, having at the synod spoken in the severest terms rela- 
tive to the wives of the clergy, saying that it was the greatest 
wickedness to arise from the side of a harlot to make the body 
of Christ, while he himself had that same day made the 
body of Christ, he was, after nightfall, surprised in the com- 
pany of a harlot. The thing being thus notorious throughout 
London, could not be denied; and thus the great honor in 
which he was held everywhere previously, was turned into 
the greatest disgrace. He returned home, therefore, by the 
judgment of God, in confusion and disgrace. 

In the same year died Henry, emperor of the Romans, 
son-in-law of Henry, king of the English. But by some it is 
alleged that the same emperor, being led by a feeling of peni- 
tence for having killed his own father, after having gone on a 
certain night, according to his usual custom, to the bed of the 
empress Matilda, the daughter of Henry king of the English, the 
lights being put out and the servants having withdrawn, re- 
tired barefoot and dressed in woollen garments, leaving behind 
the imperial vestments, his wife, and his kingdom, and was 
never after seen, nor was it discovered what became of him. 
On this, the empress, taking with her the uncorrupted hand 
of Saint James the Apostle, and the imperial crown, returned 
to king Henry, her father. After the decease or departure of 
the emperor Henry, Lothaire succeeded to the throne. Henry, 
king of the English, being greatly rejoiced at gaining the 
hand of Saint James the Apostle, founded the noble abbey 
of Reddinges, 72 and enriched it with many valuables, and 
placed in it the hand of Saint James the Apostle ; the impe- 
rial crown he placed in his own treasury. 

The moneyers throughout almost the whole of England 
were, by king's order, seized for having secretly debased the 
coin, and, their right hands being first cut off, were then deprived 
of their virility. In this year there was a great famine, and so 
great was the dearness of provisions, that no one in our time 
72 Reading. 



A.D. 1129. KING HENBY INVADES FRANCE. 219 

has seen the like, for a horse-load of corn was sold at the price 
of six shillings. In this year, also, William, archbishop of 
Canterbury, Turstin, archbishop of York, and Alexander, bishop 
of Lincoln, went to Rome. 

In the year 1127, during the Nativity, and Easter, and 
Pentecost, king Henry remained in Normandy, and, having 
made an honorable peace with the king of France, before the 
feast of Saint Michael this most victorious king returned to 
England, and brought with him his daughter the empress, the 
widow of so great a man, as previously mentioned. In this 
year, also, Robert, bishop of Chester, died. 

In the year 1128, at the Nativity, king Henry held his 
court at Windsor, and proceeded thence to London. During 
Lent and Easter he was at Woodstock, where word was brought 
to him that Charles, earl of Flanders, his most beloved friend, 
had been, by the basest treachery, slain by his nobles in a 
church at Brige, 13 and that the king of France had given 
Flanders to William, the son of Robert Curthose, his nephew 
and enemy, who, being now firmly established, had punished 
all the traitors to Charles with many torments. Accordingly, 
the king, being disturbed at these matters, held a council at 
London at the time of the Rogation Days ; and, in similar 
manner, did archbishoo William do the same at Westminster, 
in the same city. 

About Pentecost, the king sent his daughter to Normandy, 
to be married to Geoffrey, son of the earl of Anjou, and after- 
wards, in August, the king himself followed. Richard, bishop 
of London, departed this life, and the king gave the bishopric 
to Gilbert, a man most learned in all subjects. At this time, 
also, died Richard, bishop of Hereford. 
* In the year 1129, king Henry, having remained a whole 
year in Normandy, marched in a hostile manner into France, 
because the king of the Franks was supporting his nephew and 
enemy ; and encamping for eight days at Epernon, as securely 
as though he had been in his own kingdom, he compelled 
king Louis not to give aid to the earl of Flanders. While 
here, on enquiring into the origin and career of the kingdom 
of the Franks, king Henry was answered by a certain learned 
man to the following effect : 

" Most powerful among kings, like most of the nations of 
73 Bruges. 



220 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1129. 

Europe, the Franks derive their origin from the Trojans. For 
Antenor, flying with his people on the fall of Troy, built a city 
in the territories of Pannonia, called Sycambria. After the 
death of Antenor, they appointed as their leaders Turgot and 
Francion, from whom the Franks derive their name. On 
their death, these were succeeded by Marcomer, who was the 
father of Pharamond, the first king of the Franks ; Pharamond 
begat Clodius Crinitus, 74 from whom the kings of France have 
the name of 'Criniti ;' and Clodius was succeeded by Meroveus, 
his kinsman, from whom the kings of France received the name 
of Merovingians. Meroveus begat Childeric, and he begat 
Clodovius, 75 who was baptized by Saint Pvemigius. Clodo- 
vius begat Clotaire, who begat Chilperic, and he Clotaire the 
Second. Clotaire begat Dagobert, that most famous king, 
who begat Clodovius ; by Saint Batilda, his queen, Clodovius 
begat three sons, namely, Clotaire, Childeric, and Theoderic. 
King Theoderic begat Childebert, and he Dagobert, who begat 
Theoderic, the father of Clotaire, the last of this line. In suc- 
cession to him reigned Hilderic, who afterwards received the 
tonsure, and retired to a monastery, Pepin being made king. 
In another genealogical line, by the daughter of king Clotaire 
Ansbert begat Arnold, and Saint Arnold Arnulph, afterwards 
bishop of Metz. Saint Arnulph begat Anchises, and he Pepin, 
the mayor of the palace ; Pepin begat Charles Martel, and he 
king Pepin. King Pepin was father of the emperor, Charles 
the Great. 76 who shone like a constellation among his prede- 
cessors and successors. Charles begat the emperor Louis, and 
he the emperor Charles the Bald, and he king Louis, the father 
of Charles the Simple. Charles the Simple begat Louis, and 
he Lothaire, who begat Louis, the last king of that line. After 
his death, the Franks set over themselves duke Hugh, 77 the 
son of the great duke Hugh. King Hugh was the father of 
Robert, a most pious king, which king Ptobert begat three 
sons, Hugh, a most beloved duke, and Henry, a most amiable 
king, and Exbert, duke of Burgundy. King Henry was the 
father of king Philip, who, at the close of his life, became a 

74 It need hardly be remarked that this genealogy is for the most part 
fabulous. Supposing that the Trojan war took place about B.C. 1000, 
the learned informant of king Henry omits about fourteen hundred years. 

75 More generally called Clovis. * Charlemagne. 
77 Hugh Capet. 



A.D. 1130. GREAT COTOCIL AT LONDON. 221 

monk, and of Hugh the Great, who, with the great army of 
Christians and many of the chieftains of Europe, laid siege to 
Jerusalem, and rescued it from the hands of the pagans. In 
the year from the incarnation of our Lord 1129, 78 king Philip 
begat Louis, who reigns at the present time ; and if he only 
followed in the footsteps of his ancestors, you would not be 
remaining so securely in his kingdom." After these things 
were said and done, king Henry returned to Normandy. 

About this time, a certain duke, Theoderic by name, came 
from the parts of Germany to make certain claims upon Flan- 
ders, and having with him certain noblemen of that country ; 
and this he did at the persuasion of king Henry. "William, 
earl of Flanders, having collected an army and set his forces 
in battle array, marched against him, and a fierce battle en- 
sued. By his invincible prowess, earl "William made up for 
the deficiency of his forces, which were few in number. All 
his arms being stained with the blood of the enemy, he cleared 
the ranks of the foe with his sword like lightning, and, in 
consequence, his enemies being unable to bear the terrible 
might of his youthful arm, in utter dismay, took to flight. 
Thus did the earl gain a complete victory ; but, while he was 
besieging a castle 79 of the enemy, and was on the morrow to 
receive its surrender, the foe being now almost annihilated, 
by the will of God, receiving a slight wound in the hand, 
lie died in consequence thereof. This most noble youth, dur- 
ing his short life, earned endless glory, and, in his praise, a 
poet has said : " Mars has died on earth, the deities bewail a 
deity their equal." 

This year, also, Hugh de Pains, master of the knights of the 
Temple at Jerusalem, came to England, and brought many 
with him from Jerusalem ; among whom was Fulk, the bro- 
ther of Geoffrey, earl of Anjou, who was destined to be king. 
Eanulph Flambard, bishop of Durham, and William Giffard, 
bishop of Winchester, departed this life. 

In the year 1130, Louis, king of the Franks, caused his 
son Philip to be made king ; and king Henry, having made 
peace in all parts with France, Flanders, Normandy, Brittany, 
Maine, and Anjou, returned in high spirits to England. On the 
calends of August, he held a great council at London, on the 

78 Of course, this date is an error. 

79 That of Eu, against king Henry. 



222 AXtfALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEIT. A.D. 1130. 

subject of prohibiting the priesthood from taking wives. There 
were present at this council William, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, Turstin, archbishop of York, Alexander, bishop of Lin- 
coln, Gilbert, bishop of London, Roger, bishop of Salisbury, 
John, bishop of Eochester, Siffrid, bishop of Sussex, 80 Godfrey, 
bishop of Bath, Simon, bishop of Worcester, Everard, bishop 
of Norwich, Bernard, bishop of Saint David's, and Hervey, 
the first bishop of Ely. The bishops of Winchester, Durham, 
Chester, and Hereford were absent. These constituted at this 
period the pillars of the kingdom, and the rays of its sanc- 
tity. But, through the simplicity of archbishop William, 
the king deceived them ; for they conceded to the king the 
right of administering justice on the question of the wives of 
priests ; and were deemed imprudent for so doing, as afterwards 
proved to be the fact, when the matter turned out to their 
extreme disgrace ; for the king received an endless amount 
of money from priests, and then relieved them from the penal- 
ties attendant on so doing. Then, but to no purpose, did the 
bishops repent of having made this concession, when, before 
the eyes of all nations, were made manifest the deception prac- 
tised on the prelates, and the oppression of the king's subjects. 

In the same year, misfortunes befell those whom Hugh 
de Pains, already mentioned, had taken with him to Jeru- 
salem ; for, by their sensuality, rapine, and various excesses, 
the inhabitants of that holy land had offended the Lord. But, . 
as it has been written in the books of Moses and of Kings, 
their wickedness in those places did not long remain un- 
punished. For, on the vigil of Saint Nicholas, a multitude 
of the Christians were overcome by a small number of the 
pagans, whereas, previously to that, just the reverse used 
to happen. For, at the siege of Damascus, when a great part 
of the Christians had gone forth for the purpose of seeking 
for provisions, the pagans were astonished at the spectacle 
of a multitude of Christians, most valiant men, taking to 
flight like women, and, on pursuing them, slew almost count- 
less numbers. But those who took refuge in the mountains, 
God himself pursued that same night with a tempest, accom- 
panied with drifts of snow and cold to such a degree, that 
hardly any one escaped. 

It also happened that, while the son of the king of the 
80 Bishop of Selsey. 



A.D. 1133. DEATH OF KING BALDWIN. 223 

Franks, who, as previously mentioned, had been graced with 
the crown of the kingdom, was sportively spurring on his horse, 
he was met by a pig, which, running against the legs of the 
horse while in full career, the new-made king fell off, and, 
breaking his neck, expired. Consider what a dreadful mishap, 
and how deserving of our astonishment ! Behold the loftiness 
of his position, and by what trivial means it was annihilated ! 

In the year of the Word become flesh 1131, being the thir- 
teenth year of his reign, king Henry passed the festival of the 
Nativity at Worcester, and Easter at Woodstock, where Geof- 
frey de Clinton was accused of treason against the king, and dis- 
graced. During the Rogation Days, the king was at Canter- 
bury, at the dedication of the new church there. At the feast 
of Saint Michael, the king went over to Normandy. In the 
same year, pope Honorius departed this life, on whose death a 
division arose ; for two persons were elected to the papacy of 
Rome, Innocent and Anacletus. 

In the year 1132, at Chartres, the king acknowledged In- 
nocent as pope, and rejected Anacletus ; for the Romans, di- 
viding into two factions, had made choice of both of them. 
Innocent being violently expelled from the city by Anacletus, 
whose previous name was Peter de Leves, was, by the influence 
of king Henry, received throughout the whole of the Gauls. 
After this, king Henry returned to England, taking with him 
his daughter, whom, with the universal consent of the chief 
men of the whole of England, he afterwards restored to her 
husband, the earl of Anjou, who then demanded her. In 
this year died Hervey, bishop of Ely. 

In the year 1133, the king passed the festival of the Nati- 
vity at Dunstable, and Easter at Woodstock. In the same 
year died Baldwin, king of Jerusalem, and was succeeded by 
f?ulk, the brother of Geoffrey, earl of Anjou. This Fulk, king of 
Jerusalem, had by his wife, the daughter of the above-named 
king Baldwin, two sons, namely, Baldwin and Amauri. 
Baldwin succeeded his father, Fulk, in the kingdom of Jeru- 
salem, and died without issue. After his death, his brother 
Amauri succeeded him as king, and reigned eleven years ; he 
was the father of Baldwin the Leper, who was afterwards king, 
and two daughters, namely, Sibyl and Milicent, of whom fur- 
ther mention will be made in the sequel. 



224 j4TTNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1135. 

In the year 1134, after Pentecost, Henry, king of England, 
gave the bishopric of Ely to Nigel, his treasurer, and that 
of Durham to Geoffrey, his chancellor ; the king also created 
a new bishopric at Carlisle, arid gave it to Adelulph, the prior 
of Saint Oswald. In the same year an eclipse of the sun 
took place on the fourth day before the nones of August, at 
about the sixth hour of the day, to such a degree, that the 
whole of the sun's disk appeared as though covered by a black 
shield. That same day, the king, although some opposed it, 
fearing danger, and tried to dissuade him from it, crossed the 
sea without accident. 

In the year 1 1 35, Gilbert, bishop of London, departed this life. 
King Henry remained in Normandy in consequence of the joy 
he felt on account of his grandsons, whom Geoffrey, earl of An- 
jou, had become father of by his daughter, and commanded the 
earls and barons of all his dominions to swear fealty to the em- 
press Matilda, his daughter, and Henry, her youngest son, naming 
him king after himself. After this, king Henry frequently 
purposed to return to England, but his daughter, the empress, 
detained him in consequence of the various quarrels which, on 
many occasions, arose between the king and the earl of Anjou, 
being, in fact, caused by the artfulness of his daughter. By 
the excitement arising therefrom, the king was excited to anger 
and rancorous feelings, which by some was said to be the cause 
of a chill of his constitution, and afterwards of his death. For 
when the king had returned from hunting, at Saint Dennis, in 
the wood of Lions, he ate the flesh of some murense, or lam- 
preys, a fish which he was always very fond of, and which 
always disagreed with him. But although the physician had 
forbidden him to eat of this fish, the king did not obey his 
wholesome advice, in conformity with the saying, "We al- 
ways strive for what is prohibited, and desire what is denied." 81 

This food, therefore, was a source of most noxious humours, 
and a strong exciter of others of a kindred nature, and suddenly 
caused a deadly chill in his aged body, creating a great dis- 
order thereby. Nature struggling against this, caused an acute 
fever, in its attempts to resist the attack resulting from this 
most noxious substance; but the disease gaining the ascen- 
dancy, this mighty king departed this life, after having reigned 

81 "Nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimusque negata." 



A.D. 1135. DEATH OF KING HEKRY. 225 

five years and three months, on the first day of December; 
relative to whom one of our writers says : 

" King Henry is dead ! the glory once, now the grief of the 
world. The Deities lament the death of their fellow divinity : 
Mercury, his inferior in eloquence, Apollo, in strength of 
mind, Jupiter, in command, and Mars, in might ; all bewail 
him. Janus, his inferior in caution, Alcides, in prowess, Pal- 
las, in arms, Minerva, in arts; all bewail him. England, 
who, springing from her cradle, had shone exalted on high 
beneath the sceptre of this divinity, now sinks in shade. She, 
with her king, Normandy, with her duke, waxes faint ; the 
one nurtured him as a child, the other lost him as a man." 

This happened in the year from the arrival of the Britons 
in England, two thousand two hundred and sixty-five ; from 
the arrival of the Normans, sixty-nine ; from the beginning of 
the world, five thousand three hundred and seventeen ; 8Z in 
the year of grace, eleven hundred and thirty-five. 

On the decease of the great king Henry, as is generally the 
case after death, the judgment of the people was freely pro- 
nounced upon him. Some asserted that he shone resplendent in 
, three particulars ; supreme wisdom, victory, and riches. . In 
wisdom, because he was considered most profound in counsel, 
remarkable for foresight, and distinguished for eloquence. In 
victory, because, besides other exploits which he had successfully 
performed, according to the laws of warfare, he had overcome 
the king of the Franks. In riches, because in that respect he 
far outstripped his predecessors. Others again, animated by oppo- 
site feelings, charged him with three vices ; excessive avarice, 
inasmuch as, while he was wealthy, in order that he might render 
all his relatives poor, greedily gaping for their riches, he laid 
hold of everything, with the hooks of informers, by means of 
taxes and exactions ; cruelty, inasmuch as he put out the eyes 
of his kinsman, the earl of Moretuil, whom he had thrown 
into prison, (a horrid crime, which was not known until 
death had revealed the king's secrets) ; other instances were 
cited besides, which we will omit ; and sensuality, because 
after the manner of king Solomon, he was continually a slave 
to his passion for the female sex. 

82 This is clearly wrong, both according to our present reckoning, and 
his own previous mode of calculation, which places the first year of the 
Christian era in the year from the beginning of the world 4204. 

YOL. I. Q 



226 AXNALS OF BOGEB PE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1136. 

Such matters as these did the common people freely discuss. 
In the course of time, however, in consequence of the shocking 
events which were kindled through the frantic perfidies of the 
Normans, whatever Henry had done, either in a tyrannical 
manner, or as befitted a king, seemed most excellent, in com- 
parison with doings still worse. For after this, without delay, 
Stephen, the younger brother of Theobald, earl of Blois, repaired 
thither, a man of great activity and boldness ; and although he 
had taken the oath of fealty, in the English kingdom, to the 
empress and her son Henry, still, like a tempest, he rushed upon 
the crown of the kingdom of England. William, archbishop of 
Canterbury, who had been the first to take the oath, oh shame! 
consecrated him king ; in consequence whereof, God pronounced 
the judgment against him which he had pronounced against 
the high priest, the smiter of Jeremiah, 8 ** namely, that he 
should not live beyond that year. In like manner, Koger, 
bishop of Salisbury, who had been the second to take the 
before-mentioned oath, and had dictated it to the rest, gave 
him the crown and the support of his assistance ; in consequence 
of which, by the just judgment of God, at a subsequent period, 
being taken prisoner by him whom he had created king, and . 
consigned to torture, he met with a miserable end. 

But why make any further remark? All who had taken 
the oath, both bishops as well as earls and chief men, gave 
in their adherence to Stephen and did homage to him. This 
was, indeed, a bad sign, that thus suddenly all England, with- 
out any delay or resistance, as though in the twinkling of an 
eye, became subject to him. 

KING STEPHEN. 

In the year of grace 1136, on Saint Stephen's day, king Ste- 
phen was crowned, and held his court at London. At his 
coronation, according to report, the " Pax Domini" \JPeace 
of the Lord~\ was neither said at the mass, nor repeated before 
the people when this sacrament was performed. 

As yet the body of king Henry remained unburied in Nor- 
mandy ; for he had died on the first day of December. His 
body was brought to Rouen, where his entrails, brains, and 

82 * Alluding to the fate of Pashur, son of Immer, the priest, who 
smote Jeremiah. Jer. xx. 2 6. 



A.D. 1136. BURIAL OF KING HEXIiT. 227 

eyes were buried ; but the remainder of his body being cut 
asunder with knives in every part, and then sprinkled with a 
quantity of salt, was wrapped up and sewed in bull's hides, to 
avoid the offensiveness of the smell, which being strong and con- 
tinued, was overpowering to those who stood near it. In con- 
sequence of this, even the person who, in consideration of a large 
sum, had opened the head with a hatchet for the purpose of ex- 
tracting the brain, which was in a most corrupt state, although 
he had wrapped up his own head in napkins, still met with 
Ms death therefrom, and had poor reason for rejoicing at his 
bargain. He was the last of the many slain by king Henry. 

His attendants then conveyed the royal corpse to Caen, 
where, while it was lying in the church in which his father 
had been buried, it was steeped in a quantity of salt and 
wrapped up in numerous hides, still a black and disgusting 
liquid matter coming through the hides oozed forth therefrom, 
and being caught in vessels placed beneath the bier, was carried 
away by the servants fainting with disgust. 

See, therefore, reader, whoever thou art, how the body of a 
most potent king, whose head had been decked with a crown, 
gold, and the choicest gems, with splendour almost divine, 
whose two hands had been radiant with sceptres, the rest of 
whose person had glittered all over with tissue of gold, whose 
mouth used to be supplied with food so exquisite and delicious, 
before whom all were wont to arise, whom all had dreaded, all 

congratulated, all admired See, I say, to what that body 

was reduced ; how horribly it was put out of sight, how shock- 
ingly thrust aside ! Behold the result of human affairs, 
upon which the judgment ever depends, and learn to have a 
contempt for all that thus terminates, all that is thus reduced 
to, annihilation. 

At last, the remains of the royal corpse were brought to 
England, and were, in twelve days after, on his birth-day, 83 
buried at the abbey of Beading, which the same king Henry 
had founded and enriched with many possessions. Thither, 
also, came king Stephen from his court, which, at the feast of 
the Nativity, he had been holding in London, to meet the body 
of his uncle ; and with him, William, archbishop of Canter- 

83 "Natalis" here, is probably a misprint for "Natali." Roger of 
Wendover says that he was buried on Uis birth-day. 

ft 2 



223 1.NXALS OF ROGEK DE 1IOVEDEN. . A.D. 1136. 

bury, and many bishops and nobles, and there they buried 
king Henry with the respect due to a man so great. 

King Stephen proceeded thence to Oxford, where he repeated 
and confirmed the concessions which he had promised to make 
to God, the people, and the holy Church, on the day of his 
coronation, which were these : In the first place, he promised 
on oath that, on the death of bishops, he would never retain 
the sees in his own hand, but immediately consent to the 
election and invest them with bishops. Secondly, he promised 
on oath, that he would retain in his hand the woods of no clerk 
or layman, as king Henry had done, who had every year 
impleaded them, if they either took venison in their own 
woods, or rooted them up or thinned them to supply their 
own necessities : which kind of unjust impleading was carried 
to so annoying a length, that, if the supervisors set eye from 
a distance upon the wood of any person whom they deemed 
to be a moneyed man, they immediately obtained an injunc- 
tion against waste thereon, whether it had suffered waste or 
not, in order that, by some means or other, they might be 
enabled to mulct him. In the third place, he promised on 
oath, that Danegelt, that is to say, two shillings on every 
hide of land, which his predecessors had been accustomed 
to receive yearly, he would give up for ever. These are 
the principal things which he promised on oath to God ; 
there were others besides; but none of these promises did 
he keep. 

In the meantime, while, at the close of the festival of the 
Nativity, king Stephen was staying at Oxford, he received 
tidings which informed him to this effect: "David, king of 
the Scots, on pretence that he was coming with peaceful in- 
tent for the purpose of visiting you, has come to Carlisle and 
Newcastle, and stealthily taken possession of them both ;" to 
which king Stephen made answer ; " What he has taken by 
stealth, I will recover by victory ; " and thereupon, without 
delay, the king moved forward his army, which was so mighty, 
so valiant, and so numerous, that none in England could be 
remembered like it. However, king David met him in the 
neighbourhood of Durham, and, making a treaty with him, 
restored Newcastle, but retained Carlisle with the king's con- 
sent. David, however, did not do homage to king Stephen ; 
because he had previously, as the first of the laity, promised 



A.D. 1137- STEPHEN CEOSSES INTO NOBMANDT. 229 

on oath to the empress, the daughter of king Henry and his 
own niece, to maintain her in possession of England after the 
death of king Henry. However, the son of king David, Henry 
by name, did homage to king Stephen ; on which, the latter 
presented him with the horough which is called Huntingdon, 
by way of gift. 

After this, the king returned at Lent, and held his court at 
London during the festival of Easter, amid such dazzling 
splendour, that there was never one in England more brilliant 
than it in its multitudes, magnificence, gold, silver, jewels, 
garments, and luxuries of every description. 

At the time of the Rogation Days, the king was seized with 
a lethargy, and it was currently reported that he was dead. On 
hearing of this, Hugh Bigod secretly effected an entrance into 
Norwich castle, and would not restore it to any person except 
to the king himself on his repairing thither, and then very 
reluctantly. It was now that the frenzied conduct of the Nor- 
mans, which has been previously mentioned, began to produce its 
effects in perjury and treason. The king, therefore, took Bading- 
ton, the owner of which was one Robert, a traitor, who had re- 
belled against the king; after which, he laid siege to the city of 
Exeter, which Baldwin de Redwers 85 held against him ; and 
being long detained there, and constructing many engines of 
war, consumed a large portion of his treasures in so doing. At 
length, however, the castle was surrendered to him, and the 
king, following the most pernicious advice, did not exercise 
vengeance upon the traitors. But if he had exercised it 
on this occasion, so many castles would not have afterwards 
held out against him. The king proceeded thence to the Isle of 
Wight, and took it from Baldwin de Redwers, previously 
Mentioned, whom he banished from England. 

The king, elated at these successes, went to hunt at 
Bramton, which is one mile distant from Huntingdon, and 
there he held pleas as to the forests of his nobles, that is to say, 
with reference to their woods and hunting, and thereby broke 
the vow and promise which he had made before God and the 
people. 

In the year of grace 1137, being the second year of the 
reign of king Stephen, the king, at the season of Lent, 
crossed over into Normandy. Alexander, bishop of Lincoln, and 
85 Or Rivers. 



230 ANNALS OF BOGEB, DE HOVEDEX. A. D.I 138. 

many nobles besides, crossed over with him ; and there, the 
king, who was well versed in martial enterprises, enjoyed 
brilliant success in all his enterprises ; thwarted the strata- 
gems of the enemy, reduced the fortresses of the foe, and 
proved himself the most distinguished among the greatest of 
men. He made a treaty with the king of the Franks, and his 
son Eustace did homage to the king of the Franks, for Nor- 
mandy, which is subject to the superior lordship of the Franks. 
This became known to the earl of Anjou, who was his most in- 
veterate enemy, inasmuch as he had married the empress of 
Germany, the daughter of king Henry, who had received the 
oaths of Stephen with reference to England, and in conse- 
quence, the husband and wife demanded possession of England, 
but, in the end, consented to a treaty with king Stephen. 
For the earl saw that, at present, he could not possibly cope 
with the king's strength, both by reason of his great military 
renown, and the money, of which an abundance was still left 
from the treasures of the deceased king. 

In the same year, Louis the Fat, king of the Franks, 
departed this life, and was succeeded by his son Louis. 
These two years, in fact, were the most prosperous ones of 
king Stephen's reign ; but the third, of which we shall now 
make mention, was of a doubtful and varied character, Avhile the 
two succeeding ones were replete with loss and calamity. 

In the year of grace 1138, being the third year of the reign 
of king Stephen, the king, immediately on his return to 
England, flew to Bedford, on the vigil of the Nativity of our 
Lord, and besieged it throughout the whole festival of the 
Nativity ; and, indeed, it was the opinion of many that he 
incurred the displeasure of God, because the festival of fes- 
tivals he paid little or no attention to. In the same year, 
Peter de Leves, the anti-pope, departed this life. Bedford 
having surrendered to king Stephen, he immediately moved 
his army onwards to Scotland. 

For king David, having sworn fealty to the daughter of 
king Henry, as though under the veil of respect for his oath, 
by means of his troops, was perpetrating the most execrable 
deeds. Pregnant women they ripped asunder, and tore the 
offspring prematurely from the mother's womb, tossed children 
on the points of their lances, beheaded the priests upon the altars, 
and then placed the heads which they had cut off from the 



A.D. 1138. BISHOP RALPH ADDRESSES THE ARMY. 231 

crucifixes upon the bodies of the slain, and, by way of ex- 
change, placed the heads of the slain upon the crucifixes. In 
consequence of this, wherever the Scots came, the places were 
filled with cruelty and horror, the shrieks of women, the out- 
cries of aged men, the groans of the dying, and the despera- 
tion of the youthful. 

On this, king Stephen aroused himself, and burned and ra- 
vaged the southern parts of king David's kingdom, while David 
himself did not dare to confront him. After Easter, however, 
the disgraceful fury of the traitors became greatly inflamed. For 
one of the rebels, Talbot by name, held Hereford, in Wales, 
against the king ; to which, however, the king laid siege, and 
reduced it to submission. Earl Robert, 86 the illegitimate son of 
king Henry, held against him a most strongly fortified castle, 
the name of which was Bristowe, 87 and another called Slede. 83 
William Lovel held the castle of Kari ; 89 Paganel held the 
castle of Ludiow ; "William de Houn held the castle of 
Dunster ; M Robert de Nichole 91 held the castle of Wareham ; 
Eustace Fitz-John, a one-eyed vile traitor, held the castle 
of Malton; William Fitz- Allan held the castle of Salopes- 
bury, 92 which last the king took by force of arms, and hanged 
some of those who were taken prisoners ; on hearing of which, 
Walkelm, who held Dover castle, immediately surrendered it 
to the queen who was then besieging it. 

While king Stephen was thus engaged in the southern parts 
of England, David, king of the Scots, led an innumerable 
army into England. By the advice and exhortation of Tur- 
stin, archbishop of York, the nobles of the north of England 
went out to meet him, with William, the illustrious earl of 
Albennarle, and planted the standard 93 or royal banner at Al- 
wrton, 94 on Cutune moor. As, in consequence of illness, the 
archbishop of York could not be present at the battle, he sent 
in his place Ralph, bishop of the Orkneys, 96 who, standing 
in the midst of the army, on an elevated spot, addressed 
them to the following effect : 

86 Of Gloucester. Bristol. 88 Leeds. 

89 Castle Gary, in Somersetshire. * In Somersetshire. 

91 Roger of Wendover calls him Robert of Lincoln. 

92 Shrewsbury. 

83 Hence this is sometimes called the battle of the Standard. 

S1 North Allerton. 95 Roger of Wendover says, Bishop of Durham. 



232 ANXALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1138. 

"Most illustrious nobles of England, Kormans by birth, 
(for when about to enter on the combat, it befits you to hold 
in remembrance your names and your birth), consider who 
you are, and against whom, and where it is, you are waging war; 
for then no one shall with impunity resist your prowess. Bold 
France, taught by experience, has quailed beneath your valour, 
fierce England, led captive, has submitted to you ; rich Apulia, 
on having you for her masters, has flourished once again ; 
Jerusalem so famed, and illustrious Antioch, have bowed 
themselves before you ; and now Scotland, which of right is 
subject to you, attempts to show resistance, displaying a teme- 
rity not warranted by her arms, more fitted indeed for rioting 
than for battle. These are people, in fact, who have no 
knowledge of military matters, no skill in fighting, no mode- 
ration in ruling. There is no room then left for fear, but 
rather for shame, that those whom we have always sought 
on their own soil and overcome, reversing the usual order 
of things, have, like so many drunkards and madmen, come 
flocking into our country. This, however, I, a bishop, and the 
substitute for your archbishop, tell you, has been brought about 
by Divine Providence ; in order that those who have in this 
country violated the temples of God, stained the altars with 
blood, slain his priests, spared neither children nor pregnant 
women, may on the same spot receive the condign punishment 
of their crimes ; and this most just resolve of the Divine will, 
God will this day put in execution by means of your hands. 
Arouse your spirits then, ye civilized warriors, and, firmly rely- 
ing on the valour of your country, nay, rather on the presence of 
God, arise against these most unrighteous foes. And let not their 
rashness move you, because so many insignia of your valour cause 
no alarm to them. They know not how to arm 96 themselves for 
battle ; whereas you, during the time of peace, prepare your- 
selves for war, in order that in battle you may not experience the 
doubtful contingencies of warfare. Cover your heads then with 
the helmet, your breasts with the coat of mail, your legs with 
the greaves, and your bodies with the shield, that so the foeman 
may not find where to strike at you, on seeing you thus sur- 
rounded on every side with iron. Marching then against them 
thus, unarmed and wavering, why should we hesitate ? On 

98 This is probably said in allusion to the absence of defensive armour, 
with the half-naked Scotch. 






A.D. 1138. DEFEAT OF THE SCOTS. 233 

account of their numbers perhaps ? But it is not so much the 
numbers of the many as the valour of the few that gains the 
battle. For a multitude unused to discipline is a hindrance to 
itself, when successful, in completing the victory, when routed, 
in taking to flight. Besides your foi-efathers, when but few in 
number, have many a time conquered multitudes ; what then is 
the natural consequence of the glories of your ancestry, your con- 
stant exercises, your military discipline, but that though fewer 
in number, you should overcome multitudes ? But now the ene- 
my, advancing in disorder, warname to close what I have to say, 
and rushing on with a straggling front, gives me great reason for 
gladness. I therefore in the place of the archbishop of you who 
are this day about to avenge the sins committed against the 
house of the Lord, against the priests of the Lord, and against 
your king under the Lord's protection, whoever of you shall 
fall fighting, do absolve him from all punishment for sins, in 
the name of the Father, whose creatures they have so shame- 
fully and horribly slain, of the Son, whose altars they have 
polluted, and of the Holy Ghost, whose inspired ones, in their 
frenzy, they have slaughtered." To this all the troops of the 
English answered "Amen, Amen;" and the mountains and 
hills re-echoed with their cries. 

At the same instant, the Scots raised the shout of their 
country, and the cries of " Albany ! Aloany !" ascended to 
the heavens ; but the shouts were soon drowned in the dread- 
ful crash and the loud noise of the blows. When the ranks 
of the men of Lothian, who had obtained from the king of 
Scotland, though reluctantly on his part, the glory of striking 
the first blow, hurling their darts and presenting their lances 
of extraordinary length, bore down upon the ranks of the En- 
glish knights encased in mail, striking as it were against a wall 
of iron, they found them impenetrable. But the archers of the 
English, mingling with the cavalry, poured their arrows like 
a cloud upon them, and pierced those who were not protected 
by armoiir. Meanwhile the whole of the Normans and the 
English, stood in one dense phalanx around the standard, 
perfectly immoveable. The chief commander of the men of 
Lothian fell slain, pierced by an arrow, on which the whole of 
his men took to flight. For the most high God was offended 
with them, and all their valour was destroyed even as a spi- 
der's web. On seeing this, the main body of the Scots, which 



234 AXNALS OF fiOGEK DE HOVEDES. A.D. 1139- 

was fighting with the greatest valour in another part of the 
field, was alarmed and took to flight. Next, the king's troop, 
which king David had formed of several clans, as soon as it 
perceived this, began to drop off, at first ; man by man, and 
afterwards in bodies, the king standing firm, and being at last 
left almost alone. The king's friends seeing this, forced him 
to mount his horse and take to flight ; but Henry, his valiant 
son, not heeding what he saw being done by his men, but solely 
intent on glory and valour, while the rest were taking to flight, 
most bravely charged the enemy's line, and shook it by the 
wondrous vigour of his onset. For his troop was the only one 
mounted on horseback, and consisted of English and Normans, 
who formed a part of his father's household. His horsemen, 
however, were not able long to continue their attacks against 
soldiers on foot, cased in mail, and standing immoveable in 
close and dense ranks ; but, with their lances broken and their 
horses wounded, were compelled to take to flight. Eumour says, 
that many thousands 98 of the Scots were slain on that field, be- 
sides those who, on being taken in the woods and standing corn, 
were put to death. Accordingly, the English and Normans 
happily gained the victory, and with a very small effusion of 
blood. 

In this battle the commanders were the above-named Ralph, 
bishop of the Orkneys, the illustrious William, earl of Albe- 
marle, of the blood royal, and famed for his military prowess, 
"Walter Espec, a celebrated nobleman, William Piperel of Not- 
tingham, and Gilbert de Lacy, whose brother was the only 
knight there slain. 

On hearing of the result of this engagement, king Stephen 
and all who were with him gave hearty thanks to God. This 
battle was fought in the month of August. At the Advent of 
our Lord, Alberic, legate of the Roman church and bishop of 
Ostia, held a council at London, on which occasion, with the 
consent of king Stephen, Theobald, abbat of Bee, was made 
archbishop of Canterbury. 

In the year of grace 1139, being the fourth year of the 
reign of king Stephen, after the Nativity, the said king took 
the castle of Slede l by siege ; and afterwards proceeded to 
Scotland, where he laid waste the country on all sides with 
fire and sword, on which the king was obliged to make terms 
99 Roger of Wendover says, eleven thousand. 1 Leeds. 



A.D. 1139 CONDUCT OF STEPHEN TO THE BISHOP OF SALISBrKY. 235 

with him. King Stephen thereupon returned to England, 
taking with him Henry, the son of the king of the Scots 
[as a hostage]. He then laid siege to Ludlow, where the 
same Henry, being dragged from his horse by an iron hook, 
was nearly taken prisoner, but the king himself valiantly res- 
cued him from the enemy. After this, without accomplish- 
ing his object, he returned to Oxford, where a thing took place 
remarkable for its disgraceful character, and at variance with 
all civilized usage. For the king, after having received them 
in peace, violently arrested at his own court Roger, bishop 
of Salisbury, and Alexander, 1 * bishop of Lincoln, who, BO far 
from refusing to settle matters with justice, had most earnestly 
entreated permission so to do. 

Having thrown bishop Alexander into prison there, he took 
the bishop of Salisbury with him to his castle, called Devizes, 
a finer one than which there was not in all Europe. There 
he tortured him with the pangs of hunger, and tied a halter 
round the neck of his son, 2 who had been the king's chan- 
cellor, as though he were about to be hanged ; and by such 
methods extorted from him the surrender of the castle, far 
from remembering the benefits which, at the beginning of 
his reign, beyond all others, he had conferred upon him; 
such, then, was the reward he bestowed on him for his de- 
votedness. In a similar manner he gained possession of Sy- 
resburn, 2 * which was very little inferior to Devizes in magni- 
ficence. On obtaining the bishop's' treasures, by means of them 
he gained Constance, sister of Louis, king of the Franks, in 
marriage for his son Eustace. On retiring thence, the king 
took bishop Alexander, whom he had left in confinement at 
Oxford, with him to Newark, where that bishop had built 
castle, near the river Trent, extremely well fortified and 
most amply supplied. On coming there, the king imposed 
on the bishop a fast not prescribed by the law, 8 and declared, 
on his oath, that he should be deprived of all food whatever 
until the castle was surrendered to him. In consequence 
of this, with considerable difficulty, by means of prayers and 
entreaties, the bishop prevailed on his own people to transfer 

1# Some historians call him the nephew of the bishop of Salisbury, 
but he was suspected to be his son. 

2 This person, whose name was Roger, was said to be the son of Roger, 
bishop of Salisbury, by Maud of Ramsbury, his mistress. 

J * Sherburne. a The ecclesiastical law. 



236 A.NNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1139. 

his castle from his own authority into the hands of strangers. 
In a similar manner, another castle of his was surrendered, 
called Slaford, 4 not inferior to the other either in appearance 
or excellence of situation. 

Not long after, when Henry, bishop of Winchester, the king's 
brother, who was now legate of the Roman Church, was hold- 
ing a council at Winchester, Theobald himself, the archbishop 
of Canterbury, and all the bishops who were with him, threw 
themselves at the king's feet, and begged with the most earnest 
supplications that he would restore their possessions to the 
above-mentioned bishops, and promised that they themselves 
would cordially forgive the king for all he had done against 
them. But the king, listening to the voice of persons evilly 
inclined, slighted the supplications of so many venerable men 
of such high station, and would not accede to their requests. 
In consequence of this conduct, the house of king Stephen was 
consigned to impending destruction. 

For, immediately upon this, the daughter of king Henry, 
who had been empress of the Romans, and to whom the king- 
dom of England had been secured by oath, came to England ; 
on which, king Stephen besieged her at Arundel, and, either 
through listening to perfidious counsels, or else seeing that the 
castle was impregnable, allowed her to go to Bristowe. 5 

In the same year, Roger, bishop of Salisbury, pined away, 
being wasted as much by grief as by old age, and ended his life. 
Let all, then, who read of this, be astounded at so great and so 
sudden a change of events. For, from his youth upwards, so 
many blessings had fallen to the lot of the man above-named, 
and, without interruption, had so wondrously accumulated 
upon him, that all said that, in his case, Fortune was forgetful 
of her fickle disposition. Nor did he suffer any adversity dur- 
ing the whole of his life, until at last so vast an accumulation of 
miseries, befalling him at the same moment, overwhelmed him. 
Let no one then feel confidence as to the long continuance of 
his happiness, let no one presume on the stability 6 of Fortune, 
let no one imagine that his seat can long be firm upon her 
revolving wheel ! 

In the year of grace 1 140, being the fifth year of the reign 
of king Stephen, after the Nativity, the said king banished 

Sleaford. 6 Bristol. 

6 " Stabilitate" seems a preferable reading to " iustabilitate." 



A.D. 1110. DEATH OF TUESTIN. 237 

Nigel, bishop of Ely, from his see, as he was the nephew 
of the above-named bishop of Salisbury; in consequence of 
which relationship 1 he had become an object of the king's 
hatred. As to where the king was at the feast of the Nativity, 
or where at Easter, it matters not to say. For now, courts 
held in regal state, and the pomp of royalty, handed down from 
the ancient line of kings, were utterly put an end to, the vast 
amount of treasures had been entirely expended, there was no 
such thing as peace in the kingdom, all quarters were threat- 
ened with slaughter, conflagration, and rapine. Shrieks, grief, 
and terror re-echoed in tones like thunder on every side, and in 
every place there were the tumultuous alarms of depredation 
and violence. In consequence of this, the following Elegiac 
lines were composed : 

" Who shall give me a spring, for what else but a spring of 
tears do I need r that with tears I may bewail the wicked 
deeds of my native land ? A darkness hath come upon it, 
sent from the depths of hell, which in lowering clouds covers 
the face of this realm ! Lo ! frenzy, shrieks, conflagrations, 
theft, rapine, slaughter, and bad faith, in strict alliance come 
rushing on ! At the present day men act the thief both to- 
wards the wealth and the owners of the wealth, and, strange 
kind of theft ! while sleeping in their very, castles they sur- 
prise them. Perjury is good faith, lying a noble act; even 
the betrayal of their lords is a deed worthy of men. The 
band of robbers breaks open temples and tombs, and even oh 
shocking deed ! lays hands upon the priests. The anointed 
of the Lord, and women as well, they torture, and oh 
shame ! that they may purchase their liberty, devise how 
to rack them with torments ! Famine, therefore, comes on 
ajace ; their flesh consumed, to skin and bone reduced, they 
breathe forth their fleeting souls ! Who can give sepulture to 
crowds so vast of the dying ? Behold the face of hell, and a 
calamity its like !" 

In the same year, king Stephen gave Northumbria to Henry, 
the son of David, king of the Scots. In the same year died 
Turstin, archbishop of York, on whose decease there imme- 
diately arose a division in the church of York, as to the elec- 
tion of an archbishop. For some of the canons made choice of 

7 " Progeniem," in the text, hinting that he was son of the bishop of 

Salisbury. 



238 ANNALS OF KOGEH DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1141. 

"William, treasurer of the church of York, who was accordingly 
consecrated by Henry, bishop of Winchester, legate of the 
Church of Rome. But the other canons chose as their arch- 
bishop Henry Murdac, who prevailed, and retained the arch- 
bishopric as long as he lived, while archbishop William re- 
mained with Henry, bishop of Winchester, who had consecrated 
him, until the decease of Henry Murdac. 

In the year of grace 1141, being the sixth year of the reign 
of king Stephen, that king, before the Nativity, laid siege to 
the city of Lincoln, the castle of which, Ranulph, earl of 
Chester, had treacherously seized ; and there the king took up 
his quarters until the Purification of Saint Mary ; when earl 
Ranulph brought with him Eobert, the son of king Henry, his 
own son-in-law, and some other valiant nobles, in order to raise 
the siege by the king ; and the most valiant earl, having 
with difficulty crossed a marsh, which was almost impassable, 
on the same day, drawing out his troops in battle array, offered 
the king battle. He himself, with his own men, formed the 
first line ; those whom king Stephen had deprived of their 
inheritance, the second ; and the great earl Robert, with his 
men, the third ; on the flank there was a multitude of Welch- 
men, better provided with daring than with arms. After 
this, the earl of Qhester, a consummate warrior, glittering with 
conspicuous arms, thus addressed earl Robert and the other 
nobles : 

" With the greatest sincerity, to you, most invincible chief- 
tain, and to you, nobles and fellow-soldiers, do I return many 
thanks, who have magnanimously shewn your goodwill to- 
wards me at the hazard of your lives. Since then, I am the 
occasion of your peril, it is only fair that I should be the first 
to expose myself to peril, and be the first to pierce the ranks 
of this most faithless king, who, after making a treaty, has 
broken the peace. Wherefore, trusting both in the king's 
injustice and in my own valour, I will straightway cleave asun- 
der the royal ranks, and with my sword make way through the 
midst of the foe. It shall be the part of your prowess to fol- 
low me while I, lead the way, and to imitate my example as I 
strike. I already seem to myself, in my presaging mind, to be 
passing through the royal ranks, trampling the nobles beneath 
my feet, and piercing the king himself with my sword." 

Thus he spoke ; on which earl Robert addressed the youth, 



A.D. 1141> FARL ROBERT ADDRESSES HIS TROOPS. 239 

and standing upon an elevated spot, delivered a speech to this 
effect : 

" It is not without reason that you demand the honor of the 
first blow, both on the ground of your noble descent, and the 
valour wherein you excel. But still, if you stand upon noble 
descent, I am not surpassed by you, being the son of a most 
noble king, and the grandson of a most mighty monarch : if 
upon valour, here are many men of most consummate bravery, 
before whom not a man living can be preferred for prowess. 
But it is a far different reason that influences me. For, con- 
trary to the oaths which he made to my sister, the king has 
cruelly usurped the kingdom, and, causing confusion on every 
side, has been the occasion of death to many thousands, 8 and 
after his own example, has distributed lands among those who 
have no right thereto, violently taking them away from those 
who rightfully possessed them. By those who have been thus 
wickedly disinherited, with the aid of God, the Supreme Judge, 
who prepares vengeance, must he be first attacked. He who 
judges His people in equity, will look down from His habita- 
tion on high in the heavens, and will never desert us in this 
our great necessity, who with justice seek what is just. There 
is one thing, however, most valiant chieftains, and all you 
fellow-soldiers, which I desire firmly to impress upon your 
minds, namely, that by the marshes through which with diffi- 
culty you have passed, there can be no way of escape by 
flight. Here, therefore, we must either conquer or die ; in 
flight, hope of escape there is none. This alone remains for 
you, to make a way into the city with your swords. But if 
my mind presages aught of truth, the fact that you have no 
possible means of escape is the very thing which, this day, 
with the help of God, will gain for us the victory. For he 
nfust needs have recourse to prowess, who has not any possible 
means of escape. On the other hand, the citizens of Lincoln, 
who stand close to their city, with minds quailing beneath the 
vigour of your onset, you, proving victorious, will see flying 
for refuge to their homes. Besides, consider who it is against 
whom you are waging war. Alan, duke of the Bretons, comes 
forth in arms against us, nay, rather, against God ; an infamous 
man and one polluted with all kinds of crimes ; who in mis- 

8 The text has " militibus," " soldiers ; " hut "millibus," "thousands," 
seems preferable, and is the reading hi Ranulph Highden's narrative. 



240 ANNALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEX A.D. 1141. 

chief knows not his equal, who has never wanted the desire to 
do injury, and who would consider it his only and extreme re- 
proach not to be incomparable to any one in cruelty. There 
is also come out against us the earl of Hellent, crafty in his 
deceitfulness ; a planner of treachery ; in whose heart iniquity 
is rooted, and guile in his mouth ; slothful in deeds ; pre- 
sumptuous in heart ; magnanimous in words ; pusillanimous 
ia acting ; the last to attack, the first to run away ; tardy 
in battle, swift in flight. There is also come out against us 
earl Hugh, to whom it seems a trifle to have broken his oath 
to the empress, but he must commit perjury a second time 
in the most glaring manner, by affirming that king Henry 
gave the kingdom to Stephen and deprived his own daughter 
thereof. There is also come out the earl of Albemarle, a 
man of singular constancy in crime, ready for daring evil, 
and slow to relinquish it ; whom his wife, taking to flight, 
has abandoned by reason of his intolerable filthiness. There 
is also come out the earl, who has taken away his wife from the 
last named earl, a most avowed adulterer ; of singular impurity ; 
a devotee of Bacchus ; a stranger to Mars ; wreaking with 
wine, and unacquainted with warfare. There is also come out, 
Simon, earl of Hampton, 8 * whose deeds consist of words alone ; 
whose only gifts are promises ; who when he has said a thing, 
has done it; when he has promised, has given. There are 
also come out, other nobles just like their king, accustomed to 
robberies ; enriched with rapines ; fattened upon murders ; all, 
in fact, defiled by perjury. You, therefore, most valiant 
men, whom the great king Henry has advanced, and man 
has humbled, whom he has raised, this man has depressed, 
arouse your courage, and trusting in your valour, nay, rather, 
in the justice of God, take the vengeance thus offered to you 
by God upon these wicked persons, and confer imperishable 
glory upon your posterity. If then it is now your determi- 
nation to be the instruments of this judgment of God, vow 
that you will press onward, abjure all thoughts of flight, and 
with one consent raise your right hands towards heaven." 
Hardly had he concluded, when all, raising their hands to- 
wards heaven, with a thrilling shout abjured flight, and getting 
their arms in readiness for the attack, moved onward against 
the enemy in splendid array. 

8 * Southampton. 



A.D. 1141. BALDWIN ADDRESSES THE KING'S ABMT. 241 

King Stephen in the meantime, his mind fluctuating amid 
mighty cares, had the mass performed with the greatest so- 
lemnity. But when, according to the usual custom, he was 
placing in the hands of bishop Alexander a wax taper, an 
offering to God worthy of a king, it broke. This was an omen 
of sorrow to the king. The pix 9 also fell down upon the altar 
in which was the body of the Lord, the string breaking in 
the presence of the bishop. This was an omen of the king's 
ruin. After this, the valiant king went forth, and with the 
greatest coolness disposed his troops in battle array ; he him- 
self on foot ranged in the closest possible order the whole 
body of his men in armour, dismounted from their horses. 
The earls with their troops on horse-back 10 arranged to fight in 
two bodies ; but these bodies of horsemen appeared to be very 
small, as the earls had brought but few with them, though 
pretended to be more in number. But the king's army was 
very numerous, and marshalled under only one standard, that 
of the king ; upon which, as king Stephen had not an agreable 
voice, the speech to the army by way of exhortation was de- 
legated to Baldwin, a man of great nobleness, and a most 
valiant soldier, who, standing on an elevated spot, when, by a 
modest silence he had called the attention of all to his words, 
thus commenced, with the gaze of all intently fixed upon him ; 

" All those who, when the lines of battle are drawn up, are 
about to engage, ought to see beforehand to three things : first, 
the righteousness of their cause ; next, the number of their 
men ; lastly, the prowess of their troops. The righteousness 
of their cause, lest danger to the soul should be incurred ; the 
number of their men, lest they should be overwhelmed with 
the number of the enemy ; the prowess of their troops, lest, 
tmisting in a multitude, they should, by relying on the weak, 
still be overthrown. On all these points we see ourselves suit- 
ably prepared in the matter upon which we are engaged. For 
the righteousness of our cause is this, that, observing what we 
have sworn to our king before God, we stand facing those who 
1 1 uve proved perjured towards him to the peril of death. As 
to our numbers, in horsemen we are not inferior, in foot more 

9 The box in which the consecrated wafer is kept. 

)0 This passage in Roger of Wendover applies to the earls, the antago- 
nists of Stephen, and the liberty has been taken here of adapting the pas- 
sage to that sense. 

VOL. I. K 



242 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.O.I Ul. 

numerous. But the prowess of so many earls, so many nobles 
and knights always accustomed to warfare, who in words 
can express ? Besides, the boundless valour of the king him- 
self will stand for you in the stead of thousands. Since, then, 
your liege lord is in the midst of you, the Lord's anointed, 
to whom you have sworn allegiance, perform your vows be- 
fore God ; inasmuch as you shall receive the greater reward from 
God, the more faithfully and constantly you fight for your 
king, the faithful against the unfaithful, the observers of the 
law against the perjured. Then, be of good comfort and filled 
with entire confidence. Consider against whom you fight. The 
might of earl '.Robert is well known : according to his practice, 
he threatens much, and does but little, having the mouth of 
the lion and the heart of the hare eloquent in words, and al- 
ways in the back-ground through his slothfulness. As for the 
earl of Chester, he is a man of unreasonable boldness, ready for 
plotting, inconstant in performing, impetuous in warfare, un- 
provided against danger, contriving schemes too lofty for his 
reach, bent upon impossibilities, and bringing with him few 
good soldiers : collecting a straggling multitude of strangers, 
there is no reason why he should be dreaded. For whatever 
he begins like a man, he always leaves like a woman ; since 
in all matters in which he has been concerned, he has met 
with misfortune, either overcome in the encounter and running 
away, or if, on extraordinary occasions, victorious, sustaining 
greater loss than those overcome. The Welchmen whom he 
has brought with him are only objects of our contempt, oppos- 
ing their unarmed rashness to the front of battle, devoid of skill 
and all knowledge of the art of war, like cattle running upon 
the hunting-spears. The others, both nobles and common sol- 
diers, are deserters and vagabonds, and I only wish they had 
been brought here in greater numbers, for the more they are 
in number, the worse will they prove in the trial of them. 
You, therefore, earls and men of noble rank, ought to be 
mindful of your valour and your dignity. This day elevate 
your prowess, so inestimable, to the most exalted pitch, and, in 
imitation of your ancestors, leave to your sons an everlasting 
glory. The constant success of your arms should be to you 
an incentive to fight ; the continuance of reverses will be to 
them a motive for running away. And indeed, already, if 
I am not deceived, they repent of coming hither, and are at 



A.D. 1141. BATTLE AT LINCOLN. 243 

this moment thinking of flight, if the rugged nature of the 
spot would allow of it. Since then, it is not possible for them 
to fight or fly, what else have they done but, by the will of 
God, offer both themselves and their baggage unto you ? Ac- 
cordingly, you see their horses, their arms, and their bodies 
subject to your determination. Lift up your hearts, there- 
fore, and stretch forth your invincible right hands, ye war- 
riors ! to receive with extreme joyousness that which God 
himself has presented to you." 

Already, before he had concluded his speech, the shouts of 
the enemy were heard, the clanging of clarions, the neighing 
of horses, the re-echoing of the ground. The troop of the 
proscribed which formed the van, charged the king's line, in 
which were earl Alan, the earl of Mellent, Hugh, earl of 
East Anglia, earl Simon, and the earl of Warrenne, with 
such fury, that instantly, in the twinkling of an eye, it was 
routed, and became divided into three parts ; some of them 
were slain, some taken prisoners, while some took to flight. 
The division which was commanded by the earl of Albemarle 
and William of Ypres charged the Welch, who were advancing 
on the flank, and put them to flight. But the troops of the 
earl of Chester attacked the body of the above-named earl, 
and, like the first line, it was scattered in an instant. All 
the king's knights took to flight, and with them William of 
Ypres, 11 a native of Flanders, a man of the rank of an earl, 
and of great prowess. 

In consequence of this, king Stephen was left with his body 
of foot in the midst of the enemy. Accordingly, they sur- 
rounded the king's troops on every side, and assaulted them in 
every quarter, just in the way that an attack is made upon a 
fortified place. Then might you have seen a dreadful aspect 
of battle, on every quarter around the king's troops fire flash- 
ing from the meeting of swords and helmets, a dreadful 
crash, a terrific clamour, at which the hills re-echoed, the 
city walls resounded. "With horses spurred on, they charged 
the king's troop, slew some, wounded others, and dragging 
some away, made them prisoners. No rest, no breathing- 
time was granted them, except in the quarter where stood 
that most valiant king, as the foe dreaded the incomparable 

11 Roger of Wendover says that William of Ypres "and others, who 
Could not take to flight, were taken and thrown into prison." 

K 2 



244 AJTNALS OF EOGEE I)E HOVEDEN. A.I). 1141. 

force of his blows. The earl of Chester, on perceiving this, 
envying the king his glory, rushed upon him with all the 
weight of his armed men. 12 Then was seen the might of the 
king, equal to a thunderbolt, slaying some with his immense 
battle-axe, and striking down others. Then arose the shouts 
afresh, all rushing against him, and he against all. At length, 
through the number of the blows, the king's battle-axe was 
broken asunder. Instantly, with his right hand, drawing his 
sword, well worthy of a king, he marvellously waged the com- 
bat, until the sword as well was broken asunder. On seeing 
this, William de Kahamnes, a most powerful knight, rushed 
upon the king, and seizing him by the helmet, cried with a 
loud voice, " Hither, all of you, come hither ! I have taken 
the king !" All flew to the spot, and the king was taken. 
Baldwin was also captured, who had made the speech for the 
purpose of exhorting them, pierced with many wounds, and 
bruised with many blows, while earning undying fame by 
his glorious resistance. Richard Fitz-Urse was also taken, 
who in giving blows and receiving them was distinguished 
by his prowess. After the king was made prisoner, his troop 
still fought on; indeed, being surrounded, they could not 
take to flight ; but at last were all either taken prisoners or 
slain. According to the usages of war, the city was plundered, 
and the king, in a piteous condition, was taken there. 

The judgment of God being thus wrought upon the king, he 
was led to the empress, and placed in captivity in the castle at 
Bristowe. 13 The empress was recognized as mistress by all the 
people of England, except the men of Kent, where the queen 14 
and William of Yypres fought against her with all their 
strength. She was first received by the bishop of Win- 
chester, the Roman legate, and, shortly after, by the citizens 
of London. However, she soon became elated to an in- 
tolerable degree of pride, because her affairs, after their uncer- 
tain state, had thus prospered in warfare ; conduct which alien- 
ated from her the affections of almost all the people. Irritated 
at this, with all the spitefulness of a woman, she ordered the 
king, the Lord's anointed, to be placed in irons. A few days 

12 " Armatorum" seems a preferable reading to " armorum,'' as it ap- 
pears that Stephen was not taken hy the earl of Chester alone, but ra 
consequence of being overpowered and borne down by a multitude. 

13 Bristol. 14 The wife of king Stephen. 



A.D. 1142. KINO STEPHEN BESIEGES OXFORD. 245 

after, in conjunction with her uncle, the king of the Scots, 
and her brother Robert, having collected their troops, she laid 
siege to the fortress of the bishop of Winchester ; on which, 
the bishop sent for the queen and William of Ypres, and 
nearly all the nobles of England. In consequence of this, 
large armies were soon formed on either side. Daily combats 
took place, not rank meeting rank, but in skirmishes on the ex- 
terior of the lines. Their exploits, therefore, were not con- 
cealed amid the haze of battle, but the prowess of each was 
conspicuous, and proportionate renown attended his exploits ; 
so much so, that to all men of prowess this period seemed 
rich in the dazzling exploits of illustrious men. 

At length the army of the Londoners came up, swelled to 
vast numbers, and, fighting against the empress, compelled 
her to take flight. Many were taken while flying, and, among 
them, Robert, the brother of the empress, was captured, in 
whose castle the king was kept prisoner, and through whose 
capture alone the king could be ransomed : and, accordingly, 
they were both set at liberty. Thus then, through the judgment 
of God, the king was lamentably taken prisoner, and, through 
the mercy of God, he was mercifully liberated, and received 
with v great rejoicings by the nobles of England. 

In the same year, Alberic de Vere was slain at London, in a 
sedition of the citizens. In this year, also, died Geoffrey, 
bishop of Durham, and was succeeded in that see by William, 
dean of the church of Saint Barbara, at York, who was con- 
secrated by Henry, bishop of Winchester, the legate of the 
Church of Rome. 

In the year of grace 1142, being the seventh year of the 
reign of king Stephen, that king built a castle at Winchester. 15 
Just then, an immense multitude of the enemy coming upon 
him unawares, the king's soldiers, on meeting them, were 
not able to withstand their attack; on which they forced 
the king to take to flight. Many of his men, however, were 
taken prisoners ; and, among them, William Martel, the king's 
sewer, who, for his ransom, gave up the fine castle of Sherburne. 

In the same year, the king besieged the empress at Oxford, 
from after the feast of Saint Michael till the Advent of our 
Lord; and, shortly before the festival of the Nativity, the 

14 It would appear from Gervase's Chronicle, that this battle took place 
at Wilton, and not at Winchester, in the year 1 143. 



24:6 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOTEDEN. A.D. 1144. 

empress fled across the river Thame, which was frozen, clothed 
in white garments. The reflection of the snow and the simi- 
larity deceiving the eyes of the besiegers, she escaped to the 
castle of Wallingford ; upon which, Oxford was at length sur- 
rendered to the king. 

In the year of grace 1143, being the eighth year of the 
reign of king Stephen, that king was present at a council 
held at London in the middle of Lent. For, at this period, 
no respect was paid by those who plundered to either the 
clergy or the Church of God, and, whether clerks or lay- 
men, they were equally taken prisoners and held to ran- 
som. Upon this, the bishop of Winchester, the Roman 
legate, held a council at London, which at the time was 
absolutely necessary for the safety of the clergy. At this 
council it was decreed, that no one who should violently lay 
hands upon a clerk could possibly receive absolution from any 
one, not even from the pope himself, and appearing in his pre- 
sence. In consequence of this, a slight gleam of serenity, with 
great difficulty, shone forth at last upon the clergy. 

In the same year, the king seized Geofirey de Mandeville, 16 
at his court at Saint Alban's, more in retribution for the 
wickedness of the earl, than according to the law of nations ; 
more from necessity than from virtuous motives. For, if he 
had not done so, through the perfidy of this earl, whom from a 
baron he had created an earl, he would have been deprived of 
his kingdom. Accordingly, in order that the king might give 
him his liberty, he surrendered to him the tower of London 
and the castles of Walden and Plessis. In consequence of this, 
the above-named earl, being stripped of his possessions, 
attacked the abbey of Saint Benedict at Ramsey, expelled 
the monks, and introduced his plunderers, turning the church 
of God into a den of thieves. He was a man of the greatest 
prowess, but of the greatest perverseness towards God ; of ex- 
treme activity in worldly matters, but extremely neglectful 
towards God. 

In this year, shortly before the festival of the Nativity, the 
bishop of Winchester, and soon after, the archbishop of Can- 
terbury, repaired to Rome, to treat for the legateship, pope 
Innocent being dead, and having been succeeded by Celestinus. 

In the year of grace 1144, being the ninth vear of the 
16 * His name reallv was William. 



A.D. 1144. MIEACLES WBOFGIIT AGAINST THE WICKED. 247 

reign of king Stephen, that king laid siege to Lincoln, where, 
while he was building a fort opposite the castle which the 
earl of Chester held by force, nearly eighty of his workmen 
were smothered by the enemy ; consequently, abandoning the 
work, the king retreated in confusion.. In the same year, earl 
Geoffrey de Mandeville greatly harassed the king, and shone 
forth with great glory in all his exploits. But, in the month of 
August, the Divine power showed a miracle worthy of its 
justice : for two persons, who had committed the like offence 
in expelling the monks, and turning the churches of God into 
castles, it punished with a similar retribution. 

For Robert Marmion, a skilful warrior, had perversely acted 
thus towards the church of Coventry ; while, as already 
mentioned, Geoffrey de Mandeville had been guilty of the 
like wickedness towards the church of Ramsey. Robert 
Marmion, while attacking the enemy, and in the very midst 
of a large body of his own men, was slain, singly, before that 
very monastery, and, having been excommunicated, has death 
for his everlasting portion. 

In a similar manner, Geoffrey, the new-made earl above- 
named, while amid the dense ranks of his own men, was, 
singly, pierced with an arrow by a foot- soldier of the lowest 
rank. He himself at first laughed at the wound ; but, after a 
few days, died in consequence of it, and while excommunicated. 
Behold here the laudable vengeance of God, similarly attend- 
ant upon similar crimes, and worthy to be disclosed to all 
generations ! Also, while the church was held by him as a 
castle, blood gushed forth from the walls of the church and 
the adjoining cloisters, in manifestation of the Divine dis- 
pleasure, and foreboding the extermination of the wicked. 
This was seen by many persons; and, in fact, I myself 11 
' beheld it with my own eyes. 

Wherefore, because they wickedly said that God was asleep, 
God was aroused ; which is evident from these signs and mani- 
festations. For, in this same year, Arnulph also, the son of 
earl Geoffrey, who, after his father's death, retained possession 
of the church as a castle, was taken prisoner and banished the 

17 This is the earliest mention made by the writer of himself in the 
capacity of witness of what he relates. He must have been very young 
at the time ; consequently it was easy to impose on his credulity. He 
may, however, be possibly alluding to the extermination of the wicked. 



248 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1145. 

kingdom by reason thereof, and the leader of his troops, falling 
from his horse at his inn, 18 dashed out his brains and expired. 

In addition to this, the commander of his infantry, Reimer 
by name, whose habit it was to pull down churches or destroy 
them by fire, was crossing the sea with his wife, when, ac- 
cording to the statements of many, the ship became motionless. 
The sailors, astonished at this prodigy, made enquiry into 
the cause of the circumstance, by drawing lots, on which the 
lot fell upon Reimer. He, however, contradicting, with all his 
might, that this was the fact, the lots were drawn a second 
and a third time, and fell upon him still. Upon this, he was 
placed in a boat, with his wife and the money which he had 
most wickedly acquired, and immediately thereupon the ship 
ploughed the sea with the swiftest speed, just as before. The 
boat, however, with these most wicked people, being whirled 
round by a whirlpool suddenly formed, was sucked in and 
came to destruction. 

In the same year, pope Celestinus having departed this life, 
Lucius was appointed in his stead. 

In the year of grace 1 145, being the tenth year of the reign 
of king Stephen, that king was at first occupied in business 
relative to the departure of Hugh Bigot. But, in the spring, 
earl Robert, and the whole body of the king's enemies, built 
a castle at Ferendimer ; 19 on which, the king, displaying his 
usual activity, collected his forces and hurried thither, taking 
with him a numerous and warlike body of Londoners. After 
having assailed the fortress for whole days together, while 
earl Robert and his supporters were not far from the king's 
army, waiting for additional troops, by a display of military 
prowess attended with the most laborious efforts, he gained 
possession of it, though not without great bloodshed. Then, 
at length, the king's fortunes began to change for the better, 
and to soar aloft. 

In the same year pope Lucius died, and was succeeded by 
pope Eugenius. In this year also, Alexander, bishop of Lincoln, 
went again to Rome, and was honorably entertained by Euge- 
nius, the new pope, a man worthy of that highest dignity. 

18 " Hospitio." This may possibly mean the portion of the monastery 
where the monks were in the habit of entertaining strangers. 

19 " Ferendune " is a various reading. " Ferendimer " being probably a 
misprint. Faringdon, in Berkshire, is the place meant. 






A.D. 1147. STEPHEN CBOWNED AT LINCOLN. 249 

His mind was always kindly disposed, his discretion always 
to be relied on, his countenance always not only cheerful but 
even joyous. The bishop, returning the second year after this 
to Lincoln, with wonderful taste repaired the church there so 
skilfully, that it appeared more beautiful than when it was 
first built. 

In the year of grace 1 146, being the eleventh year of the 
reign of king Stephen, that king, having assembled a large 
army, built an impregnable castle, situate opposite to Walling- 
ford, where Eanulph, earl of Chester, who was now on friendly 
terms with the king, was staying with a large number of his 
followers. But, shortly after, as the earl was coming in a 
peaceful manner to the king's court, the king seized him at 
Northampton, while apprehending no such attack, and thrust 
him into prison until he had restored to him the most famous 
castle of Lincoln, which he had taken from him by stratagem, 
and all the rest of the castles which had belonged to himself ; 
upon which, the earl was released from prison and restored to 
liberty. 

In the same year, the noble city of Edessa, in Syria, which 
is now called Roaise, was taken through treachery by the 
Saracens, on the night of the Nativity of our Lord, while the 
bishop and Raymond, earl of Saint Gilles, and innumerable 
troops collected from the whole kingdom, and the people of 
the city were engaged in their religious duties ; who, on the 
capture of the city, were put to death by the pagans. In this 
city the remains of Saint Thomas the Apostle, which were 
formerly transferred from India, are said to rest. 

In the year of grace 1147, being the twelfth year of the 
reign of king Stephen, that king, at the festival of the Nativity 
' >f our Lord, was crowned at the city of Lincoln, which no 
king had dared to enter, in consequence of certain supersti- 
tions 20 preventing them. After the king's departure thence, the 
earl of Chester came to Lincoln with his troops, for the pur- 
pose of assaulting it ; upon which occasion, the commander of 
his troops, a man of invincible bravery, was slain at the en- 
trance of the north gate, and, after losing many of his men, 
the earl was forced to take to flight. On this, the citizens of 
Lincoln, being victorious, were filled with extreme joy, and, 

20 It was believed that misfortune and a speedy death would befall the 
king so doing. 



250 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.I). 1143. 

with great pomp, returned thanks, attended with praises, to the 
Virgin of virgins, their protectress. 

At Pentecost, Louis, king of the Franks, Theodoric, earl of 
Flanders, and the earl of St. Gilles, with numberless troops 
from the well-peopled kingdom of the Franks, besides many of 
the English nation, having assumed the cross, set out for Je- 
rusalem, for the purpose of expelling the pagaas, who had 
taken the city of Roaise. Conrad also, the emperor of Ger- 
many, led a still greater body of troops, and both armies passed 
through the dominions of the emperor of Constantinople, who 
afterwards betrayed them. 

In the month of August, Alexander, bishop of Lincoln, set 
out for Auxerre, to meet pope Eugenius, who was then at that 
place, having previously been to Paris. He was received by 
the pope in the most honorable manner ; but, in consequence 
of the excessive heat of the weather, brought with him to 
England the seeds of disease and death, and died in the follow- 
ing year, having for his successor Ptobert de Chedney. 

In the year of grace 1148, being the thirteenth year of the 
reign of king Stephen, the armies of the emperor of Germany 
and of the king of the Franks, which, graced by those most 
noble chieftains, marched onward with the greatest pomp, 
were annihilated, because God utterly despised them. For the 
incontinence ascended to the sight of God, of which they were 
guilty in acts of fornication and manifest adultery ; a thing 
which greatly displeased the Almighty, and was aggravated by 
the rapine and all kinds of crime of which they were afterwards 
guilty. Accordingly, at first they fell, attacked by famine, 
through the treachery of the emperor of Constantinople, and 
afterwards by the edge of the enemy's sword. The king of 
France and the emperor of Germany, upon this, with a very 
small number of followers, fled ignominiously, first to Antioch, 
and afterwards to Jerusalem. On arriving there, the king of 
France, as though about to do something to compensate his loss 
of glory, having obtained the aid of the knights of the Temple 
at Jerusalem, and gathering forces on every side, laid siege to 
Damascus ; but having effected nothing there, he returned to 
France. 

In the meantime, a naval force, headed by no influential 
men, and relying upon no mighty chieftain, but only on Al- 
mighty God, inasmuch as it had set out in a humble spirit, 



A.D. 1148. HENRr IS MADE DTTKE OF NORMANDY. 251 

earned the favour of God and manifested great prowess. For, 
though but few in number, by arms they obtained possession 
of a famous city of Spain, Lisbon 21 by name, and another, 
called Almeida, together with the parts adjacent. How true 
is it that God opposes the proud, but to the humble shows 
grace ! For the army of the king of the Franks and of the 
emperor was larger and better equipped than the former one, 
which had gained possession of Jerusalem ; and yet they were 
crushed by a very few, and routed and demolished like webs 
of spiders ; whereas these other poor people, whom I have just 
mentioned, no multitude could resist, but the greater the num- 
bers that made head against them, the more helpless were they 
rendered. The greatest part of them had come from England. 

In the meantime, Geoffrey, earl of Anjou, husband of the 
above-named empress, the daughter of king Henry, entered 
Normandy with a great army and ravaged it, and took many 
castles and fortified cities ; and the nobles of Normandy, keep- 
ing in mind the oaths they had made to the said empress 
and her heirs regarding Normandy, readily changed to their 
ride. For Eustace, the son of king Stephen, who had been 
the duke of Normandy, and had married Constance, sister of 
Louis, king of France, was now dead, and the king of France 
had given his sister Constance in marriage to Raymond, earl 
of Saint Gilles ; and from this period the wars so greatly in- 
creased against king Stephen in England, that he could give 
no attention to the defence of Normandy. 

At this time, Henry, son of the empress Matilda, being 
now a youth sixteen years of age, and having been brought 
up at the court of David, king of the Scots, his mother's uncle, 
was dubbed a knight by the same king David, at the city of 
Ctrlisle, having first made oath to him that if he should come 
to be king of England, he would restore to him Newcastle and 
the whole of Northumbria, and would allow him and his 
heirs to hold for ever in peace, without challenge of their 
right, the whole of the land which lies between the rivers 
Tweed and Tyne. After this, the same Henry, by the advice 
and assistance of David, king of the Scots, crossed over into 
Normandy, and being received by the nobles, was by them 
made duke of Normandy. 

?1 Great part of Portugal was at this time in the hands of the Moors. 



252 AHTTALS OF BOGEB. DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1153. 

In the year of grace 1149, being the fourteenth year of the 
reign of king Stephen, Henry, duke of Normandy came into 
England with a great army, on which many castles were sur- 
rendered to him, and a great number of towns ; he also coined 
new money, which they called " the duke's money ;" and not 
himself only, but all the influential men, both bishops as well as 
earls and barons, coined their own money. But from the time 
when the duke came over, he rendered null the coin of most of 
them. 

In the same year, Louis, king of the Franks, and Eleanor, 
his wife, returned from Jerusalem to France. 

In the year of grace 1150, being the fifteenth year of the 
reign of king Stephen, the abbey of Holcoltram was founded, 
also the abbey of Kinross, in Moray. In the same year, also, 
the Praemonstratensian order came to Dryburgh, at the feast of 
Saint Martin 

In the year of grace 1151, being the sixteenth year of the 
reign of king Stephen, pope Eugenius sent by his legate, John 
Papirius, four palls to Ireland, whither a pall had never been 
sent before, and appointed archbishops at four places, one at 
Armagh, another at Cashel, a third at Dublin, 22 and a fourth at 
Connaught. In the same year, Geoffrey, earl of Anjou, departed 
this life, and his son Henry succeeded him in the earldom. 

In the year of grace 1152, being the seventeenth year of 
the reign of king Stephen, during this year as also two pre- 
ceding ones, king Stephen and Henry, duke of Normandy, 
frequently engaged in battle, and did not withdraw from the 
combat, except with a great loss of substance and of men ; but 
the duke of Normandy always gained the day. For his re- 
sources increased more and more, and became more abundant 
every day, while the king's power decreased more and more. 
For the chief men of the kingdom, bearing in mind the oaths 
they had taken to the empress and her heirs, nearly all gave 
in their adhesion to the above-named empress and her son, the 
duke of Normandy. In the same year, Henry, earl of Nor- 
thumbria, son of David, king of the Scots, and Matilda, his 
daughter, departed this life. 

In the year of grace 1 153, being the eighteenth year of 
the reign of king Stephen, peace was restored to England, a 
treaty being made between king Stephen and Henry, duke of 
2 - Called " Diveiine " in the text. 




A.D. 1154. DEATH OF KING STEPHEN. 253 

Normandy, whom king Stephen adopted as his son, and ap- 
pointed his heir and successor in the kingdom, through the 
mediation of the venerable man Theobald, archbishop of Can- 
terbury, and Henry, bishop of Winchester. The king also 
appointed the duke justiciary of England under him, and all 
the affairs of the kingdom were transacted through him ; and 
from this time forward the king and the duke were of one 
mind in the government of the realm, so much so that, from 
this period, no disagreement ever arose between them. 

In the same year died David, king of the Scots, on the ninth 
day before the calends of July, on which, his grandson Malcolm, 
the son of earl H<zory, a boy twelve years of age, succeeded him 
in the kingdom. In the same year, pope Eugenius departed 
this life, and was succeeded in the papacy by Anastasius. In 
this year died Bernard, abbat of Clernlle ; William, bishop of 
Durham, also died in this year, and was succeeded by Hugh 
de Pudsey, 23 treasurer of the church of York, nephew of the 
above-named king Stephen. He was consecrated at Rome, by 
pope Anastasius, on the Lord's day preceding the Nativity of 
our Lord. In the same year died Henry, archbishop of York, 
on whose decease archbishop William, whom pope Eugenius 
had suspended, set out for Rome, and finding grace with pope 
Anastasius, the archbishopric of York was restored to him. 

In the year of grace 1154, being the nineteenth and last 
year of the reign of king Stephen, Eustace, the son of king 
Stephen, departed 24 this life. In the same year, William, 
archbishop of York, was honorably restored to his see ; but 
shortly after, by the treachery of his clergy, after receiving the 
Eucharist, during his ablutions, he was destroyed by means of 
some liquid of a deadly nature ; on which he was honorably 
interred by Hugh, bishop of Durham, in the church of Saint 
Peter at York ; and on the presentation of king Stephen, Roger, 
archdeacon of Canterbury, succeeded him in the archbishopric. 

In the same year king Stephen laid siege to many castles, and 
took them, and levelled many of them with the ground ; almost 
the very last of which was the castle of Drax; shortly after 

23 Or De Pusat, or Pusar. 

24 There is clearly a mistake here ; as the death of Eustace is mentioned 
above as having taken place before the year 1148, in which year his widow 
Constance was given in marriage to the earl of Saint Gilles. 1152 is 
probably the date of his death. 



254 ANXALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A. a. 1154. 

which, king Stephen died, and was buried at the abbey of Fever- 
sham. He was succeeded on the throne by Henry, duke of Nor- 
mandy, son of the empress Matilda, who was crowned and conse- 
crated king by Theobald, archbishop of Canterbury, at London, 
on the Lord's day before the Nativity of our Lord. 

In the same year, Theobald, archbishop of Canterbury, gave 
to Thomas Becket, his clerk, the archdeaconry of Canterbury. 
In this year also, Louis, king of the Franks, caused himself to 
be divorced from his wife Eleanor, daughter of the duke of 
Aquitaine, the archbishops, bishops, earls and barons, making 
oath that she had ceased to deserve to be his wife. However, 
Henry, king of England, took the before-named Eleanor to 
wife, and had by her sons and daughters. The king of France, 
however, by his wife Eleanor, had no issue of the male sex, 
and only two daughters, one of whom he married to Henry, 
earl of Champagne, and "the other to Theobald, earl of Blois, 
brother of the said earl Henry. After this, Louis, king of 
the Franks, took to wife the daughter of the king of Spain, 
by whom he had two daughters only. 



ROGER DE HOYEDEN. 



THE SECOND PART. 

IN the year 1155, being the first year of the reign of king 
Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said king laid siege 
to the castles of his enemies in England, and captured them ; 
some of which he retained in his own hands, and some he 
levelled with the ground. After this, he crossed over into Nor- 
mandy, and did homage to Louis, king of the Franks, for 
Normandy, Aquitaine, Anjou, Maine, and Touraine, with all 
their appurtenances. In the same year, died pope Anastasius, 
who was succeeded by Adrian. 

In the year of grace 1156, being the second year of the 
reign of Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said king 
returned from Normandy to England, and caused nearly all 
the castles, which had been erected in England in the time 
of king Stephen, to be demolished, and issued a new coinage, 
which was the only one received and current throughout the 
realm; he also established peace in the kingdom, and com- 
manded the laws of king Henry, his grandfather, to be ob- 
served inviolably throughout the whole of his kingdom, and in 
many matters followed the advice of Theobald, archbishop of 
Canterbury. 

In this year, a convent of nuns was established a second 
time at Eccles. 

In the year of grace 1157, being the third year of the reign 
of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said king, 



256 ANNALS OF ROGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. I]j9. 

by the advice and entreaty of Theobald, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, conferred the chancellorship upon Thomas, archdeacon of 
Canterbury, and bestowed upon him many revenues, both ec- 
clesiastical and of a secular nature, and received him so much 
into his esteem and familiarity, that throughout the kingdom 
there was no one his equal, save the king alone. In the same 
year, Malcolm, king of the Scots, came to the king of England at 
Chester, and did homage to him in the same way that his grand- 
father had done homage to the former king Henry, saving al- 
ways all his dignities. 

In the year of grace 1158, being the fourth year of the 
reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said 
king Henry caused himself to be crowned a second time at 
Lincoln, without 25 the walls of the city, at Wikeford. In the 
same year, by the king's command, the castle of Werk 26 was 
rebuilt. The king, and Malcolm, king of the Scots, met at Car- 
lisle, but separated mutually displeased ; in consequence of 
which, the king of Scots was not created a knight for the 
present. 

In the year of grace 1159, being the fifth year of the reign 
of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said king 
Henry caused himself, a third time, together with his wife 
Eleanor, to be crowned at Worcester, at the festival of Easter: 27 
and when they came to the offertory, they took off their crowns, 
and offered them upon the altar ; vowing before God, that 
they would never in all their lives wear them again. In the 
same year died Waltheof, abbat of Melrose, on the fourth day 
before the nones of August ; he was uncle to king Malcolm. 

In the same year, pope Adrian departed this life, and was 
succeeded by pope Alexander the Third, who was canonically 
elected and consecrated. But Frederic, emperor of the Ro- 
mans, being unwilling to acknowledge him, erected an idol for 
himself, Octavianus, an antipope, and, an execrable conven- 
tion and league being formed of those of his own blood, 
against pope Alexander, he with his nation determined to pay 
veneration to him, on which a schism arose in the church, 
which lasted eighteen years. 

In the same year, Henry, king of England, having levied 

25 Probably on account of the superstition alluded to in p. 249. 

26 In Northumberland. 

s; Ixoger of Wendover says, at Christmas. 



A. D. 1161. TREATY BETWEEN HENET AND LOUIS. 257 

a large army, laid siege to Toulouse, and although he sat before 
it for a long time, and wasted his treasure in various expenses, 
still he was able to effect nothing there, and, without gaining 
his object, took his departure. In this expedition died William, 
earl of Boulogne, son of king Stephen, and Hamo, son of the 
earl of Gloucester, with many others. On his return from 
this expedition, Malcolm, king of Scotland, was knighted by 
Henry, king of the English, at Tours. 

In the year of grace 1 1 60, being the sixth year of the reign of 
king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, Malcolm, king of the 
Scots, returned to his country from the expedition against Tou- 
louse. On his arrival at the city called Perth, earl Feretaeh and 
five other earls being enraged against the king, because he had 
marched against Toulouse, laid siege to the city of Perth, and 
attempted to seize the person of the king, but were not able. 
On three different occasions, king Malcolm with a great army 
invaded Galloway, and at last conquered it. In the same 
year, king Malcolm gave his sister Margaret in marriage to 
Conan, duke of Bretagne. 

In the year of grace 1161, being the seventh year of the 
reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, that king 
and Louis, king of the Franks, disagreed respecting some 
divisions of their territories, and the castles of Gisors and 
Neafle, which at that time were in the hands of Louis, king 
of the Franks, and which the said king Henry. claimed as pro- 
perly belonging to his dukedom of Normandy. But shortly 
after they came to terms on these conditions ; that the king 
of France should give his two daughters, whom he had had by 
his wife, the daughter of the king of Spain, (the name of one of 
whom was Margaret, and of the other Alice,) in marriage to 
the two sons of king Henry, namely, Henry and Richard, 
avho were as yet but little children ; that he should de- 
liver the before-named castles of Gisors and Neafle into the 
hands of the Templars for safe custody, until such time as 
his above-named daughters should be married to the said sons 
of king Henry, and that it should be arranged with them, that 
is to say, with Robert de Pirou and Tostes de Saint Omer, that 
when Margaret, the daughter of the king of France, had been 
married to Henry, the son of the king of England, they should 
deliver up to king Henry both the castles. 

These terms being agreed to on both sides, and confirmed by 
VOL. i. s 



258 ANNALS OP BOGER DE HOVEDEK. A.D. 1163. 

oath, the king of the Franks delivered both of his daughters 
to the king of England, and the above-named castles into 
the custody of the Templars. Shortly after this period, 
Henry, king of England, caused his son Henry to be married 
to Margaret, the daughter of the king of France, although they 
were as yet but little children, crying in the cradle ; Robert 
de Pirou, Tostes de Saint Omer, and Richard de Hastings, the 
Templars, who had custody of the said castles, being wit- 
nesses and consenting thereto ; immediately upon which they 
surrendered those castles to the king of England. In conse- 
quence, the king of France was extremely indignant at them, 
and banished these knights from the kingdom of France, upon 
which the king of England received them and rewarded them 
with many honors. In the same year, Theobald, archbishop of 
Canterbury, legate of the Roman Church, departed this life. 

In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 1162, being 
the eighth year of the reign of king Henry, son of the em- 
press Matilda, the said king conferred the see of Canterbury 
on Thomas, his chancellor. In the same year, pope Alex- 
ander came into France, having been expelled from his see 
by Frederic, the emperor of the Romans. He was honorably en- 
tertained by king Louis and by Henry, king of the English, \dho 
looked upon him as pope of the Catholic Church. In the 
same year, Malcolm, king of the Scots, gave his sister Ada in 
marriage to the earl of Holland. 29 

In the year of grace 1163, being the ninth year of the reign 
of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said king of 
England returned from Normandy into England ; and king 
Malcolm having recovered at Doncaster from a severe illness, 
a solemn treaty of peace was made between him and the 
king of England. In the same year, pope Alexander held a 
general council at Tours, at which he excommunicated Oc- 
tavianus the antipope. 

In the same year, a great dissension arose between the king of 
England and Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, relative to the 
ecclesiastical dignities, which the said king of the English was 
attempting to disturb and lower in estimation, whereas the 
archbishop endeavoured by every possible means to keep the 
ecclesiastical power and dignities intact. For it was the king's 
wish that if priests, deacons, subdeacons, and other rulers of the 
29 This passage is probably in a corrupt state. 



A.D. 1164. MISSION OF EENULPH, BISHOP OP LISIETTX. 259 

church should be apprehended on the commission of theft, or 
murder, or felony, or arson, or the like crimes, they should 
be taken before secular judges, and punished like the laity. 
Against this the archbishop of Canterbury urged, that if a 
clerk in holy orders, or any other ruler of the Church, should 
be charged upon any matter, he ought to be tried by eccle- 
siastics and in the ecclesiastical court ; and if he should be 
convicted, that then he ought to be deprived of his orders, 
and that, when thus stripped of his office and his ecclesiastical 
preferment, if he should offend again, he ought to be tried 
at the pleasure of the king and of his deputies. 

In the year of grace 1 164, being the tenth year of the reign 
of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said Henry 
gave to Henry, duke of Saxony, his daughter Matilda in 
marriage. In the same year, having called together a great 
council, and all the archbishops and bishops of England being 
assembled in his presence, he requested them, out of their love 
for and obedience to him, and for the establishment of the king- 
dom, to receive the laws of king Henry, his grandfather, and 
faithfully to observe them : on which, Thomas, archbishop of 
Canterbury, made answer for himself and the others, that they 
would receive those laws which the king said were made by 
his grandfather, and with good faith would observe the same ; 
saving their orders and the honor of God and of the Holy 
Church in all respects. But this reservation greatly displeased 
the king, and he used every possible method to make the bishops 
promise that they would, without any exception whatever, ob- 
serve those laws ; to this, however, the archbishop of Canter- 
bury would on no account agree. 

A considerable time after this, Ernulph, bishop of Lisieux, 
came over to England, and anxiously endeavoured, day and 
flight, to make peace between the king and the archbishop, 
but was unable to ensure complete success. Upon this, by 
the advice of the bishop of Lisieux, the king separated Roger, 
archbishop of York, Robert de Melun, bishop of Hereford, 
Robert, bishop of Lincoln, and some other prelates of the 
church, from the society and counsel of the archbishop of Can- 
terbury, in order that through them he might more easily in- 
duce the archbishop to yield to his own attempts. After 
this, there came to England a certain man belonging to the 
religious orders, named Philip de Elcemosyna, being sent as 

a 2 



260 ANNALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1164. 

legate " a latere," by Alexander the Supreme Pontiff, and all 
the cardinals, for the purpose of making peace between the 
king and the archbishop of Canterbury ; by whom the pope 
and all the cardinals sent word to the archbishop of Canter- 
bury, that he must make peace with the king of England his 
master, and promise, without any exception, to obey his laws. 
Assenting therefore to this and other advice on the part of 
these great men, the archbishop of Canterbury came to the 
king at Woodstock, and there made a promise to the king and 
agreed that he would, in good faith, and without any bad intent, 
observe his laws. 

Shortly after this, the clergy and people of the kingdom 
being convened at Clarendon, the archbishop repented that 
he had made this concession to the king, and, wishing to recede 
from his agreement, said that in making the concession he had 
greatly sinned, but would sin no longer in so doing. In con- 
sequence of this, the king's anger was greatly aroused against 
him, and he threatened him and his people with exile 30 and 
death; upon which, the bishops of Salisbury and Nor- 
wich came to the archbishop, together with Robert, earl of 
Leicester, Reginald, earl of Cornwall, and the two Templars, 
Richard de Hastings and Tostes de Saint Omer, and in 
tears threw themselves at the feet of the archbishop, and 
begged that he would at least, for the sake of the king's 
dignity, come to him, and in the presence of the people 
declare that he would observe his laws. The archbishop 
being consequently overcome by the entreaties of such great 
men, came to the king, and in the presence of the clergy 
and the people, said that he had acceded to those laws 
which the king called those of his grandfather. He also 
conceded that the bishops should receive those laws and 
promise to observe them. Upon this, the king gave orders 
to all the earls and barons of the realm, that they should 
go out and call to remembrance the laws of king Henry 
his grandfather, and reduce them to writing. "When this 
had been done, the king commanded the archbishops and 
bishops to annex their seals to the said writing ; but, while the 
others were ready so to do, the archbishop of Canterbury swore 
that he would never annex his seal to that writing or con- 
firm those laws. 

30 " Exillium " is a preferable reading to " Exitium." 



A.D. 1164. EABTHQT7AKE IN SICILY. 261 

When the king saw that he could not by these means attain 
his object, he ordered a written copy of these laws to be made, 
and gave a duplicate of it to the archbishop of Canterbury, 
which he, in spite of the prohibition of the whole of the clergy, 
received from the king's hand, and turning to the clergy, 
exclaimed, " Courage, brethren ! by means of this writing 
we shall be enabled to discover the evil intentions of the king, 
and against whom we ought to be on our guard ;" after which 
he retired from the court, and was unable by any means to 
recover the king's favour. And because he had acted unad- 
visedly in this matter, 31 he suspended himself from the celebra- 
tion of divine service from that hour, until such time as he 
himself, or his messenger, should have spoken thereon with our 
lord the pope. 

After this, there came to England Eotrod, archbishop of 
Rouen, on behalf of our lord the pope, for the purpose of 
effecting a reconciliation between the king and the archbishop 
of Canterbury ; to which, however, the king would on no ac- 
count consent, unless our lord the pope should, by his bull, 
confirm those laws. When this could be in nowise effected, the 
king sent John of Oxford and Geoffrey Riddel, his clerks, to 
pope Alexander, requesting him to give the legateship of the 
whole of England to Roger, that archbishop of York, that so 
through his means he might be able to confound the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury. But our lord the pope would not, as 
to this part of it, listen to the king's request. However, upon 
the petition of the king's clerks, our lord the pope conceded 
that the king himself should be legate for the whole of Eng- 
land ; on such terms, however, that he could do nothing offen- 
sive to the archbishop of Canterbury. The king, on seeing 
ihis, in his indignation sent back to our lord the pope the 
letters appointing him legate, which John of Oxford and 
Geoffrey Riddel had brought. 

In the same year, on the vigil of Saint Agatha, the virgin 
and martyr, a great earthquake took place in the island of 
Sicily ; so much so, that the city of Catania was utterly de- 
stroyed, and the bishops and clergy, and all the inhabitants of 
the city, perished ; thirty thousand fighting men, in fact, be- 
sides women and children, which could not be numbered. On 
the same day, after the destruction of the city of Catania, the 
31 la taking the oath. 



262 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1165. 

sea receded a distance of three thousand seven hundred and fifty 
paces, 32 leaving vast quantities of fish of various kinds on the 
sands; and when the inhabitants of the country adjacent to 
the city that had heen overthrown flocked together, and were 
intent upon taking the fish, the sea flowed back again and sur- 
rounded them, and swept them away into the deep. 

In the same year, William, the brother of Henry, king of 
England, departed this life. In this year also died Octavianus, 
the antipope, and was succeeded by the antipope Guido of 
Crema. In the same year, the abbey of Cupar was founded 
by king Malcolm. In this year also, Sumerled, the thane of 
Arregaidele, rose in rebellion against his natural lord, king 
Malcolm, and, landing in Renfrew with a vast army of Irish, 
was there slain by a few of the people of the province. In 
the same year died Herebert, bishop of Glasgow, and was 
succeeded by Ingelran, the king's chancellor, who was conse- 
crated by pope Alexander, at the city of Sens, although the 
deputies of Roger, archbishop of York, vigorously opposed it. 

In the year of grace 1165, being the eleventh year of the 
reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said 
king assembled a great council at Northampton, where he 
inflicted great annoyances upon Thomas, the archbishop of 
Canterbury. For in the first place, the king made his own 
horses take up their quarters at the archbishop's lodgings, on 
which the prelate sent word to the king that he would not come 
to court until his lodgings had been cleared of the king's 
horses and men. On the day after the council, archbishop 
Thomas came to the king's court, attended by his suf- 
fragan bishops, and demanded his leave immediately to cross 
the sea to go to pope Alexander, who at this time was stay- 
ing in France ; this, however, he could not obtain ; but the 
king said to him, " You shall first answer me, for the injustice 
you have done to John, my marshall, in your court." For this 
John had made complaint to the king that when he had 
claimed in the archbishop's court a certain piece of land against 
him, as held by hereditary right, and had for a long time im- 
pleaded him in respect thereof, he was unable to obtain any 
redress from him, and had appealed from the jurisdiction of 
the archbishop's court upon oath, according to the custom of 
the kingdom. To this the archbishop made answer : 

, a 2 Nearly three miles and a half. 



A. P. 11G5. ILLNESS OF AECHBISHOP THOMAS. 263 

" There has been no refusal of justice to John in my court ; 
but he himself (whether by the advice of some one else, or 
whether of his own free will, I know not,) brought into my 
court a certain bundle, 34 and took the oath upon it, that in con- 
sequence of denial of justice he withdrew from my court; 
whereas it appeared to the justices of my court that it was 
he who had done the injustice towards me, in thus withdrawing 
from my court ; as it is one of the statutes of your kingdom 
which says, ' If any person shall wish to appeal from the court 
of another person, he must make oath upon the Holy Evan- 



However, the king, paying no attention to Thomas, when 
he had said these words, made oath that he would have both 
justice and judgment at his hands. The barons of the king's 
court thereupon sentenced him to be amerced by the king, 
and although the archbishop endeavoured to appeal against this 
judgment, still, by the entreaties and advice of the barons he 
suffered himself to be amerced by the king, in the sum of 
five hundred pounds, and found security for that sum. 

Upon this, he retired from the court and went to his lodg- 
ings, and, on account of the annoyance and vexation which he 
felt in his mind, took to his bed and fell extremely ill. AVhen 
this became known to the king, that he might annoy him 
still more, he immediately sent to him, and summoned him 
by trusty summoners, to appear before him on the following- 
day, prepared to give him an account of the stewardship, which 
he had held in the kingdom before his consecration. The 
archbishop, however, being sensible that a heavy sentence of 
banishment awaited him, if he should hasten to make his 
appearance at the court, sought every excuse for delay ; both 
tn the ground of the time given by the summons being ex- 
tremely short, as also of his severe attack of illness. Upon 
this, the king seeing that the archbishop would not appear 
that day, sent to him Robert, earl of Leicester, and Reginald, 
earl of Cornwall, to be witnesses of his illness. When they 
came, they foundhim lying ill in bed, and at his entreaty granted 
him a respite from coming to the court until the following 
morning. On the same day it was told him, and word was 

54 The word used in the text is " toper," which does not seem to have 
any meaning ; it is possible that it may stand for the word " toppuiu," 
which sixaines a " bundle." 



264 AlfNALS OF B.OGEK DE HOVETEN. A.D. 1165. 

brought to him by those of the king's household, that if he ap- 
peared at the king's court, he would either be thrown into 
prison or put to death. 

In consequence of this, the archbishop, after conferring with 
his friends on these matters, by the advice of a certain pru- 
dent person, next morning, before going to the court, cele- 
brated with the greatest devotion the mass of Saint Stephen, the 
Proto-martyr, the office 35 of which begins to this effect, "Ete- 
nim sederunt principes, et adversum me loquebantur," &c., 36 
and commended his cause to the supreme Judge, who is God. 
Still, for celebrating this mass, he was afterwards severely ac- 
cused by Gilbert, bishop of London, who spoke in the king's 
behalf. For the bishop of London made it an accusation 
against him, that he had ' celebrated this mass by means of 
the magic art. and out of contempt of the king. 

After having thus celebrated the mass, the archbishop placed 
over his shoulders his stole, and then put on his black canoni- 
cal cape, and forthwith set out for the king's court. Imme- 
diately upon this, a great crowd of people collected together 
from all quarters to see what would be the end of it. He 
carried his cross in his right hand, while with the left 
he held the reins of the horse on which he was seated, and 
on coming to the king's palace dismounted, and, still hold- 
ing the cross, entered the royal mansion ; after which, he 
entered the outer chamber alone, still carrying his cross ; but 
no one of his people followed him thither. On entering the 
chamber, he found there a great number of the common people, 
on which he took his seat among them. The king, however, 
was in his private closet with the persons of his household. 

On this, Gilbert, the bishop of London, came to the arch- 
bishop on the king's behalf, and greatly censured him for coming 
to the court thus armed with the cross, and even tried to wrest 
it from his hands, but the archbishop grasped it too tightly 
for him ; whereupon, Henry, the bishop of Winchester, said to 
the bishop of London, " Brother, allow the archbishop to retain 
his cross ; for he ought himself to be well able to carry it." 
The bishop of London, being greatly enraged at this remark, 
turned to the bishop of Winchester, and replied, " Brother, 

35 The formulary for devotion appointed by the ritual for that day. 
35 " Princes surrounded me, and spoke against me ;" from the 118th 
Psalm in the Vulgate, being the commencement of the Introit. 



A.D. 1165. AECHBI8HOP THOMAS IS SUMMONED BY THE KING. 265 

you have spoken to ill purpose, and evil will ensue to you 
therefrom, inasmuch as you have spoken against the king's 
interests." 

Next came to him Roger, the archbishop of York. " Oh, 
how oft did he wish to' approach him with bland requests, 
and soft entreaties to use I" 37 But the old embers of hatred 
forbade him so to do, and would not allow him to utter a word 
in a peaceful way. On the contrary, he uttered the most severe 
reproaches against him for thus coming to court armed with 
the cross ; saying that the king had a sword which was still 
sharper, and therefore, if he followed his advice, he would 
put aside his cross. On this, one of the bystanders made this re- 
mark : " Believe me, if you believe him, you will be deceived. 
The fowler plays sweetly on his pipe while decoying the birds. 
Beneath sweet honey noxious poisons lie concealed." ^ How- 
ever, the archbishop of Canterbury refused to put aside his 
cross, but said : "If the king's sword carnally slays the body, 
my sword pierces spiritually, and sends the soul to hell." Now 
while he was sitting there waiting, some persons secretly told 
him that his death had been sworn by the king's followers ; 
in consequence of which, from that hour he sought an oppor- 
tunity for withdrawing from the court, and, that he might 
more easily withdraw, appealed to the Supreme Pontiff, placing 
the cause of the Church and of himself under the protection of 
God and of our lord the pope ; and gave orders to all the bishops 
inviolably to observe his appeal. 39 Upon this, all the bishops 
advised him to comply with the king's wishes, and, surrender- 
ing his see, throw himself upon his mercy ; but the archbishop 
refused to trust them upon that point. 

At this moment the king sent him word by his knights 
t< i come to him without delay, and render to him a full account 
of all the receipts of the revenues of the kingdom during the 

37 A quotation from Ovid 

" quotiens voluit blandis accedere dictis, 

Et molles adhibere preces." 
M A quotation from Ovid 

" Crede mihi, si credis ei, tu decipieris. 
Fistula dulce canit volucres dum decipit auceps. 

Impia sub dulci melle venena latent." 

39 By not being present when any judgment might be passed upon him 
by a temporal tribunal. 



266 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1165. 

time that he had been his chancellor. And, in particular, he 
was questioned with reference to thirty thousand pounds of 
silver ; on which the archbishop made answer : " My lord the 
king knows that I have often rendered him an account with 
reference to all the demands he is now making upon me, 
before my election to the archbishopric of Canterbury. But, 
upon my election to that see, the king's son, Henry, to whom 
the kingdom was bound by its oath, and all the barons of the 
exchequer, and Richard de Lucy, the justiciary of England, 
released me before God and the Holy Church, from all receipts 
and reckonings, and from all secular exactions on behalf of our 
lord the king, and thus, free and acquitted, was I elected to the 
administration of the duties of this office ; and for that reason 
do I refuse to plead any further." The king, upon hearing this, 
said to his barons : " Make haste and pronounce judgment 
upon this person, who, being my liege-man, refuses to take his 
trial in my court;" on which they went forth, and pro- 
nounced that he deserved to be arrested and placed in con- 
finement. On hearing this, the king sent to him Reginald, 
earl of Cornwall, and Robert, earl of Leicester, to inform him 
of the judgment that had been pronounced upon him ; who 
accordingly said to him : " Listen to the judgment pronounced 
upon you." To this, the bishop made answer : "In the name 
of Almighty God, and under penalty of excommunication, 
I forbid you this day to pronounce judgment upon me, inas- 
much as I have appealed unto the presence of our lord the pope." 
"While the above-named earls were carrying this answer to 
the king, the archbishop went forth from the chamber, and going 
through the midst of them, reached his palfrey, and mounting 
it, left the palace, all the people shouting after him and 
saying : "Where are you going, traitor? Stop, and hear 
your sentence !" 

When, however, he had arrived at the outer gates, he found 
them shut, and was in great apprehension of being taken 
by his enemies, but Almighty God delivered him. For, Peter 
de Munctorio, 40 one of his servants, espied a number of keys 
hanging on a nail 11 near the gate, and taking them down, opened 
it, on which the archbishop sallied forth on horseback, the 

* Probably in the Norman, " Peter de Mouchoir." 
-H Singularly enough, Holinshed renders the words, " in clavo," " tied 
to a club's end." 



A.D. 1165. K1XG LOUIS INTEBCEDES WITH THE POPE. 267 

king's porters standing by, and uttering not a word. The 
archbishop made all haste to arrive at the house of some canons 
regular, 42 where he was hospitably entertained, and com- 
manded the tables to be set out and all the poor that were to 
be found before the gates to be introduced to eat and drink 
in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. This was accordingly 
done ; and he, together with them and his people, becomingly 
partook of the repast in the refectory of the canons, and, when 
it was finished, made his bed in the church, between the nave 
and the altar. In the meantime, he had secretly ordered pre- 
parations to be made for his journey, as it was his intention to 
depart by night. At twilight, therefore, when the king and the 
rest were supping in the town, taking with him two friars of 
the Cistercian order, the name of one of whom was Robert de 
Caune, and of the other Scaiman, and a single servant, who 
was called Roger de Broc, he went out of the town through 
the gate, which was left entirely without guards, and at day- 
break arrived at Lincoln, and was entertained at the house of 
James. Here the archbishop changed his dress, and, changing 
his name, ordered himself to be called by that of Dereman ; 
and then, being recognized by few persons, taking remote ways 
and bye-paths, he hastened towards the sea-shore, he and his 
attendants riding on at night, and concealing themselves 
in the day among his friends and acquaintances. At last 
they arrived at the sea-shore, and reaching the port of Sand- 
wich, secretly embarked on board of a ship, and then, secretly 
setting sail, in the morning landed in Flanders, whence he 
immediately made his way to France. 

Before, however, he had arrived at the court of Louis, king 
of the Franks, Gilbert Folliot, bishop of London, and William, 
earl of Arundel, had arrived on behalf of the king of England, 
to prevent the king of France from receiving the archbishop of 
Canterbury in his kingdom, and to request him to beg our 
lord the pope, out of his love for him, not to receive the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury into his favour. But the more pains the 
above-named envoys of the king of England took to have the 
archbishop of Canterbury expelled from the kingdom of France, 
the more did the king of France favour him and his cause. 

In addition to this, the king of France sent brother Francis, 
his almoner, to pope Alexander, who was at this time staying 
4i The abbev of Saint Andrew. 



268 AJTNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1165. 

in France, begging him, as he esteemed the honor of the Ro- 
man Church and the aid of the kingdom of France, in all 
things to maintain Thomas, the archbishop of Canterbury, and 
his cause against the tyrant of England ; and, accordingly, 
from this moment our lord the pope received the archbishop of 
Canterbury into great favour. 

In the meantime, Henry, king of England, sent to our 
lord the pope, Roger, archbishop of York, Henry, bishop of 
"Winchester, Gilbert, bishop of London, Hilary, bishop of 
Chichester, and Bartholomew, bishop of Exeter, together 
with Guido Rufus, Richard de Ivechester, and John of 
Oxford, clerks, and "William, earl of Arundel, Hugh de 
Gondeville, Bernard de Saint Yalery, and Henry Fitzgerald, 
laymen. These persons found the pope at the city of Sens, 
and gave utterance to many evil and false accusations against 
the archbishop of Canterbury ; but our lord the pope did not 
believe them, as he knew that they were bearing false witness 
against him. 

On seeing that they could not gain their object, they re- 
quested of our lord the pope that two legates might be sent to 
England to take cognizance of the dispute which existed be- 
tween the king and the archbishop of Canterbury, and 'to de- 
cide it to the honor of God, and of the Holy Church, and of the 
realm. However, our lord the pope was not willing to send any 
cardinal or any legate, as he was aware that the king of Eng- 
land was powerful both in word and deed, and that legates 
might easily be corrupted, as being more athirst for gold and 
silver than for justice and equity. Upon this, the envoys of 
the king of England, being unable to gain their object, with- 
drew from the court of our lord the pope. On the fourth day 
after, Thomas, the archbishop of Canterbury, came thither, 
and, throwing himself at the feet of our lord the pope, pre- 
sented to him the above-mentioned writing, in which were 
written the laws of England, which the king called the laws 
of his grandfather. The pope, having heard them read in 
presence of all the cardinals, and of the clergy and a large con- 
course of people, pronounced a perpetual condemnation upon 
them, and excommunicated all persons who should observe 
them, or in any way maintain them. 

In this year two comets made their appearance before sun- 
rise, in the month of August ; one in the west, the other in 






A.D. 1165. KING HENBY'S EDICT AGATNST THE POPE. 269 

the north. A comet is a star which does not appear at all 
times, but in especial at the death of a king, or upon the ruin of a 
nation. When it appears refulgent with a hairy crown, it fore- 
tells a royal death ; but, if it has long locks of hair ** which, as it 
scintillates, it spreads abroad, it betokens the ruin of a nation. 

In the same year, pope Alexander returned to Rome, and 
was honorably received by the people of that city. In this 
year died Malcolm, king of the Scots, and was succeeded by 
his brother William. In this year, also, Henry, king of the 
English, crossed over from England into Normandy, having 
issued a shocking and execrable edict against pope Alexander 
and Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury ; the words of which 
were to the following effect : 

" If any person shall be found carrying letters or a man- 
date of our lord the pope, or of the archbishop of Canter- 
bury, containing an interdict of Christian offices in England, 
let him be arrested and without delay let justice be done upon 
him, as a traitor to the king and the realm. Moreover, let 
no clerk, monk, or lay brother of any orders, be permitted 
to cross the sea, or to return to England, unless he has a letter 
from the justiciaries permitting him to cross over, or a letter 
from the king allowing his return. And if any such person 
shall be found, let him be arrested and detained. It is also 
forbidden that any person shall bring any mandate whatsoever 
of our lord the pope, or of the archbishop of Canterbury. 
And, if any such person shall be found, let him be arrested 
and detained. It is also universally forbidden that any per- 
son shall appeal to our lord the pope, or to the archbishop 
of Canterbury, and that, in future, any mandate of theirs 
shall be received in England ; and it is ordered that no pleas 
whatsoever shall be held at their mandate. And if any per- 
son shall do anything against this prohibition, let hrm be 
arrested and detained. And further, if any bishop, priest, 
abbat, monk, clerk, or layman, shall observe any sentence 
of interdict, without delay let him be banished the king- 
dom, and all his kindred, but they are to take away 
none of their chattels with them, but let their chattels and 
possessions be seized into the king's hand. Also, let all 
clerks, who have benefices in England, be admonished 

44 What we call the tail of a comet, the ancients more poetically styled 
its " hair." 



270 AXNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1165. 

throughout every county, within three months after sum- 
mons, to return to their benefices, as they wish to retain 
those benefices and to return to England. And, if they shall 
not return within the period before-mentioned, then let their 
chattels and possessions be seized into the king's hand. Also, 
let the bishops of London and Norwich be summoned to appear 
before the king's justiciaries, to make redress for having, con- 
trary to the statutes of the realm, laid an interdict on the 
lands of earl Hugh, and passed sentence 46 against him. Also, 
let Saint Peter's pence be collected and kept." 

The Address of the llessed Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, to 
Henry, king of England, at his Council held at Chinon.* 1 
" With great longing have I longed to see your face, and to 
converse with you ; much, indeed, on my own account, but 
more especially on yours. On my own account, that, on 
seeing your face, you might recall to mind the services which, 
in my obedience to you, I have devotedly rendered to you to 
the best of my conscience; as God may help me at the last judg- 
ment, when all shall stand before His tribunal to receive 
according to what they have done in the body, whether good 
or whether evil : also, that I might move you to take com- 
passion upon me, who am obliged to live on charity among 
the people of a foreign land ; although, by the grace of God, 
I still have suflicient provision and in abundance. It is 
also my great consolation that the Apostle says, ' All that 
will live godly in Christ shall suffer persecution,' 48 and the 
words of the Prophet are, ' I have not seen the righte- 
ous man forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.' 49 Again, for 
your own sake, for these three reasons ; because you are my 
lord, because you are my king, and because you are my son 
in the Spirit. Because you are my lord, I owe and offer 
to you my counsel, as is due from every bishop to his lord, 
in accordance with the honor of God and of the Holy Church; 
because you are my king, I am bound to respect and to ad- 
monish you ; because you are my son, I am bound by the 
duties of my office to chastise and to correct you. For a father 
corrects his son, sometimes in kind words and sometimes in 

46 Of excommunication. 

47 A portion of this so-called speech is introduced by Roger of Wen- 
dover, in his narrative, as a letter from the archbishop to king Henry. 

48 2 Tim. iii. 12. * 9 Psalm xxxvii. 25. 



A.D. 1165. THE ARCHBISHOP'S ADDKESS TO KING HENKT. 271 

harsh, that, by the one means or the other, he may recall him to 
do what is right. You ought to understand that, by the grace 
of God, you are a king for the following purposes : first, 
because it is your duty to govern yourself, and to amend your 
life with the practice of good manners, in order that by your 
example others may be induced to reform their lives, according 
to the saying of the wise man, that the world is formed after 
the example of the king. 48 In the second place, for encouraging 
some and punishing others, by virtue of the power which you 
have received from the Church with the sacrament of anoint- 
ing, and with the sword which, in virtue of your office, you 
wield for the destruction of evil-doers to the Church. For 
kings are anointed in three places ; on the head, on the 
breast, and on the arms, thereby signifying glory, knowledge, 
and strength. The kings who, in ancient times, did not 
observe the judgments of God, but sinned against His com- 
mandments, were deprived of both glory, knowledge, and 
strength, both they and their descendants: as examples in 
proof whereof, witness Saul, Nebuchadnezzar, Solomon, and 
many others. But those who, after their offences, in contri- 
tion of heart humbled themselves before the Lord, to them 
was granted more abundantly and more effectually the grace 
of God, together with all the blessings above-mentioned ; as for 
instance, David, Hezekiah, and many others. Christ founded 
the Church and gained its liberty with His own blood, by 
enduring the scourges, the spitting, the nails, and the straits 
of death, and thereby left us an example to follow in His foot- 
steps ; wherefore the Apostle says, ' If we be dead with him, 
we shall also live with him. If we suffer, we shall also reign 
with him.' 49 The Church of God is composed of two orders 
the clergy and the people. Among the clergy are the Apos- 
tles and Apostolical men, the bishops and other rulers of 
the Church, to whom has been entrusted the care and go- 
vernment of that Church, and who have the management of 
ecclesiastical concerns, that they may cause all things to tend to 
the salvation of souls. For which reason it was said to Peter, 
and in Peter to the other rulers of the Church, ' Thou art Peter, 
and upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of 
hell shall not prevail against it.' 50 In the number of the 
people are kings, dukes, earls, and other potentates, who 
Alluding to Eccl. x. 2. 2 Tim. ii. 11, 12. 50 St. Matt. xvi. 18. 



272 ANNAJLS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEW. A.D. 1165. 

have the management of secular business, that they may cause 
it entirely to tend to the peace and unity of the Church. And, 
inasmuch as it is certain that kings receive their power from 
the Church, and not it from them, but (with your leave I say 
it) from Christ, you ought not to give your commands to 
bishops to absolve or to excommunicate any person, to bring 
the clergy before secular courts, to pronounce judgment rela- 
tive to tithes and churches, to forbid bishops taking cog- 
nizance of breaches of faith or vows in such manner as is here 
set forth in writing among your customs, which you style the 
laws of your grandfather. For the Lord says, 'Keep my 
laws ; ' and, again, by the mouth of the prophet, ' Woe unto 
them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievous- 
ness which they have prescribed ; to turn aside the needy from 
judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my 
people.' 51 Therefore, let my lord, if so it pleases him, listen to 
the counsels of his liege, the advice of his bishop, and the cor- 
rection of his father. Let him, for the future, have no inter- 
course or communication with schismatics. For it is well known 
to almost all the world how duteously and how honorably you 
received our lord the pope, how greatly you have cherished and 
have honored the Church of Rome, how greatly our lord the pope 
and the Church of Rome have loved and honored your person, 
and, on whatever occasion, in conformity with the will of God 
they possibly could, have listened to your requests. Do not 
then attempt, my lord, if you wish for the salvation of your 
soul, in any way to withdraw from that Church what is its own, 
or in any degree to contravene justice in acting towards it ; 
but rather allow it to enjoy the same freedom in your 
kingdom which it is known to enjoy in others. Keep in remem- 
brance also the profession which you made and placed in writing 
upon the altar at Westminster, to preserve its liberties to the 
Church of God, at the time when, by my predecessor, you 
were consecrated and anointed king. Restore, also, the 
church of Canterbury, in which you received your promotion 
and consecration, to that state and dignity which it enjoyed 
in the days of your predecessors and mine. Restore, also, the 
possessions which belong to that church, the towns, the castles, 
the estates, of which you have made distribution at your will, and 
replace in full all the things which have been taken from either 
61 Isaiah x 1, 2. 



A. D. 1165. THE AECHBISDOP'S LETTEK TO POPE ALEXANDER. 273 

me as well as my clerks and laymen. Likewise, allow me 
freely and in peace to return to my see, and I am ready 
to serve you loyally and duteously, as my most dear lord 
and king, in so far as I can, saving always the honor of God 
and of the Roman Church and my orders. But if you will 
not do thus, then know, for a certainty, that you will feel 
the severity of God's vengeance." 

The Letter of the blessed Tliomas, archbishop of Canterbury, to 
Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff. 

" To your presence, most holy father, do I fly for refuge ; 
inasmuch as you have redeemed the liberties of the Church, 
amid so great hazards to yourself, understand that that is 
the sole or the principal cause of the persecutions to which, 
following your example, I have been subjected. For I la- 
mented that the foundations of the Church are being gra- 
dually shaken, and that her rights are being destroyed by the 
avarice of princes, and I therefore thought it my duty to meet 
the malady on its approach. The more I felt myself bound 
in duty to my liege lord, to whom, after God, I owe everything, 
tne more safely did I think I might oppose his wicked insti- 
gators ; until they had gained full possession of the serenity of 
his favour, and had clouded it against me ; from which time, 
as is the way among princes, they threw out charges and accu- 
sations, in order thereby to ensure my persecution ; on which, 
I preferred to be driven away rather than willingly to suc- 
cumb. To these evils, this was added, that I was summoned, 
as though a layman, to appear before the king and to satisfy 
him thereon. And still further, in the quarter to which I looked 
for support in my resistance, I was deceived ; for I found my 
brethren, the bishops, at the bidding of the courtiers, prepared to 
f renounce judgment against me. Thus, almost crushed by the 
multitude of my antagonists, I have taken breath in your pre- 
sence, which does not overlook even those who are in extreme 
need. Under your protection will I prove, that I ought not 
to have been brought for trial before that tribunal, nor yet be- 
fore those persons. For what else, my father, would this have 
been than to rob you of your rights ? What else than to sub- 
ject the spiritual power to the temporal ? When once made, 
this precedent would be generally established ; and for that 
reason, I considered it my duty the more firmly to oppose it, 

VOL. I. I 



274 AJTNALS OP EOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1165. 

because a more ready method of doing injury would be intro- 
duced, if any weakness were manifested at the outset. But it 
will be their remark, ' The things which are Cesar's should 
be rendered unto Caesar ; ' 52 still, if in many things we must 
obey the king, we must not obey him on those points, the 
result of which would be, that he would not be a king. To 
do thus would be to make him not Caesar, but a tyrant ; and 
then they would have to resist him, not for me, but in their 
own behalves. For if to him is reserved the highest possible 
judgment, when he is all-powerful to pronounce judgment 
upon body and life, will there be any last appeal among man- 
kind when he giyes judgment according to his own mo- 
tives ? If those who have attacked me have taken the side of 
justice, for what reason do they censure me ? If, on the other 
hand, I have made my appeal to him, to whom it is not law- 
ful or excusable to disallow an appeal, the consequence is, that 
they must either be accusing me unjustly, or must have dis- 
trust in your justice. For doubly should I be confounded, if 
before your Holiness I should be convicted. And do I merit 
persecution on the part of those, in behalf of whom I have laid 
myself open to such attacks, and should have gained my point, 
had they only been so inclined ? But badly fares the head, 
if it is forsaken by the limbs. If too the eyes were to assume u 
tongue in opposition to the head, if they were to be gifted with 
foresight, they would find that/they were contriving evil against 
themselves ; so likewise have the king's followers used their 
aid against me to ensure their own slavery. What can have 
been the cause of hatred so great that, in order to destroy me, 
they should destroy themselves ? The consequence is, that 
while they neglect their spiritual for their temporal duties, 
they fail in both. And is it the fact that, while I protested 
aloud and appealed to your presence, they presumed by their 
judgment to condemn their own father ? Why, if they have 
made a compact to agree with the prince who is so offended at 
me in relation to the universal Church, even to you, most 
holy father, may their suspicion extend. But they will affirm 
that they have held with the king by reason of their duty to 
their liege ; even so, corporeally to him, but spiritually to me. 
Whom then, in preference to themselves, ought they to have 
held with ? Ought they not to have submitted in preference 
to the loss of things corporeal rather than spiritual ? But to this 
St. Matt. xxii. 21. St. Mark xii. 17. 



A.D. 1105. THE ARCHBISHOP TO HIS SUFFBAGAN BISHOPS. 275 

they may reply, that this was not a proper time for provoking 
the prince. How astutely do they argue to ensure their own 
slavery ! Why, they themselves encourage it, who give shelter 
beneath their wings to his excesses ; for if they had not given 
their sanction, he would have refrained from acting thus. 
And on what occasion is constancy more required than during 
a time of persecution ? Are not his friends proved by the test 
of persecution ? If people always succumb, what are they to 
look for ? Resistance is necessary at times. Look then with 
condescension, most holy father, upon my exile and persecu- 
tions, and remember that once in your time I occupied an 
exalted position, and that for your sake I have been loaded 
with injuries. Put forth your severity, and restrain those at 
whose instigations this persecution has befallen me ; and let 
not aught of these things be imputed to my lord the king, who 
is rather the instrument, than the author of these machinations." 

The Letter of the blessed Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, 
to his suffragan bishops. 

" Thomas, by the grace of God, the humble servant of the 
church of Canterbury, to his venerable brethren, the bishop of 
London, and the other bishops of the whole province of Can- 
terbury ; may they so enjoy temporal blessings, as not to lose 
those of eternity. My most dearly-beloved brethren, wherefore 
do ye not arise with me against my enemies ? Why do ye not 
take part with me against those who work iniquity ? Is it that 
ye are ignorant that the Lord scattereth abroad the bones of those 
who please men ? They shall be confounded, inasmuch as the 
Lord hath despised them. Your discreetness well knows that 
when the errors of a man are not opposed, they are approved ; 
and that when truth is not defended, it is smothered. He, too, 
who does not hasten to the reproval of that which ought to be 
corrected, appears, Saint Gregory giving his testimony thereto, 
to encourage him who commits the wrong. Enough, and even 
more than enough, have we put up with our -lord, the 
king of England ; and yet, in return, the Church of God has 
received no support from him. We hold that it is a thing dan- 
gerous and not to be endured, to leave unpunished for the 
future, as hitherto, the excessive outrages committed by him 
and his officials against the Church of God and the ministers 
of that Church ; and the more especially so, inasmuch as, most 

T 2 






276 AJWALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1165. 

frequently by letters and messages, and other means, as was 
our duty, we have endeavoured to recall him from the perverse- 
ness of his course. But since we have been hardly heard by 
him, much more listened to, after invoking the grace of the Holy 
Spirit, we have publicly condemned, and have made null and 
void that writing in which are contained, not those customs, but 
rather those corruptions by which at the present time the 
Church of England is disturbed and put to confusion, as also 
the authority of the said writing. All who observe, or enforce, or 
counsel, or aid, or defend the same, we do likewise excommuni- 
cate; and all you bishops, by the authority of God and of our- 
selves, we do absolve from the promises, by which, against the 
rules of the Church, you bound yourselves to the observance 
thereof. For who is there that can doubt that the priests of Christ 
are appointed to be the fathers and masters of kings and princes, 
and of all the faithful ? Is it not understood to be an act of 
lamentable madness for the son to attempt to make his father, 
or the disciple his master, obedient to him, and by unrighteous 
means of compulsion to render him subject to his power ? One, 
too, whom he believes to have power to bind and to loose 
him not only on earth, but even in heaven as well ? There- 
fore, in order that we may not fall into the commission of this 
error, we have rendered of no effect, and have made null and 
void the authority of that writing, as also the writing itself, 
together with all the corruptions that are therein contained ; 
and more especially the following : 'Appeal shall not in any 
case be made to the Apostolic See, except with the king's per- 
mission. It shall not be lawful for an archbishop or bishop to 
depart from the kingdom, to attend the summons of our lord 
the pope, without the king's permission. It shall not be law- 
ful for a bishop to excommunicate any person who holds of 
the king in capite, or to lay an interdict upon any one of his 
officers, without the king's permission. It shall not be lawful 
for a bishop to take cognizance of perjury or breach of faith. 
The clergy are to be brought before secular tribunals. Lay- 
men, whether the king or other persons, are to take cognizance 
of causes as to churches and tithes, and other enactments to a 
like effect. We do also denounce as excommunicated, and have 
excommunicated by name, the man called John of Oxford, who 
has fallen into a damnable heresy, by tendering an oath to schis- 
matics, through whom a schism that had almost died out has re- 



A.D. 1165. THE ABCHBISHOP TO HIS SUFFRAGAN BISHOPS. 277 

vived in Germany, as also for communicating with that most 
notorious schismatic, Reginald of Cologne ; and because, con- 
trary to the mandate of our lord the pope and of myself, he has 
taken unlawful possession of the deanery of the church of Salis- 
bury ; a deed which, so detestable as it is, so contrary to right, so 
pernicious in its example to the Church of God, we do make utterly 
null and void, and do render it of no effect whatsoever; and it is 
our command to the bishop of Salisbury, and the chapter of that 
church, in virtue of their obedience, and at the peril of their 
orders, on seeing this our letter, thenceforth no longer to hold 
him as dean thereof. In like manner, we do denounce as excom- 
municated, and have excommunicated, Richard de Ivechester, 
because he has fallen into the same damnable heresy, by 
holding communication with Reginald of Cologne, the schis- 
matic, as also by inventing and contriving all kinds of mischief 
with those schismatics and Germans, to the destruction of the 
Church of God, and especially of the Church of Rome, ac- 
cording to the terms agreed upon between our lord the king 
and them. We have also excommunicated Richard de Lucy and 
Jocelyn de Baliol, who have been the authors and fabricators 
of these corruptions ; also Ranulph de Broc, who has taken 
possession of the property of the church of Canterbury, which 
by right is a provision for the poor, and withholds the same, 
and has arrested our men as though they were laymen, and de- 
tains them in his custody. We have also excommunicated Hugh 
de Saint Clair and Thomas Fitz-Bernard, who, without either 
connivance or consent on our part, have laid hands upon the 
property and possessions of the said church of Canterbury. 
All others beside who in future shall lay violent hands upon 
the property and possessions of the church of Canterbury 
gainst our will and consent, we have included in the same sen- 
ence of excommunication ; according to the words of pope 
Lucius ; ' All spoilers of the Church and withholders of her 
possessions, putting them away from the threshold of the said 
mother Church, we do excommunicate, sentence to damnation, 
and pronounce to be guilty of sacrilege.' And not these only, 
but those even who assent thereto, does he comprehend in the 
same sentence. The Scripture, also, in one place, tells us that 
he who agrees with the sinful, and defends another in his sin, 
shall be accursed before God and man, and shall be visited 
with the most severe afflictions ; and likewise, that if any one 



278 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEW. A.D. 1166. 

defends another in his sin, he shall be more severely corrected 
than he who has committed the sin. As yet, indeed, we have 
delayed pronouncing this sentence against the person of our lord 
the king, in the hope that perchance, by the inspiration of the Di- 
vine grace, he may recover his senses ; still, we shall very shortly 
pronounce it, unless he shall make haste so to do. Therefore, we 
do command your brotherhood, and by virtue of your obedience 
enjoin you, that henceforth you hold the aforesaid men who 
have been excommunicated by us as excommunicated, and 
cause them to be denounced as such ; in obedience to the de- 
cree of pope Honorius : ' Be it lawful for all bishops to de- 
clare the names of those who have been excommunicated by 
them both to the neighbouring bishops, as well as to the people 
of their own diocese, and placing them in a public place be- 
fore the doors of the churches, to warn all comers thereby, so 
that due diligence may be given to both points, entrance into 
the churches may be everywhere denied to those excommuni- 
cated, and grounds for excommunication may be removed from 
the rest.' 52 And you, brother, the bishop of London, we do 
command, and, by virtue of our authority over you, enjoin the 
same, that you will disclose and show this our letter to the 
rest of your brethren and to all our brother bishops of our pro- 
vince. Fare ye well in Christ, and pray continually for us." 

After these things, Henry, king of England, returned from 
Normandy to England, and marched with a great army into 
Wales, where he lost many of his nobles, barons, and men. 
He also did justice upon the sons of Rees, 53 and upon the sons 
and daughters of his nobles, for he had the eyes of the male 
children put out, and cut off the noses and ears of the females. 54 

In the year 1166, being the twelfth year of the reign of 
king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said king Henry 

52 This passage seems in a hopelessly corrupt state ; it runs as follows : 
" Eaque in celebri loco posita prae foribus Ecclesiae, cunctis venientibus 
inculcare, quatenus in utraque diligentia excommunicationis, ubique Eccie- 
siasticus aditus denegetur, et excommunicationis causa omnibus auferatur. " 

53 King of the Welch. 

64 Holinshed has the following quaint passage as a quotation from our 
author, which, if correct, goes to prove that his MS. differed materially 
from the printed copy. " He did justice upon the sons of Rice or Rees, 
and also on the sons and daughters of other noblemen that were his com- 
plices, very vigorously, causing the eyes of the young striplings to be 
picked out of their heads, and their noses to be cut off or slit ; and the 
ears of the young gentlewomen to be stuffed." 



A.D. 11GG. TOPE ALEXAKDEB'S LETTEE TO KING HENRY. 279 

expelled from England, and from all the lands of his domi- 
nions, all the men and women he could possibly find belbng- 
ing to the kindred of the blessed Thomas, archbishop of Canter- 
bury; even infants crying in the cradle, and still hanging at 
the mother's breast, he sent into banishment, that, upon seeing 
them, the grief of the above-named archbishop might be in- 
creased. "What art thou doing, thou tyrant ? What madness 
is it that hath overcome thee, that thou shouldst thus drive 
away from thy kingdom those who have done thee no injury, 
and in whose mouths no guile has been found ? There is no 
reason why the issue of the banished, so long as they observe 
the laws, should not live in the city ! 

"When the blessed Thomas beheld them, he was greatly 
afflicted, and, sharing in their sorrows, became more than 
a martyr. " No wonder was it, then, if his mind, becom- 
ing disturbed, melted away, like water dropping from the 
snow." 55 Still, all these sorrows did the man of God endure 
with great long-suffering. He had hardly remained two years 
at the abbey of Pontigny, with the abbat Gwarine, and the 
monks who were there in the service of God, under whose 
charge he had been placed by Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff, 
when the king of England sent word to the above-named 
abbat of Pontigny, that if he any longer harboured the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury in his house, he would, in such case, 
banish all the monks of his order from England. The conse- 
quence of this was, that the blessed Thomas, of his own accord, 
departed from that house, in order that so many houses of 
the religious might not, on his account, come to ruin. He, 
therefore, betook himself to Louis, king of the Franks ; by 
whom he was hospitably received, and sent to the abbey of 
S^int Columba, near the city of Sens. 

The Letter of pope Alexander to Henry, king of England. 

" Alexander the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his dearly beloved son Henry, the illustrious king of England, 
health and the Apostolic benediction. Although your great 
devotion towards us and your mother the Holy Church seems 
in some measure to have waxed cool, still, at no season do 
we relax our paternal feelings towards you and the kingdom 
entrusted to your government. Inasmuch, then, as the stripes 

66 Nee mirum est igitur si metis sua turbida facta 
De uive inanautis more liquescit aquae." 



280 A1TSTALS OP EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1166 

of a friend are better than the kisses of an enemy, your high- 
ness ought diligently to advert thereto, and, seriously giving 
it your consideration, observe that as the clergy are distin- 
guished in their lives and habits from the laity, so also are the 
tribunals of the clergy bound to be entirely different from the 
tribunals of the laity. Wherefore, if you confound the same 
in an unseemly manner, render subject to your power that 
which belongs to Jesus Christ, enact, at your own good- 
will, new laws for the oppression of the churches and of the 
poor of Christ, and introduce customs which you style those 
of your grandfather, then, without doubt, at the last judg- 
ment, which you will not be able to escape, you yourself will 
be judged in a similar manner ; ' "With the same measure 
with which you mete, it shall be measured to you again.' 58 
But, lest our admonitions may appear in some measure tedious 
or harsh to the ears of your highness, recollect the words 
of the Scripture, that ' the son whom the father loveth he 
correcteth,' 57 knowing this for certain, that the more ardently 
we love your person with all brotherly love in the Lord, and 
the more frequently and thoughtfully we recall to mind the 
marks of your most sincere attachment to us and to the Church 
of God, which you formerly so frequently and so bounte- 
ously showed, the more readily do we make these intima- 
tions to you, to whom, with all the yearnings of our heart, 
we wish spiritual and eternal welfare. But if the future 
judgment is in any way to deter you, or if a crown of glory, 
as a reward in your eternal rest, has any delights for you, 
then does it befit you to worship true justice, which is God ; to 
con cede to every one his rights, and to leave to the ecclesiastics 
all ecclesiastical matters, and especially those of a criminal 
nature, which arise from breaches of faith or of oaths, and all 
cases relative to the property and possessions of churches. 
In fact, it would neither befit, nor, indeed, be expedient for 
your serene highness to confound the offices of king and priest. 
For, if the whole of the property of the Church, which by 
means of oppression of this nature has been converted to 
your use, were to be expended by you in the relief of the poor, or 
in other works of piety, you would therein be paying a mark 
of respect not more pleasing to God than if, after offering 
one alms-dish on the altar, you were to cover up another, or, 
86 St. Matt. vii. 2. w Prov. iii. 12. 



THE POPE'S LETTER TO BISHOP GIXBEBT. 281 

if you were to crucify Peter, that you might deliver Paul from 
peril of death. For you ought to recollect, and have it as an 
example on this occasion before your eyes, how king Saul, 
who, after he had conquered Amalek, wished, against the 
commandment of the Lord, to reserve the spoil, was re- 
proved by the Lord when he made it his excuse that he 
had reserved it for sacrifice ; and how, while he was still 
alive, another man was appointed to the royal honors and 
dignities. The sins of the people had raised him to be king, 
but his own offences deprived him of the government of the 
kingdom. How king IJzziah, 86 also, when he attempted to 
sacrifice and to usurp the office of priest, was, as a worthy 
punishment, smitten with leprosy, it would be for your well- 
being to recall to mind. If, however, you shall ascribe your 
successes to your might and prowess, and not to God, beyond 
a doubt He who has set you over others, and made you a 
great prince in the world, for the governance of the faithful, 
and not for their oppression, will, with rebuke, require of you 
the talents which have been entrusted to you ; and, as we 
read of Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, who, for his father's 
sins, was driven from his kingdom, so will God visit the sins 
of the father upon the children. Do you, then, give no heed 
to the evil suggestions of any .person, nor incline your ear to 
those who are always whispering mischief, but diligently 
attend to those things which concern your salvation. Where- 
fore, make it your endeavour to govern to the honor of God 
and the peace and tranquillity of the Church, for which alone 
you have received the government of your kingdom, and study 
to rule it to the best of the power that God has given you, to 
the end that God may preserve for you your temporal kingdom, 
jpd, after that, may give you one to endure world without end." 

The Letter of pope Alexander to Gilbert, bishop of London, 

in behalf of the blessed Thomas. 

" Alexander the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his venerable brother Gilbert, bishop of London, health and 
the Apostolic benediction. Inasmuch as, in relation to the 
matters which we have enjoined to your brotherhood, you 
have shown efficient zeal and diligence, and have made it your 
care faithfully to solicit and advise our most dearly beloved 
56 2 Chron. xxvi. 20. 



282 ANNALS OF EOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1166. 

son in Christ, Henry, the illustrious king of England, upon 
the increase and exaltation of the Church and of ourselves, we 
deem it every way pleasing and acceptable, and, returning you 
most abundant thanks for the same, with extreme praises, do 
commend your prudent anxiety in the same unto the Lord. 
And, inasmuch as we do love the said king and illustrious 
prince with the greatest affection, as a most truly beloved 
son, so both through you and through our venerable brethren, 
the archbishop of Rouen and the bishop of Hereford, as also 
through our most dearly beloved daughter in Christ, his 
mother, the former illustrious empress of the Romans, have 
we often and often, in divers ways, tried to induce and encourage 
him to observe his duty to the Church. Wherefore, we do 
rejoice and exult in the Lord at the dutifulness of the said king, 
of which in your letter you have informed us. But, inas- 
much as we wish him to continue in his duty to the Church of 
God and to ourselves, as from the beginning he has been wont 
to do, we do ask of your brotherhood, enjoin, and command that, 
anxiously and diligently, you will often and often advise him, 
both yourself and by others, and exhort him by all means, and 
prevail upon him, after his usual manner, to use his best endea- 
vours for the honor and exaltation of the said Church, and 
manfully to support and maintain and defend her cause. Let 
him, also, love and honor the churches and ecclesiastical per- 
sons, and preserve their rights. Our venerable brother, also, 
the archbishop of Canterbury, let him receive again into his 
love and favor. And we, if he shall continue to pay to Saint 
Peter and to ourselves that honor and respect which he has be- 
gun to do, will love him with sincere affection, and will use our 
endeavours in every way, as will be our duty, for the exalta- 
tion of himself and the preservation of the kingdom entrusted 
to him. And, indeed, we would prefer to outdo him in patience 
and long-suffering, so long as we can possibly endure so to do, 
rather than cause him vexation in any way. Given this Wed- 
nesday, the eleventh day before the calends of September." 

The Letter of Gilbert, bishop of London, to pope Al zander, upon 
the answer of tlie King on the business of tJie archbishop of 
Canterbury. 
"To his father and lord, Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff, 

the brother Gilbert, servant of the church of London, the debt 



A.D. 1166. BISHOP GILBERT'S LETTEB. TO THE POPE. 283 

of sincere affection and the service of humble obedience. 
Your mandate, dearest father in Christ, has been received by 
us with due veneration, immediately on which, we presented 
ourselves before your son, and our dearest lord, the illus- 
trious king of the English, who is now at the head of his 
army in the French territory ; and, in conjunction with our 
venerable brother, the bishop of Hereford, we diligently and 
carefully admonished him according to the tenor of your man- 
date. We set before his eyes all the particulars of your letter, 
and, beseeching him and expostulating with him as far as 
was becoming towards his royal "majesty, we constantly and 
incessantly exhorted him that he would satisfy us as to his 
purposes, and that, if he had in any way departed from the 
paths of reasonableness, he would not delay, at your admoni- 
tion, through us, to return to the ways of truth and justice; 
that, following the pious admonition of his father, he would 
desist from all evil actions, would love God with purity 
of heart, and would regard with his usual veneration his 
holy mother, the Roman Church ; that he would neither im- 
pede those who wished to visit her, nor prevent appeals 
being made to her ; that benignly recalling and restoring our 
brother, the lord archbishop of Canterbury, to his see, he 
would remain firm and immoveable in his reverence for Saint 
Peter and yourself, and that, giving his entire attention to works 
of piety, he would not oppress either the churches or eccle- 
siastical persons in his realm or in his territories, nor yet al- 
low them to be oppressed by his means or those of another ; 
but, on the contrary, diligently preserve them under his 
royal protection, to the end that He, through whom kings 
reign, might preserve for him his temporal kingdom while 
on earth, and bestow on him an eternal one in heaven : that 
otherwise, if he would not listen to those wholesome counsels, 
your Holiness, who has hitherto patiently borne with him, 
could no longer bear with him in your long-suffering. We 
'further added, that we greatly feared for him, that if he 
I did not correct his faults, he would before long incur the 
wrath of Almighty God ; so much so, that his kingdom would 
not be of long continuance, nor his family allowed to prosper ; 
but that He who had exalted him when humble, would now, 
when exalted, hurl him down with a heavy fall from the sum- 
mit of the throne. On this, he received your admonition 



284 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1166. 

with much thankfulness and with much forbearance, and 
with great meekness made answer to each part of it in order. 
In the first place, he asserted that his feelings were in no way 
estranged from you, and that he had never had in his mind 
any other intentions, provided you showed a paternal solici- 
tude towards him, than to love you as his father, to sup- 
port and cherish the Holy Church of Rome as his mother, 
and humbly to obey and follow your holy commands, saving 
always the dignity of himself and of his kingdom. But that, 
if for some time past he has not looked upon you with reve- 
rence, he asserts that the following is the reason for the same : 
that although he maintained your cause in your need, with all 
his heart, with all his soul, and with all his strength, your 
Holiness did not return him the like, according to his deserts, 
in his time of need, when he had recourse to you through his 
envoys ; but he complains, and feels ashamed to say, that in 
almost every request he has made of you, he has met with a 
repulse. Trusting, however, in a father's love, which, when it 
shall think fit, will listen to his son, hoping for and expecting a 
more cheerful countenance, he remains firm and constant, as we 
have already said, in his attachment to Saint Peter and to your- 
self. For this reason it is that he will not attempt to prevent 
any one who may wish to visit your Holiness, and neither, as he 
affirms, has he hitherto prevented them. As regards the question 
of appeals, by the ancient institutions of his realm, he claims it 
as his privilege and duty that no clerk shall go out of his king- 
dom for any civil suit, unless he has first made trial whether by 
the king's own authority and mandate he can obtain justice. But 
if he shall be unable to obtain this, then, the king making no 
opposition whatsoever thereto, any person whatsoever shall be at 
liberty to appeal to your excellency, whenever he shall think fit. 
And if upon this point your rights or dignities have been in any 
way prejudiced, he promises that he will speedily correct the 
same, with the help of God, in a synod of all the clergy of his 
dominions. As regards the emperor, although the king knew 
him to be a schismatic, still until this day he has never heard 
that you had excommunicated him. But if on our information 
he shall come to know that such is the case, if he has entered 
into any unlawful compact with him or with any other per- 
son, this he also promises he will have similarly corrected by 
the judgment and counsel of the Church of his realm. The 



A.D. 11CG. BISHOP GIIBEKT'S LETTEB TO THE POPE. 285 

king also asserts that he has by no means expelled our father, 
the lord archbishop of Canterbury, from his kingdom ; as he has 
left it entirely of his own accord, so when he shall have a 
mind so to do, he will be entirely at liberty with his entire 
sanction to return to his church. Provided always, that while 
he receives satisfaction on those points upon which he makes 
complaint, he shall be willing that the royal privileges should 
be faithfully observed to which he has been sworn. And, if 
any church or ecclesiastical person shall make proof that they 
have been wronged by him or his people, he will be prepared to 
make full compensation, according to the judgment of the whole 
Church. This is the answer which we have received from our 
lord the king, although we could have wished that we had re- 
ceived something more entirely according to your wishes. 
This answer, however, we have determined upon notifying to 
your highness, that from his reply your wisdom might be 
enabled to form a judgment how to put an end to these 
matters. But our lord, the king, seems in especial to justify his 
cause, upon the fact that on all the points which have been men- 
tioned, he will abide by the judgment and counsel of the Church 
' in his dominions ; and he promises that he will in nowise 
prevent the return of our father, the lord archbishop of Can- 
terbury, as we have previously mentioned. Wherefore we 
have thought proper to supplicate your excellency, keeping 
this always before our eyes, ' A braised reed shalt thou not 
break, and the smoking flax shalt thou not quench.' 66 Mo- 
derate for a time, if so it please you, within the bounds of 
discretion that zeal which is kindled by the flames of the 
Divine Spirit to avenge each injury done to the Church of 
God ; lest by pronouncing an interdict or the extreme sentence 
, ofc excommunication, you may have to lament that number- 
less churches are subverted, and so, which God forbid, irre- 
vocably alienate from your allegiance both the king him- 
self, and numberless people with him. For it is as good 
for the limb to be joined to the head, even though wounded, 
as to be cast away from the body when cut oft'. For wound- 
ed limbs return to a state of healthfulness, whereas, when 
once cut off, they have great difficulty in adhering to the 
body. To cut off a limb, is to entail desperation ; whereas 
the cautious treatment of the surgeon will very frequently 
heal the wound. Wherefore, if so it please you, it were 
66 St. Matt. xii. 20. 



286 ANNALS OF KOGEK DE HOVEDENT. A.U. 11C6. 

better that, at the present moment, you should use your en- 
deavours in healing the wound, if any such there is, than 
that, by cutting off the most noble portion of the Church of 
God, you should bring to utter confusion that which, for this 
long time past, has been in a state of confusion beyond what 
can possibly be expressed. For, suppose that as yet your 
wo'rds have not taken their full effect, or have been entirely 
appreciated. Is then the Divine grace to be despaired of? 
At an acceptable time, they may both have their full effect, 
and be entirely appreciated. Is the hand of God so shortened, 
that .it cannot save ? Or is his ear stopped, so that it cannot 
hear ? Those words are swift in their course : God, when he 
wills it, with a high hand works changes in all things, and 
gives unhoped-for accomplishment to the prayers of his Saints. 
Royal blood, then only knows how to be overcome when it 
has been successful ; nor is it ashamed to yield when it has 
gained the victory. By kindness is it to be mollified, by ad- 
vice and long-suffering is it to be overcome. But what if 
this long-suffering, when manifested, or needed for a time to be 
manifested, causes some loss of temporal possessions ? Is there 
nothing to be rescued from the wreck when the fate of multitudes 
is threatened? Are not many things needed to be thrown into 
the deep when the confusion of land, sea, and waves is threat- 
ening destruction ? Foolishly, but still in charity, do we ad- 
dress you in no fictitious language. If this should be the ter- 
mination of the matter, that, losing everything, the lord arch- 
bishop of Canterbury should submit to continual exile, and, 
which God forbid, England should no longer obey your com- 
mands, it would have been much better patiently to have 
endured this for a time, than with such zeal to have insisted 
upon acting with severity. For, suppose that your venge- 
ance shall not be able to separate still more of us from our 
obedience to you still, there will not be wanting some to bow 
the knee to Baal, and without regard to religion and justice, 
to receive the pall of Canterbury at the hands of their idol. Nor 
will there be wanting persons to occupy our sees, and, seated 
in our seats, to show him obedience with all feelings of duty. 
Many are already prognosticating such things, hoping that 
offences may arise, and that the straight may be made 
crooked. Wherefore, father, we do not mourn or lament 
our own misfortunes ; but unless you meet these evils, we see 



A.D. 1166. THE ARCHBISHOP'S LETTER TO KING HENEY. 287 

that a shocking subversion of the Church of God is threatened, 
and that, becoming weary of our lives, we may curse the day 
on which we were born to behold such a sight as this. Beloved 
father in Christ, may Almighty God preserve you in safety for 
long to come !" 

The Letter of tJte blessed Thomas to King Henry. 

" To his most revered lord, Henry, by the grace of God, the 
illustrious king of the English, duke of Normandy and Aqui- 
taine, and earl of Anjou, Thomas, by the same grace the hum- 
ble servant of the church of Canterbury, health and best prayers 
for his prosperity in all things. To speak concerning God stands 
in need of a mind utterly free and unbiassed ; upon this sub- 
ject it is that I address my lord, and, I trust, with peace to- 
wards all men. I beseech you, my lord, that, with patience 
of mind, you will endure some little advice, which, by the 
grace of God, which is never ineffectual, will contribute to the 
salvation of your soul and to my acquittal. Difficulties beset 
me on every side ; even tribulation and difficulties have come 
upon me, who am placed between two most grave and fearful 
alternatives. When I say between two most fearful alterna- 
tives, I mean a dangerous silence on the one hand, and admo- 
nition of you on the other. If, on the one hand, I am silent, it 
will be death to me, and I shall not escape the hands of the 
Lord, who says, ' If thou dost not warn the wicked from his 
wicked way, and he shall die in his iniquity, his blood He will 
require at your hands. ' 57 If, on the other hand, I admonish you, 
I fear, which God forbid, that I shall not escape the wrath of my 
^lord. And I trust that it may not befall me, according to what 
the wise man says, that when a person sends to intercede or 
to admonish a person who is not pleased thereat, it is to be feared 
left, becoming angered, his mind may be provoked to do what 
is worse. "What, then, am I to do ? Am I to speak, or am I to 
be silent ? In either alternative there is danger, no doubt. 
But inasmuch as it is safer to fall under the indignation of men 
than into the hands of the living God, trusting in the mercy 
of the Most High, in whose hands are the hearts of kings, 
and who will induce them as He shall think fit, (and I trust 
that He will, to take the better part), I will speak to my lord, 
inasmuch as I have once begun so to do. For often are good 
w Ezekiel iii. 18. 



288 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEff. A..D.11C6. 

things provided for those who are unwilling, and especially 
when the safety more than the will is consulted. In your 
land is kept in captivity the daughter of Sion, the spouse of a 
great king, oppressed by many, insulted by those who long 
have hated her, and by whom she ought rather to be honored 
than afflicted, and in especial by you. Keeping, therefore, in 
your recollection each of those blessings which God has be- 
stowed upon you in the beginning of your reign, in the middle 
thereof, and almost unto the present moment, do you release 
her, and allow her to reign jointly with her husband, to the 
end that God may bless you, and that your kingdom may forth- 
with begin to recover its strength, and this reproach be taken 
away from your generation, and that unbroken peace may 
reign in your days. Believe me, most serene prince, my much- 
loved lord, the Almighty is slow in retribution, long-suffer- 
ing in His patience, but most severe in His vengeance. Hear 
me, and do that which is right. But, if otherwise, it is greatly 
to be feared that (and I trust that so it may not be) He will 
gird His sword upon His thigh, and will come in His might and 
with a strong hand, armed with many woes, to set free His 
spouse, and that not without heavy oppressions and servitude, 
attended by tribulation. But if you listen to me, then the 
Lord will of necessity be sensible forthwith of your duteous- 
ness, as acting the part of a valiant soldier on His side, and 
in such case He will bless you, and will add glory unto 
your glory, even unto the issue of your sons and of your 
daughters, down to distant times. But if otherwise, I fear, 
and may God avert it from you, that the sword will not depart 
from your house, until the Most High shall have come and ai i 
avenged the injuries done to Him and His ; just as it did not 
depart from the house of Solomon, although God had made 
choice of him, and had conferred upon him such great wisdom, : " 
and such an enjoyment of peacefukaess, that it was said by all, 
' This is the son of wisdom and of peace ;' yet, inasmuch as 
he departed from the path of the Lord, and proceeded from 
wickedness to wickedness, God divided asunder his kingdom, 
an'd gave it unto his servant ; and, in especial, because, after 
the commission of his sin, he did not instantly seek to ap- 
pease the Lord, as his father David had done, who imme- 
diately after his offence humbled himself before the Lord, cor- 
rected his fault, sought for mercy, and obtained pardon ; and 



A.D. 1166. THE ARCHBISHOP TO THE BISHOP OF HEREFORD. 289 

would that, with the grace of God, you would do the like. 
These words I write unto you at present, the rest I have 
placed in the mouth of him who bears these presents, a pious 
man, one of great credit, and, as I believe, a faithful servant 
of yours. In them, I pray that so it may please you to 
place full belief ; still in preference, with your favour, I could 
wish to enjoy the condescension of an interview with you. 
Once and always to my lord, farewell !" 

The Letter of the blessed Thomas to Robert, bishop of Hereford. 

"Thomas, by the grace of God,- the humble servant of the 
church of Canterbury, to his venerable brother Robert, by the 
same grace, bishop of Hereford, health and blessings in all 
things. If so it is that my letters have caused anxiety in 
your brotherhood, would that it were the case that I had not 
found you slothful in feeling, and not watchful in the due per- 
formance of the duties of the office you have undertaken. I have 
chosen to be cast out and to become accursed on behalf of you 
all, a reproach before men and a scorn before the people, that I 
might not behold the evils of the holy ones, and keep silence 
upon the injuries done to my nation ; and anxiously did I wish 
that perchance some one of you in his zeal for the law of God, 
and his love of the liberties of the Church, would follow and 
come after me, that so we might not give horns 58 to the 
sinful. And behold ! you, whom I believed to be given unto 
me by the Lord, that with me you might build, and weed, and 
plant, are suggesting encouragement amid ruin, and solace in 
despair ; inasmuch as you are preaching humility, nay, even 
abject submission, and are announcing tidings of good, while, 
on every side, confusion prevails, to the injury of God and of the 
clergy : and this, at the moment when you ought to be 
lengthening the constancy of my mind amid its vacillation, 
and, with me, sustaining the attack, in order to defend 
our inheritance of the cross and repel and crush the enemies 
of the church, to be suggesting counsel to my ears, to be 
breathing fresh life into my spirit, to the end that I might 
entreat with the more firmness, that I might argue with 
the greater cogency, and rebuke with the greater severity. 
And, if they should refuse to hear me, then, undoubtedly, 
ought you to have exclaimed, ' Why dost thou sleep ? Un- 

58 Give them cause to raise their horns, or exult. 
VOL. i. r 



290 ASNALS OF EOGEK DE HOVEDEIT. A.D. 1166. 

sheathe the sword of Saint Peter, avenge the blood of the 
servants of Christ that has been shed, the injuries of the 
Church which are being daily committed against us and ours.' 
Has it entirely escaped your memory with what injuries I 
have been afflicted, with what insults persecuted, when, in 
ray own person, against all authority and against all semblance 
of right, Christ was brought to be judged before a lay tribunal ? 
Still, I will not recail to your mind the injury done to my own 
person but to the Church. Consider with thoughtfulness, and 
deeply reflect upon it in your mind, what was done before my 
departure, what was being done at my departure, what has 
been done since, what, in fact, is being done every day in 
your country, in relation to the Church of God and its servants. 
With what conscience can you possibly conceal these things 
from yourself ; you, of whom hopes were entertained that you 
would be the redeemer of Israel, the liberator of the Church 
from bondage? And, now, because you have so long held 
your peace, I am always in affliction for you, my own begot- 
ten son, lest he should come after you who shall take away 
your birthright, and shall deprive you, which may God 
forbid, of the blessing of the first-born. But, though even 
thus far you have held your peace, resume your might (my 
most dearly-beloved son) and cry aloud it is your duty so to 
do lift up your voice against them, inspire them with fear, 
awaken their contrition, banish their self-satisfaction, that so 
the anger of God may not descend upon them, and the whole 
people perish ; or even, which may God forbid, the rulers with 
the people. For, even now, Divine vengeance is at the gates. 
These things do I write unto you, not for your confusion, 
but to put you on your guard ; to the end that, relying upon 
the authority of God and of myself, for the future you may 
be strengthened and may be willing more manfully and more 
boldly to perform the duties of your office. This one thing 
in especial I wish you to be assured of, with the mercy of 
God, confusion to his Church shall not be extorted from me. 
In addition to what I have said, I give you thanks for this, 
that even now you have visited me, and have comforted me with 
your solaces. Further there is one thing which I am not able 
to endure without the greatest bitterness of soul verily. I 
weep for my most beloved lord the king. For fear and trem- 
bling have come upon me, and the shades have overwhelmed me, 
since I have seen that tribulation and difficulties are threatening 



A. D. 1166. ABCHBISHOP'S LETTEli TO THE BISHOP OF HEBEFOKD. 291 

my lord the king. And no wonder. For he has vexed the 
Church of God, and has put her to confusion, and has made hard- 
ships the lot of his clergy, giving them the wine of sorrow to 
drink. Therefore, thus saith the Lord to him, ' Where now, 
simple man, are the wise counsellors who used to say to 
thee, ' Thou art the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings, 
whose customs must be observed throughout England ; which 
if a person shall not observe, he is not a friend to Caesar, but 
an enemy to the crown, a criminal at the judgment- seat.' But, 
assuredly, that person is rather the friend of the cross of 
Christ ; for, ' Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, 
and that write grievousness which they have prescribed, to 
turn aside the needy from judgment, and take away the right 
of the poor of my people,' 58 * that churches and widows may be 
their prey, and that they may plunder the possessions of certain 
of the clergy. What shall these persons do on the day of visi- 
tation and of calamity that approacheth from afar ? To whose 
aid will they fly for refuge, and lay aside their vainglori- 
ousness, that they may not be bowed down under judgment, 
and fall with the slain ? Where, now, are his wise men ? 
Let them come forth, and let them disclose to him and say 
what the Lord of Hosts has determined as to England. His 
wise men are become fools, and his nobles have come to 
nought ; they have deceived England, and into the midst of 
the people of England its lord has introduced a feeling of 
stupefaction. By their deeds they have made England to go 
astray, even as a drunken man goes astray, vomiting and 
staggering ; and for England help there will be none. Who 
shall know the beginning or end 59 hereof? For they have 
devoured Jacob, and have laid waste his dwelling-place, 60 and 
have said, ' Let us take possession of the holy place of God,' 
and have reviled the priests and their chief men, saying, 
4 Whither will ye fly for refuge from our hands, or in whom 
I do ye put your trust ? Why have ye fled, and proved dis 
obedient to our commands ?' Oh, how empty are these thoughts ! 
how shameful these deeds in the sight of the Lord, who be- 
holds how vain they are ! For He will laugh to scorn him who 

** Is. x. 1, 2. 

69 In the text, " Quis faciet caput aut caudam," literally, ' Who shall 
i make head or tail ?" This portion of the letter is in a most corrupt state. 
60 Psalm Ixxix. 10. 

U 2 



292 ANNALS 01' EOGEE DE HOYEDEN. A.D. 1166. 

thinks thus, when He shall see him acting thus ; because His 
day is near at hand, even now He is at the gates, and will say, 
' Behold the men who have not placed reliance in their God, 
but have put their trust in the multitude of their riches, and 
have waxed strong in their vanity !' But it is in vain that they 
do thus ; the Lord will not leave His church, nor His clergy, 
without a defender, without the heaviest vengeance. For it 
has been founded upon a firm rock ; and that rock is Christ, 
who has founded it with his own blood. Assuredly, if they 
do not make amends herein, they will not escape with im- 
punity, inasmuch as they have trodden under foot the Holy 
of Holies, the house of God, and have afflicted His priests 
with injuries and abusive words. These are those to whom 
the Lord himself has said, ' I have said, ye are gods ; and 
all of you are children of the Most High ;' 61 and also, in 
another place, ' He that hateth you, hateth me, and he 
that despiseth you despiseth me ; and he that toucheth you, 
toucheth the apple of my eye.' 62 Let them then return to 
their senses ; let them avert evil from themselves ; let 
them with the greatest humility show repentance. But if, 
they do not, then it is to be feared, and, oh may it be averted ! 
that the Lord will speedily come, and will bring upon them 
and their land great tribulation and the most heavy vengeance 
of His retribution. Behold! our Lord shall come and shall 
not delay, and He shall save us ; inasmuch as He will never 
forsake those who put their trust in Him. Eor the prophet 
saith, ' Trust in the Lord, and do good, and thou shalt be 
fed upon his riches ; ' 62 * and, again, ' Wait on the Lord, 
be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart ;' 63 
and, ' put your trust in the Lord, and He shall soon deliver 
thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome 
pestilence.' M And, that I may end all that I have said herein 
with a becoming conclusion, inasmuch as the Lord has shown 
what and how great things we ought to endure for His name 
and in the defence of His Church, I hold it necessary for you 
to pray, both you and the whole Church entrusted to your 
charge, continually for us ; to the end that, what through our 
own merits we are unable to endure, by your intercession and 
that of the holy men who are subject to you, we may be 
enabled to endure, and that thereby we may deserve to obtain 
Rl Psalm Ixxii. 6. 62 Partly from Zech. ii. 8. 62 * Psalm xxxvii. 3. 
65 Psalm xxvii. 14. w Psalm xci. 3. 



A.D. 1167. THE AKCHBISHOP'S LETTER TO POPE ALEXANDER. 293 

everlasting grace. Farewell, and be comforted ; farewell, like- 
wise, to the whole of the Church of England, and may she be 
comforted in the Lord, that so we likewise may fare well." 

In the same year Henry, king of England, after his return 
from Wales, crossed over from England in to Normandy, whither 
he was followed by William, king of the Scots. In the same 
year died earl Cospatric, in Albany, and was succeeded by his 
son Waltheof. 

In the year of grace 1167, being the thirteenth year of the 
reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said 
Matilda, formerly empress of the Romans, and mother of the 
above-named king, departed this life, and was buried at 
Rouen, at the abbey called Saint Mary de Pratis. In the 
same year, Frederic, emperor of the Romans, went to Rome, 
and by violence and with an armed band, thrust Guido of 
Crema, the antipope and schismatic, into the Apostolic See. 
On his departure, a deadly plague immediately broke out among 
his people, and Reginald, the archbishop elect of Cologne, who 
was the head of the whole schism, perished on the Alps ; in 
order that his bones might be separated from the flesh and 
taken to Cologne, the whole of his body was boiled in water. 

The Letter of the lles&ed Thomas, the a/rcJibisTiop, to Pope Alexander. 

" To his most loving father and lord, Alexander, by the 
grace of God, Supreme Pontiff, Thomas, the humble servant of 
the church of Canterbury, due and dutiful obedience. I have 
endured enough and more than enough, most loving father, 
while waiting for the reformation of the king of England, 
and yet have gathered no fruits whatever of my long suffer- 
ing ; but, on the contrary, while unthinkingly submitting 
thereto, I have incurred the loss and utter destruction of the 
authority and liberties of the Church of God. I have often- 
times by messengers, religious and fitting men, called upon 
him, and have frequently invited him to make due satisfaction ; 
as also by letters, the copies whereof I have sent unto you. I 
have announced to him the Divine wrath and vengeance, if he 
fails to come to his proper senses ; whereas he more and more 
persists in his evil courses, treading under foot and depress- 
ing the Church of God ; both persecuting myself personally 
and those who are in banishment with me, so far as even to at- 
sempt to deprive me, by threats and menaces, of the kindnesses of 
servants of God, who for the sake of God and of yourself 



294. AXXALS OF ROGEB DE EOVEDEN. A.D. 1167. 

provide us with food. For lie has written to the abbat of the 
Cistercians, 66 that as he loves those abbeys of his order which 
are in his power, so must he withhold from us all services and 
attentions on part of his order. But why enlarge ? For, 
notwithstanding my long suffering, to that degree has the 
harshness of the king and his officers proceeded, that even 
if any number of religious men whatsoever were to inform 
you thereupon, even upon oath, I should be much surprised if 
even then your Holiness would give any belief to their assertions. 
Reflecting, therefore, upon these things with great anxiety of 
mind, and the danger ensuing therefrom, both to the king 
and to yourself, I have publicly condemned these pernici- 
ous, I will not say customs, but perversions or corruptions, 
by which the Church of England is disturbed and confounded, 
together with the writing and the authority of the writing by 
which they were confirmed ; as also the observers, enforcers, 
and defenders of the same. I have also in general terms ex- 
communicated his abettors, advisers, and coadjutors, who- 
soever they may chance to be, whether clergy or laity, and 
have absolved my bishops from the oath by which they 
have been violently forced to the observance of the said cus- 
toms. But these are the points which, in this writing, I have 
especially condemned : ' Appeal shall not in any case be made 
to the Apostolic See, except with the king's permission. It is 
not lawful for a bishop to take cognizance of perjury or 
breach of faith. It is not lawful for a bishop to excom- 
municate any person who holds aught of the king in capite, 
or his lands, or to lay an interdict upon any one of his officers 
without the king's permission. Clerks, or those of the re- 
ligious orders, are to be brought before secular tribunals; 
laymen, whether the king or other persons, are to take cogni- 
zance of causes as to churches or tithes. It is not lawful for 
an archbishop or bishop to depart from the kingdom, to attend 
the summons of our lord the pope, without the king's per- 
mission ; ' and other enactments to a like effect. By name also 
I have excommunicated John of Oxford, who has held com- 
munion with that schismatic and excommunicated person, 
Reginald of Cologne ; and who, contrary to the mandate of 
our lord the pope, and of ourselves, has taken unlawful pos- 
session of the deanery of the church of Salisbury, and, at 
the court of the emperor, has administered the oath for the 
65 At Pontigny. 



A.D. 1167. LETTEB OF THE POPE TO KING HENRY. 295 

supporting of that schism. In like manner also, I have de- 
nounced and excommunicated Richard of Ivechester, because 
he has fallen into the same damnable heresy, by holding 
communication with that most notorious schismatic at Cologne, 
and inventing and contriving all kinds of mischief, with those 
schismatics and Germans, to the destruction of the Church of 
God, and more especially of the Church of Rome, according to 
the treaties agreed upon between the king of England and 
them, and Richard de Lucy and Jocelyn de Baliol, who have 
been the encouragers of the royal tyranny, and the fabricators 
of these heretical corruptions. I have also excommunicated 
Ranulph de Broc, Hugh de Saint Clair, and Thomas Fitz-Ber- 
nard, who, without our license and consent, have seized the pro- 
perty and possessions of the church of Canterbury. I have ex- 
communicated all besides who, contrary to our will and assent, 
have laid hands upon the property and possessions of the church 
of Canterbury. The king, however, I have not as yet personally 
excommunicated, being still in expectation of his reformation ; 
him, however, I shall not delay to excommunicate, if he does 
not speedily recover his senses, and submit to discipline for 
what he has done. To the end, therefore, most holy father, 
that the authority of the Apostolic See, and the liberties of the 
Church of God, which in our country have almost perished, may 
be enabled to be in some measure restored, it is necessary, 
and in every way expedient, that you should entirely ratify, 
and by your letters confirm, what I have done. Farewell, 
and may your Holiness enjoy all happiness." 

The Letter of Pope Alexander to Henry, king of England. 

"The bishop Alexander, servant of the servants of God, 
tQ his beloved son, Henry, the illustrious king of the English, 
health and the Apostolic benediction. With what paternal and 
kindly feelings we have often convened your royal excellence, 
and have frequently exhorted you, both by letters and our 
nuncios, to become reconciled to our venerable brother Thomas, 
archbishop of Canterbury, and to restore to him and his 
clerks their churches, with the other things which you have 
taken from them, the prudence of your highness is by no 
means unaware, inasmuch as it is public and notorious to 
nearly the whole of Christendom. Wherefore, seeing that we 
have hitherto been able to make but little progress in this 
matter, or by kind and gentle conduct to soothe the emotions 



296 AKNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D.I 167. 

of your mind, we are rendered sad and sorrowful, and grieve 
that we are disappointed in. our hopes and expectations ; particu- 
larly as we love you sincerely as our most dearly-beloved son 
in the Lord, and we see this great danger threatening you ; and 
inasmuch as it is written, ' Cry aloud, and spare not ; lift up thy 
voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression ;' 66 
and likewise, ' If thou dost not warn the wicked from his way, 
his blood will I require at thy hand ; ' 66 * and by Jeremiah, 
the slothful man was ordered to be stoned with the dung of 
oxen. We have determined no longer to bear your hard- 
ness of heart as heretofore, to the detriment of justice and your 
own 67 salvation ; nor will we for the future close the mouth of 
the said archbishop in any way, or prevent him from freely 
doing his duty, and avenging with the sword of ecclesiastical 
severity the wrongs which have been done to himself and to 
the Church entrusted to his charge. Now, as to the points 
which are contained in this letter relative to the matters before- 
mentioned, as also others of less importance, our well-beloved 
brother, the prior of Mont-Dieu, and the brother Bernard de 
Corilo, men who indeed pay more respect to God than to 
kings, will in words further explain to your highness. May 
He, to pay obedience to whose admonitions is to reign, and in 
whose hands are the hearts of princes, incline your mind and 
will, that so you may be prevailed upon rather, than, against 
God and your salvation, persist any longer in so determined a 
course of obstinacy. But if even now you shall refuse to 
hearken to the proposals which they shall make to you in my 
behalf, then without doubt you will have occasion to fear what 
is to ensue, and to dread the Divine vengeance in the world to 
come." 

The Letter of the Messed Thomas, the Archbishop of Canterbury, 
to Gilbert, Bishop of London. 

"Thomas, the humble minister of the church of Canter- 
bury, to Gilbert, bishop of London, may he, now as always, 
so pass through good things temporal as not to lose those 
eternal. It is a cause for wonder, indeed, for extreme as- 
tonishment, that a man of prudence, well versed in Holy 
Scripture, and especially wearing the appearance of religion, 
should, laying aside the fear of God, so manifestly, not to say 

66 Isaiah Iviii. 1. 66 * Ezek. xxxiii. 8. 

67 " Nostram" is no doubt an error for " vestrara." 



A.D. 1167. THE ARCHBISHOP TO THE BISHOP OF LONDON. 297 

irreverently, set himself against truth, oppose justice, and, to 
the utter confusion of all right and wrong, seek to overthrow 
the establishment of the Holy Church, which the Most High 
hath founded. For it is the Truth which says, ' the gates of 
hell shall not prevail against it.' He is generally supposed not 
to be of sane mind who intends the ruin thereof, and is like a 
man who binds a rope around a vast mountain, and attempts to 
throw it down. But is it because I am inflamed with anger or 
with hatred, that, in my exasperation, I am driven to utter 
words of this nature against my brother, and colleague, and 
fellow-bishop ? God forbid ! But to the above effect have I 
collected from your letter, which I received through your arch- 
deacon ; nor was I enabled thereby to gather grapes of thorns, 
or figs of thistles. That it may be clear whether or not it is 
BO, let us examine it, and bring its contents to the light. The 
end, when compared with the beginning, presents a very strong 
resemblance to a scorpion. The one approaches us, using smooth 
and gentle language, the other, stinging us severely, attempts 
to impose silence upon us. For, what else is it, first to acknow- 
ledge your dutiful subjection to us, and to promise obedience 
in conformity with that subjection, and then, in the end, to have 
recourse to appeal, in order that you may not be obliged to obey ? 
The Apostle says, ' Do I purpose that with me there should be 
yea, yea, and nay, nay ?' 68 As the Apostles could not always be 
with the disciple, of necessity did the disciples receive power 
from the Lord of treading upon serpents and scorpions ; for even 
unto this day Ezekiel 68 * is dwelling with the scorpions. And 
now consider in what sense you say, ' We do have recourse to 
the remedy of appeal ?' You call yourself a follower of Christ ; 
in this speech you are found to be far otherwise. For the effica- 
^ ious, nay, rather the most efficacious remedy of all our evils, 
namely, Christ, has recommended to us obedience, not only in 
word, but by His most evident example, inasmuch as He became 
obedient to His Father even unto death. And with what grace do 
you call that a remedy which is an impediment to obedience ? 
Not a remedy, indeed, but, more properly, a hindrance ought it 
to be called. But on what grounds do you rest your confidence 
in this presumption ? Is it that you expect to find a defender 
of your disobedience in him who has received the office and 
the command to take cognizance of all acts of disobedience ? 
It were wrong in you to expect this of him, 69 and greatly 
68 2 Cor. i. 17. <* According to Ezekiel ii. 6. 69 The pope. 



298 AXNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1167. 

to be mistaken in him. You might have been withheld from 
a supposition of that kind by the first and second repulses 
you have already experienced. For, in the first place, you 
appeared personally ; after which, the letter which you wrote 
for the purpose of persuading him experienced how firmly 
stands the vicar of Saint Peter, and with what truthful- 
ness, when, neither by prayers, nor by gifts, nor by suggestions, 
nor by promises, could you move him. But a third attempt 
must be made, that, after the example of his lord, he may, on a 
third attempt, come off triumphant. Besides, that no annoy- 
ance may be wanting, you have put off the time for your ap- 
peal nearly a whole year. You have had no compassion on 
my exile or on the difficulties of the Holy Church, the spouse 
of Christ, whom He has obtained with His own blood. Besides, 
to pass this over, which, indeed, I ought not to do, it was your 
duty to use some foresight in his behalf, to whom you assert 
yourself to be a well-wisher, I mean our lord the king, who, 
so long as he behaves thus towards us, or the Church of 
Christ, will be able neither to go to war, nor to live in 
peace, without danger to his soul. Let us now pass on to the 
rest. You mention that some confusion arose on my depar- 
ture, and in consequence of my departure. Let the authors 
and contrivers of this confusion be afraid, lest they also be 
brought to confusion. You extol me with great praises, as to 
the good purpose of my journey, and indeed it is the duty of a 
prudent man not to be neglectful of his character ; but still, it 
is the part of a discreet one, in relation to himself, not to be- 
lieve another rather than himself. I am accused as though 
I had done certain injuries to my lord the king ; but inas- 
much as you do not mention one of them by name, I do not 
even know what it is I am to make answer to ; therefore, as I 
am only charged in a superficial manner on that point, in a 
superficial manner only shall I defend myself. In the mean- 
while, however, take this for my answer because I am con- 
scious of having done nothing wrong, for that reason I have 
not justified myself. You express surprise at the letter of 
warning which I sent him. What father sees his son going 
astray and holds his peace ? What person is there that does 
not smite another with the rod, that he may not run upon 
the sword ? The father despairs of the son whom he does 
not correct with threats or the scourge. However, God forbid 
that I should think as you do, that our lord, growing impatient 






A.D. 1167. THE ARCHBISHOP TO THE BISHOP OF LONDON. 299 

under correction, will by degrees proceed to the extermination 
of the seceders ! 70 For the plantation of our heavenly Father 
will not be rooted up. A most violent tempest is now toss- 
ing the ship ; I have hold of the helm, and do you invite 
me to sleep ? Do you collect and place before my eyes the 
benefits that have been conferred upon me by our lord the king, 
and speak of my being elevated from a lowly state to the 
highest position ? Still, in my simplicity, to give you some 
small answer, what lowly state is it you are thinking of? 
If you look at the time at which he placed me high in his 
service, there were the archdeaconry of Canterbury, the 
priorship of Beverley, many benefices, several prebendal 
stalls, with other things, not a few, which, at that period at- 
tached to my name, go far to disprove that I was in such a low 
position as you affirm, with relation to the things of this 
world. And if you look at the origin of my family and my 
ancestors, they were citizens of London, who dwelt in the midst 
of their fellow-citizens without reproach, and persons by no 
means of the lowest station. But as, one day, when the darkness 
of the world is removed, we shall be judged by the light of truth, 
which will be the most glorious, to have been born of humble 
parents, or even those of the lowest rank, or of the great and 
honored ones of the world ? For the Apostle says : ' Those 
members of the body, which we think to be less honorable, upon 
those we bestow more abundant honor.' 71 ' What do pedigrees 
avail ?' says the heathen poet. What then ought a learned and 
religious Christian bishop to say? But perhaps, by your 
mention of my lowly condition, it was your intention to put 
me somewhat to confusion ; however, how criminal it is to 
put one's father to confusion, you yourself will see from the 
commandment of the Lord, which you have received as to 
"honoring your father. But, as for commending the king's favour 
to me, there was no great need to take the trouble of recapi- 
tulating his services done to me. For I call the Lord as my 
witness that nothing under the sun do I prefer to his favour 
and safety, save only those things which belong to God and to 
the Holy Church ; for otherwise it will not be possible for him 
to reign with happiness or with safety. As it is, so be it. 
There are many other favours, and still greater ones, than are 
mentioned in your letter, which I have received at his hands. 

" Apostasife," meaning himself and his followers. 
1 Cor. xii. 23. 



300 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1167. 

In return for all these, even if they were to be doubled, ought 
I to peril the liberties of the Church of God, much less for the 
preservation of my own character, which has so frequently 
swerved from what is right ? If I have acted with greater 
forbearance towards others, in this I will spare neither you. 
nor any one else, not even an angel, if he were to come down 
from heaven, but the instant I should hear him suggesting such 
a course, he should hear from me these words, ' Get thee behind 
me, Satan, thou savourest not the things that are of God !' 71 
Far from me be such madness as that ! May the Lord avert 
such insanity from me, that any one should persuade me, by 
any backsliding, to make a bargain about the body of Christ ; 
for, in such case, I should be likened to Judas, the seller of our 
Lord to the Jews, the buyers of Christ ! But as to my pro- 
motion, which you state in your letter to have taken place, 
the mother of my lord the king dissuading him therefrom, the 
kingdom exclaiming against it, and the Church, so far as she 
could, heaving sighs thereat, this I tell you in answer thereto. 
I did not hear exclamations on the part of the kingdom, but 
rather acclamations ; and if there was any dissent on the 
part of my lord's mother, they did not come to the ears of the 
public. It might possibly be the case that some ecclesiastics 
did sigh upon that promotion, as aspirants 72 generally do, 
when they found that they were disappointed in the hopes 
they had once entertained. And, possibly, at this day, it is 
those same persons who, by way of revenge for their mis- 
fortune, are the authors and advisers of the present dissen- 
sions. But ' Woe to him by whom offences come !' Against 
the aforesaid obstacles, and against others, if any there were, 
the dispensations of God prevailed, as we may at this day per- 
ceive. For I am compelled by Him, who is justice itself, to 
postpone Him for nothing whatsoever, who in His mercy has 
placed me in this position. The points, also, which you seem 
to put forward, by way of justifying the king, I think ought 
not to be lightly passed over, or without some discussion ; and 
I could only wish that he had not taken so wide a departure 
from justice, and that my complaints against him appeared 
less just. You say that he is, and always has been, ready to 
give me satisfaction. This you assert you can confidently say 
and maintain. Hold then a moment, and answer these ques- 

71 Matt. xiv. 23. 

72 He seems to pun upon the resemblance of " suspiro," and " aspiro." 



A.D. 1167. THE ABCHBISHOP TO THE BISHOP OP LOSTDOIT. 301 

tions. When you say that he is ready to give satisfaction, in 
what sense do you understand it ? You see those of whom 
God says that He is the father and the judge, the orphans, 
the widows, the fatherless, the innocents, and those who are 
utterly unacquainted with this controversy which is going on 
hetween us, you see these proscribed, and you are silent ; you 
see the clergy banished, and you do not exclaim against it ; 
you see others spoiled of their property, and loaded with 
insults, and you do not reprove it; you see my servants 
thrown into prison and confined there, and you hold your 
peace ; you see the property of your mother church of Can- 
terbury being made away with, and you offer no resistance ; 
you see swords threatening the very throat of me your father, 
and myself escaping with the greatest difficulty, and you ex- 
press no sorrow ; still worse even, you are not ashamed to take 
part with my persecutors, and in me, persecutors of God and 
His Church, and that too, not in secret. Is this, then, giving 
satisfaction, not to correct evils which have been perpetrated, and 
day after day, to add to what is bad what is still worse ? But per- 
haps you understand it in a contrary sense, and that to obey the 
will of the unrighteous is to give satisfaction, according to the 
words, ' I will make mine arrows drunk with blood.' 73 How- 
ever, you will say to me, ' My father, of what do you accuse 
me ? I will acquit myself in a few words. I am afraid for my 
gown.' It is true, my son, and too true what you say, and it is 
for that reason, that you wield not the sword. But as to what 
you say, that he is prepared to stand by the judgment of his 
realm, as though, forsooth, that were a full satisfaction; who is 
there on earth, or even in heaven, that would presume to pro- 
nounce judgment with reference to the ordinances of God ? Let 
human matters be pronounced judgment upon ; but let Divine 
tilings remain utterly unshaken, and be left alone. How much 
better would it be, my brother, how much more healthful for 
him, and more safe for yourself, if you were to labour in 
every way to disclose to him and to persuade him, what is the 
will of God with reference to maintaining the peace of His 
Church, and to warn him not to covet those things which do 
not belong to his administration, and to remind him to honor 
the priests of God, not giving heed to who they are, but whose 
servants they are. You charge me with having been warped 
by prejudice against the bishop of Salisbury and John of 

73 Dent, xxxii. 42. 



302 AXIfALS OF KOGEK DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1167. 

Oxford, not a dean as you call him, but the usurper of a 
deanery. But you ought to bear in mind that certain mani- 
i'estoes 74 preceded my judgment. You say too, that you have 
been moved thereby; how should you not? Ucalegon trembles 
when Ms neighbour's party- wall is on fire; 75 and I only 
wish that you may be becomingly moved from the position 
which you have so unbecomingly taken up. Let then 
my lord, at your intimation, know and understand, that He 
who rules not only the kingdom of men, but of angels as 
well, has ordained under Him two powers, princes and priests ; 
the one earthly, the other spiritual ; the one to minister, the 
other to warn ; to the one of whom He has conceded power, 
to the other He has willed respect to be shown. But he 
who withholds aught of his rights from the one or the 
other, resists the ordinances of God. Let not my lord then 
disdain to show respect to those to whom the Supreme ruler 
of all has not disdained to show respect ; ' I have said ye are 
Gods,' 76 and again, ' I have made you a God unto Pharaoh,' 76 * 
and 'thou shalt not revile the Gods;' 77 meaning the priests. 
And again, when speaking by Moses of him who was about to 
swear, he says, ' Bring him unto the Gods,' that is to say, the 
priests. And let not my lord presume to attempt to pronounce 
judgment on his judges. For to the earthly powers are not en- 
trusted the keys of heaven, but to the priests. Wherefore it 
is written, ' the priest's lips shall keep knowledge, and they 
shall seek the law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of 
the Lord;' 77 * and Saint Paul says, ' Shall we not judge 
angels ? How much more men.' 78 That also, at your suggestion, 
should be brought to our lord's recollection as worthy of remem- 
brance and imitation, which we read in Ecclesiastical History 
concerning the emperor Constantine, to whom when there had 
been presented written accusations against the bishops, he 
took the libels, and, calling the accused before him, in their 
sight, burned them, at the same time saying : ' Ye are gods, 
made so by the true God. Go settle your disputes among 
yourselves, for it is not fitang for us men to give judgment on 
gods.' Oh mighty emperor ! Oh discreet ruler upon earth ! one 

74 Probably by way of warning. 

75 p ar i es C um proximus ardet." In allusion to the lines of Virgil and 
Juvenal. 75 * St. John, x. 34. 76 Ps. Ixxxii. 6. 76 * Exod. vii. 1. 

77 Exod. xxii. 28. " Mai. ii. 7. 

' l8 A loose quotation of 1 Corinthians vi. 3. 



A.D. 1167. LETTER OF THE SUFFRAGANS OF CANTERBURY. 303 

who did not fraudulently usurp that which belongs to another, 
and thus earned an eternal kingdom in heaven. Therefore, 
let my lord make it his study to imitate a prince so mighty, so 
discreet, and so prosperous ; who enjoys both a praiseworthy 
memory upon earth, and an eternal and glorious life in heaven. 
Otherwise, let him fear what the Lord has threatened in 
Deuteronomy,' 9 saying : ' The man that will do presumptuously, 
and will not hearken unto the priest, shall die before the 
judge.' For unto this he has been called, and hereby the 
temporal peace and mightiness of his kingdom, of which you 
remind me, is ministered unto him from heaven. Otherwise, 
notwithstanding his many virtues, the king will not be saved, 
even though kingdoms should be subdued by him, and nations 
should be prostrate. But enough upon these points. Whoever 
you have had as your fellow- writers in the aforesaid letter, let 
them understand that this answer made to you is an answer to 
themselves. For the future, my brethren, I warn you, I beg and 
entreat of you that schisms may not separate, nor enmities over- 
shadow us ; but let us have one heart and one soul in the Lord, 
and let us listen to Him who telleth us to struggle for justice with 
all our soul, and to contend for it to the death, and the Lord 
will conquer for us our enemies. And let us not forget that 
strict judge, standing before whose tribunal the truth alone shall 
judge us, all dread of and trust in the powers of 'this world 
beiug laid aside. Farewell to your brotherhood in the Lord." 

The Letter of the suffragans of the Church of Canterbury to 
the blessed Ilwrnas, archbishop of Canterbury. 

"To their venerable father and lord, Thomas, by the grace 
of God, archbishop of Canterbury, the suffragan bishops of that 
church and the beneficed clergy appointed over the various 
places throughout their dioceses, due submission and obedience. 
\\Ticreas, father, on your departure for foreign parts, through 
the very unexpectedness and novelty of the circumstance, con- 
siderable confusion arose, still, we did hope, through your hu- 
mility and prudence, with the aid of the Divine favour, for a re- 
turn therefrom to the serenity of our former peaceful state. That 
was, indeed, a solace to us, which, after your departure, reached 
us all by general report ; that you, while passing your time 
in the parts beyond sea, had no ulterior designs ; that you 
were guilty of no machinations against our lord the king or 
18 xvii. 12. The way the text is quoted differs from our version. 



304 AXNA1.S OF BOGEK DE HOVEDE1T. A.D. 1167. 

against his kingdom, but endured with moderation the burden 
of poverty which you had spontaneously taken upon yoiirself ; 
that you were devoting your time to reading and prayer, and 
were atoning for the loss of time past by fastings, watchings, 
and tears, and, occupied in spiritual pursuits, were making 
your way, by the increase of your virtues, to the perfection 
of blessedness. We rejoiced to hear that by pursuits of this 
nature you were applying yourself to the restoration of the 
blessings of peace ; and, in consequence thereof, we did enter- 
tain a hope that you would be enabled also to bring the heart 
of our lord the king to feelings of graciousness, so that, in his 
royal clemency, he might cease to be angered against you, and 
no longer recall to mind the injuries that had been inflicted 
upon him in your departure, and in the consequences thereof. 
Your friends and well-wishers did enjoy some access to him 
while these things were heard of you, and when they made 
entreaties for the bestowal on you of his favour, he re- 
ceived each with benignity. But now, from the information 
of certain persons, we have learned that which we recall to 
mind with anxiety, namely, that you have issued against him 
a letter of warning, in which you omit the salutation, and in 
which you do not make any attempt to gain his favor, or have 
recourse to entreaties ; in which you neither breathe nor write 
aught in a friendly spirit; but, on the contrary, with extreme 
severity, you declare in the threats which you utter against 
him, that you will shortly have to pronounce against him 
an interdict or else sentence of excommunication. Now, 
should this be carried out with as much severity as it has been 
asserted with harshness, we then no longer have any hope 
that peace may succeed the present state of confusion, but are 
greatly afraid that he will be inflamed to a lasting and inexo- 
rable hatred. But the prudence of the devout takes into 
consideration the results of things, using its best endeavours 
that what it has commenced with discretion it may also bring 
to a good end. Therefore, if so it please you, let your dis- 
creetness consider to what it tends, and whether, by attempts 
of this nature, it can obtain the end which is its object. As 
for us, in consequence of these endeavours, we have fallen 
from great hopes, and after conceiving the hope of at some 
time obtaining peace, we now find ourselves repelled 
by deep despair from the very threshold of hope. And 
thus, while the combat is being waged as it were with the 



A. D. 1167. LETTEB OF THE StTFFEAGANS OF CANTEBBUBT. 305 

sword drawn, there is no room whatever to be found for 
entreaty in your behalf. Therefore do we write to our father 
what in our Christian love is our advice to him, not to super- 
add difficulties to difficulties, injuries to injuries, but rather, 
desisting from threats, to observe patience and humility. Let 
him entrust his cause to the Divine clemency, to the favour and 
mercy of his lord, and, thus doing, let him heap and gather 
hot coals of fire upon the heads of many. By thus acting, 
brotherly love will be excited, and, the Lord inspiring and 
the advice of the good prevailing, perhaps piety alone would 
be enabled to do that which threats have proved unable. It 
would be as well for you to be spoken of in terms of praise 
for your voluntary submission to poverty, as, for ingratitude 
for benefits received to become the subject of general remark. 
For all persons have a full recollection how kind the king our 
master has shewn himself towards you, to what a pitch of glory- 
he has raised you from an humble station, and how he has with 
feelings so joyous received you into his especial favor, that the 
whole of the various portions of his dominions, which extend 
from the northern ocean to the Pyrenees, he has rendered sub- 
ject to your power ; so much so, that in them public opinion 
considered those only as fortunate who were able to find grace 
in your eyes. And, that no worldly fickleness might be able 
to shake your glory, he has willed immoveably to root you in 
the things which belong to God. While his mother dissuaded 
him, the kingdom expostulated, the Church of God, so far as 
she could, sighed and groaned, he made it his object, in every 
possible way, to raise you to that elevated post which you 
now enjoy, hoping that he should for the future reign hap- 
pily, and, amid the greatest security, rejoice in your aid and 
counsel. If, then, he receives injury where he looks for secu- 
riff , what will be the remark made on you by the voice of all ? 
"What will be your reward, or what your character, in con- 
sequence of your having made such a return as this ? Do, then, 
if so it please you, spare your own character, spare, too, your 
own fame, and, in humility, endeavour to surpass our lord, 
and, in Christian charity, your son. If, however, our advice 
cannot prevail upon you to do this, at least the love and 
fidelity of the Supreme Pontiff, and of the holy Roman Church, 
ought to influence you. For you ought easily to be persuaded 
not to wish to make any attempt which may increase the labours 
VOL. I. x 



306 ANNALS OF ROGEB BE HOVE.DEN. A.D. 1167. 

of your mother, who has now laboured so long, by causing her 
grief, which deplores the disobedience of many, to be increased 
by the loss of those who are obedient. For what if, and God 
forbid it should be so, through your irritation of him, or by 
your agency, our lord the king, whom people and kingdoms 
follow and obey, the gift of the Lord, should withdraw from 
our lord the pope, and decline to follow him for the future, 
after his refusal to give him satisfaction against you ? For, 
what entreaties, what gifts, what promises, and how many of 
them, are strongly urging him to this step ! whereas he has 
hitherto stood firmly upon a rock, and has victoriously, with 
feelings of deep devotion, trodden under foot the whole that 
the world could make offer of. One thing only do we fear, that 
him whom these offers of riches, and the whole of that which in 
the estimation of men is precious, could not influence, the indig- 
nation of his feelings of themselves may be enabled to over- 
come. Should this come to pass through your agency, you 
will have entirely to adopt the lamentations of Jeremiah, and 
in future will never by any means be enabled to deny unto 
your eyes a fountain of tears. Recollect, therefore, if so 
it please you, that the design of your highness, if it should 
succeed, will in every way conduce to the injury of our 
lord the pope and the holy Roman Church, and, if so it please 
you, of yourself as well. But those who are near you, and 
have deep designs, perhaps will not allow you to proceed upon 
this path. They entreat you to make trial against our lord the 
king who you are, and, in all matters which belong to him, 
to exercise your utmost possible power. For what power is 
there an object of fear to the sinful, of dread to him who refuses 
to give satisfaction ? We do not, indeed, say that our lord the 
king has never done amiss, but we do say, and aver with con- 
fidence, that he has always been ready to make satisfaction to 
our lord. The king, who has been so appointed by the Lord, 
provides for the peace of his subjects in all things, that he may 
be enabled to preserve the same for the churches and the 
people entrusted to him, while, at the same time, the dignities 
which were the due of and accorded to the kings before him, 
he asks as his own due and to be accorded to him. Wherefore, if 
any disagreement has arisen between him and you, having been 
convened and warned thereon by the Supreme Pontiff, in his 
paternal love, through our venerable brethren the bishops of 
London and Hereford, he has not treated the same with super- 



A.I). 1167. LETTER OF TILE SUFFRAGANS OF CANTERBURY. 307 

ciliousness, but has shown that he does not require what does 
not belong to him in all those matters in which any grievance 
has been put forward relative to a church or any ecclesiastical 
person, and has humbly and meekly made answer that he will 
conform to the judgment of the Church of his kingdom ; which 
he is also prepared to fulfil in deed, and to esteem it a pleasing 
obedience when he is advised to correct the same, if he has 
been guilty of any offence towards God. And, not only to 
give satisfaction, but also to make reparation, if required, is 
he prepared. If then, he is ready both to give satisfaction 
and to make reparation to the Church in those matters which 
concern the Church, and not in the least to shrink there- 
from, thus bowing his neck to the yoke of Christ, with what 
right, by what law, by what canon or interdict will you oppress 
him, or, which God forbid, with what weapon of the Gospel will 
you smite him r Not to be carried away by impulse, but to be 
prudently regulated by the judgment, is a thing worthy of praise. 
Wherefore, this is the common petition of us all, that you 
will not give way to precipitate counsels, and thus betray us, 
but rather by your paternal kindness make it your study to 
provide for the sheep entrusted to your charge, that they may 
enjoy life, and peace, and security. Indeed, that is a subject of 
concern to us all, which we have lately heard of as being done, 
preposterously as some think, against our brother the bishop 
of Salisbury and his dean. Against them, following, as it 
seems to us, rather the warmth of anger than the path of jus- 
tice, you have hurled the penalties of suspension or con- 
demnation before an enquiry has taken place as to their 
faults. This is a new method of giving judgment, hitherto, 
we trust, unknown to laws and canons, first to condemn for it, 
and afterwards to take cognizance of the fault. This we beg you 
ifot to attempt to put in practice against our lord the king and 
his kingdom, or against ourselves and the churches and dioceses 
entrusted to our charge, to the detriment of our lord the pope, 
to the loss and disgrace of the holy Church of Rome, and to the 
no slight increase of your own confusion. To such a course 
on your part we oppose the remedy of appeal, having already 
in the face of the Church personally made appeal to our lord 
the pope against our fears of oppression. And now once more 
do we appeal to him in writing, and we name the day of the 
Ascension of Our Lord as the appointed time for our appeal. 

x 2 



308 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1167- 

Still, with all possible duteousness, we entreat you, adopting 
more healthful counsels, to spare your own and our labour and 
expense, and to make it your endeavour to place your case 
in such a position that it may admit of a remedy. Father, we 
wish you farewell in the Lord." 

The Letter of the Suffragans of the Church of Canterbury to 
Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff. 

" To their father and lord, the Supreme Pontiff Alexander, 
the bishops of the province of Canterbury, and the beneficed 
clergy appointed over many places throughout their dioceses, 
to their lord and father, the due service of love and obedience. We 
believe, father, that your excellency will remember that, through 
our venerable brethren, the bishops of London and Hereford, 
you did, by letter to them some time since directed, convene 
your dutiful son, our most dear lord, the illustrious king of 
the English, and did advise him, in your paternal love, as 
to the correction of certain points which seemed to your Holi- 
ness in his kingdom to stand in need of correction. On re- 
ceiving your mandate with due reverence, as is well known to 
all, he did not thereupon give way to any ebullition of anger, 
or with haughtiness despise to pay obedience thereto ; but 
immediately thereupon, feeling gratitude for your paternal 
correction, he submitted himself to the judgment of the 
Church, repeating upon each point the commands which, accord- 
ing to the tenor of your mandate, had been carefully given to 
him thereupon ; that he would be obedient to the judgment ot 
the Church of his kingdom, and that what in it should seem 
worthy of correction, he would of his own praiseworthy 
counsel, and, with a duteousness in a prince most commendable, 
correct. From this determination he has not withdrawn, nor 
does he intend to fall away from his promise : but, on the 
contrary, whoever shall sit as judge, whoever shall take 
cognizance, and whoever shall pronounce judgment, he him- 
self, showing respect to the Divine mandates, and not putting 
forward the pride of majesty, but rather, like an obedient son, 
is ready in all things to submit to that judgment, and in a 
lawful manner to show obedience to the sentence, and so prove 
himself a prince bound to respect the laws. Wherefore, as 
he submits himself to the judgment of the Divine laws, it is 
not necessary, either by interdict, or by threats, or by the 
goads of maledictions, to urge him to give the satisfaction 



A.D. 1167. THE SUFFRAGANS TO POPE ALEXANDER. 309 

required ; for his deeds do not in any way -withdraw themselves 
from the light, nor do they in any measure need to fly to the 
shade for concealment. For the king, who is in faith a most 
devout Christian, in the bonds of chastity a most exemplary 
husband, a preserver and defender of peace and justice of 
incomparable activity, sets all his wishes thereupon, and is ani- 
mated by every desire, that all scandals may be removed from 
his kingdom, that all sins with their abominations may be ba- 
nished therefrom, that peace and justice may universally pre- 
vail, and that, amid profound security and pleasing quietude, all 
things may rejoice and flourish under his rule. When, there- 
fore, he learned that by the enormous excesses of certain in- 
solent clerks the peace of his kingdom was in no slight de- 
gree disturbed, showing to the clergy all due reverence, he 
reported their excesses to the bishops, the judges of the Church, 
in order that the spiritual sword might come to the aid of the 
temporal, and the spiritual power might establish and conso- 
lidate in the clergy that peace which he revered and cherished 
in the people. On this occasion the zeal of both parties was 
made manifest ; the judgment of the bishops taking this posi- 
tion, that murder and similar crimes ought only to be pu- 
nished in the clergy by deprivation of orders. The king, 
on the other hand, was of opinion that this punishment was 
not at all equal to the guilt, and that due care was not 
had for the establishment of peace, if a reader or an aco- 
lyte should be allowed to kill any man illustrious for his 
exemplary piety or his high station, and then come off safe 
with solely the loss of his orders. The clergy, therefore, in- 
sisting that thus it has been ordained by heaven in favour of 
their order, while our lord the king was for visiting guilt with, 
ae he hopes, a justifiable hatred, and striving to root peace still 
more deeply, a holy contention arose, which is excused, we 
believe, before the Lord, by the single-mindedness of either 
party. On his side, it is not from a love of dominion, nor with 
the object of crushing the liberties of the Church, but from a 
wish to establish peace, that our lord the king has made this 
attempt that the customs of the kingdom and the dignities of 
the kings which have before his time been observed in the 
kingdom of England by ecclesiastical persons and peacefully 
maintained, should be still upheld. And that, upon these points, 
the cord of contention might not be prolonged to succeeding 
times, and public notice be attracted thereto, the elders, 



310 ANXALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEK. A.D. 1167. 

bishops, and other great men of the kingdom, having been 
adjured thereupon by their faith and their hopes in God, 
after having been informed upon the usage in time past, the 
required immunities were openly discussed and published upon 
the testimony of the chief men throughout the kingdom. This, 
then, is the cruelty of our lord the king towards the Church of 
God which has been so loudly exclaimed against throughout the 
whole kingdom, this is his persecution, this is his malignity, 
the reports of which have been spread abroad among ourselves 
as well as in all other quarters. Still, in all these, if there is 
anything contained that is dangerous to the soul, anything 
offensive to the Church, he has promised all along, and does 
most steadfastly promise, that, advised and moved thereto by 
your authority, he will, with the most holy duteousness, by 
reason of his reverence for Christ, and for the honor which he 
professes to pay to the Holy Church, whom he confesses to be 
his mother, and for the salvation of his own soul, correct the 
same, according to the advice of the Church of his realm. And, 
indeed, our father, our aspirations for peace, would, as we hope, 
before this have obtained their wished-for end, if the asperity 
of our father, the lord archbishop of Canterbury, had not 
kindled afresh the anger that was now subdued and almost 
extinguished. For he, from whose long-suffering we had hither- 
to hoped for peace, from whose moderation a renewal of his 
favour, has most harshly and irreverently made an attack upon 
him whom he ought to have softened with his admonitions, 
and to have subdued by well-deserving and meekness, by means 
of grievous and threatening letters, little savouring of the de- 
votedness of the father or the long-suffering of the priest, 
upon the occasion of his lately taking proceedings against 
certain disturbers of the peace. He has most bitterly 
threatened sentence of excommunication against him, and 
the penalties of interdict against his kingdom. If, then, his 
humility is thus rewarded, what is to be done with him 
when he is contumacious? If ready duteousness and obedience 
are thus esteemed, in what way will punishment be inflicted 
upon obstinate perverseness ? To these grievous threats, 
things more grievous have been added. For upon certain faith- 
ful and familiar friends of our lord the king, the first nobles 
of the realm, who especially take part in the private coun- 
sels of the king, and by whose hands the sovereign's inten- 
tions and the business of the kingdom are carried out, he 



A.D. 1167. THE STJFFBAGAKS TO POPE ALEXANDER. 311 

has passed sentence of excommunication, and has publicly 
denounced them as excommunicated, when they have been 
neither cited nor defended, nor are, as they say, conscious of 
having committed any fault, nor have been convicted or 
made confession thereof. In addition to this, our venerable 
brother, the bishop of Salisbury, when absent and undefended, 
having neither confessed to or been convicted of any crime, 
has been suspended from the sacerdotal and episcopal office 
before the grounds of his suspension had been submitted to the 
judgment of his brother bishops of the province, or indeed of 
any one else. If, therefore, this method of passing judgment 
is to be carried out with regard to the king, and with regard 
to the kingdom, in so preposterous, not to say, irregular a 
manner, what are we to suppose may be the possible conse- 
quence ? For the days are evil, and find numerous pre- 
texts for speaking ill of us, unless the bonds of peace and of 
brotherly love, by which the sovereignty and the priesthood 
are held together, are burst asunder, and we, together with 
the clergy entrusted to our charge, depart hence, dispersed in 
exile, or else, which God forbid ! withdraw from our fealty 
to you, and are hurled into the evils of schism, and into the 
abyss of iniquity and disobedience. For this is the shortest 
possible way to the entire destruction of religion, and to the 
subversion and ruin of both clergy and people. Wherefore, 
let not, in the days of your Apostolate, the Church be thus 
grievously subverted ; let not our lord the king and the people 
his servants, be, which God forbid ! turned away from their 
obedience to you ; let not the wrath of our lord the archbishop 
of Canterbury, which, by the machinations of certain private 
persons, is contrived to be levelled against him and his man- 
dates, be enabled to work any grievance against our lord the 
fcing, or his kingdom, or ourselves, or the churches committed 
to our charge. To your highness, by word and by writing, 
we have appealed, and have fixed on the Ascension of our 
Lord as the day of our appeal, choosing, in all humility, to endure 
whatsoever shall in all respects be pleasing unto your Holiness, 
rather than suffer daily grievances, till we are wearied, from 
his manifestations of loftiness of spirit, our deserts not meriting 
the same. Beloved father in Christ, may the Lord Almighty 
preserve the safety of your Church to avail even unto ages far 
distant." 



312 ANNALS OF KOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1168. 

In this year Robert de Cheney, bishop of Lincoln, departed 
this life, on the sixth day before the ides of January. In the 
same year, Almaric, king of Jerusalem, took Babylon, and 
rendered it tributary to himself. 

In the year of grace 1168, being the fourteenth year of the 
reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, Eicharcl, 
earl of Striguil, 82 assembling a great army, invaded Ireland, 
and subdued the greater part of it, with the assistance of 
Milo de Coggeham, a warlike soldier, and then, making a 
treaty with the king at Dublin, received his daughter as his 
wife, together with the kingdom of Dublin. In the same 
year died Guido of Crema, the second anti-pope, and was suc- 
ceeded by John, abbat of Struine, who was styled pope Calix- 
tus. In the same year died Eobert, earl of Leicester, chief 
justiciary of England. 

The Letter of the blessed Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, to 
Gilbert, bishop of London, with reference to the sentence 
pronounced against him. 

" Thomas, by the grace of God, archbishop of Canterbury, 
and legate of the Apostolic See, to Gilbert, bishop of London, 
would indeed that he could say, his brother, may he turn 
away from evil and do what is good. Your extravagances we 
have borne with, so long as we could, and we hope that our 
endurance and long-suffering, which have been to ourselves de- 
trimental beyond measure, may not redound to the injury of the 
whole Church. But inasmuch as you have always abused our 
patience, and have not been willing to listen to our lord the 
pope or ourselves in the advice which concerned your salvation, 
but rather, your obstinacy has been always increasing for the 
worse ; at length, the necessities of our duty and the require- 
ments of the law forcing us thereto, we have, for just and mani- 
fest causes, smitten and excommunicated you with the sen- 
tence of anathema, and have cut you off from the body of 
Christ, which is the Church, until you make condign satis- 
faction. Therefore, by virtue of your obedience, and at the peril 
of your salvation, of your dignity and of your priestly orders, as 
the form of the Church prescribes, we do command you to ab- 
stain from all communion with the faithful ; lest by coming in 

82 Strigulia, the Latin name of Chepstow, of which Richard Strong- 
bow was earl, as also earl of Pembroke. 



A.D. 1168. THE ARCHBISHOP TO THE CHAPTER OF LOITDOK. 313 

contact with you, the Lord's flock may be contaminated to its 
ruin, whereas it ought to be instructed by your teaching, and 
taught by your example how to live." 

The Letter of Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, to the Chapter 
of London, upon avoiding communion with those who are ex- 
communicated. 

" Thomas, by the grace of God, archbishop of Canterbury, 
and legate of the Apostolic See, to the dean, archdeacon and 
clergy of the church of London, health, and may they faith- 
fully abstain from communion with excommunicated per- 
sons. That ought not to escape your discernment, which 
almost the whole Latin world acknowledges, how unrighte- 
ously, taking the opportunity of the general schism, Gil- 
bert, bishop of London, our brother, would that we could 
say our true brother, has acted in the cause of the Church, and 
has endeavoured to disturb the peace thereof. Still, with 
great long-suffering we have hitherto endured this, while he has 
always abused the same, and to his manifold errors has added 
the crime of disobedience as well. We, therefore, being able no 
longer to conceal this from ourselves, the necessities of our duty, 
and the requirements of the law forcing us thereto, have publicly 
excommunicated him, and we do enjoin you in virtue of your 
obedience, and at the peril of your priestly orders and of your 
salvation, forthwith to abstain from all communion with him, as 
befits the faithful in Christ. Likewise, under the same penal- 
ties, we do order you to avoid those whose names are hereunder 
written. With a like sentence, also, God willing, we shall, 
on the day of the Ascension, condemn those who have been 
solemnly cited by us, unless in the meantime they shall make 
satisfaction ; namely, Gilbert, archdeacon of Canterbury, and 
Robert, his vicar, Richard de Ivechester, Richard de Lucy, 
William Giffard, Adam de Cheringes, and those who, either at 
the king's command or of their own rashness, have taken pos- 
session of the property of ourselves, or of our clergy, as also those 
who, by their aid or counsel, are known to have instigated the 
feelings of our lord the king against the liberties of the Church, 
and to the proscription and plunder of the innocent, and 
those who hinder the nuncios of our lord the pope, and of 
ourselves, from ministering to the necessities of the Church. 
Let not your heart be disturbed hereat, or be afraid, inas- 



314 AXXA.LS OF EOGEB, DE 1IOVEDEK. A. D. 1168. 

much as by the mercy of God we are safe, under the pro- 
tection of the Apostolic See, against the backslidings of the ma- 
lignant and the subterfuges of appeals. These are the names 
of those excommunicated Jocelyn, bishop of Salisbury, earl 
Hugh, Ranulph de Broc, Thomas Fitz-Bernard, Robert de 
Broc, clerk, Hugh de Saint Clair, Letardus de Norfleet, 
clerk, j^igel de Saccaville, and Richard, the brother of William 
de Hastings, who has taken possession of our church at New 
Coton. Farewell." 

T/ie Letter of the blessed Thomas, the archbishop, to Robert, bishop 
of Hereford. 

" Thomas, by the grace of God, the humble servant of the 
church of Canterbury, to his venerable brother Robert, by the 
same grace, bishop of Hereford, health and constant perse- 
verance in justice and in the defence of mother Church. 
For the glory of the Saints, and for the damnation of the 
wicked it is necessary that offences must come : in tribula- 
tions the elect are to be proved, who by patience gain for them- 
selves a crown, and improve others by their example. But 
woe unto those by whom offences do come ! Whereas, the 
bishop of London has not abstained from giving offence, 
but among other works of his notable wickedness, since he 
has been delivered up unto Satan, has even gone so far as, 
with insolent audacity and parricidal impiety, to lift up his 
heel against his and your mother, the holy church of Canterbury, 
in presuming to say that he owes no submission and will pay no 
obedience to him by whom he was translated to his see ; and to 
the weight of his condemnation has added this, that he would 
be for causing the transfer of the archiepiscopal throne to the 
see of London we do therefore entreat your brotherhood, in 
whom we have full confidence, with all possible affection to 
oppose the shield in defence of your mother, against this son of 
Belial, who in the front of other Gentiles, like another Goliah of 
Gath, has not been ashamed to come forth alone, by the Lord's 
working, from the camp of the uncircumcised, and has not 
feared to challenge to the combat the whole community of the 
sons of the church of Canterbury, while he is thirsting for the 
blood of their mother, and is forsaking the unity of catholic 
concord. For he has written to our lord the pope, on be- 
half of our brother the archbishop of York, beseeching him 



A.D. 1168. THE ARCHBISHOP TO THE BISHOP OF HEKEFOBD. 315 

with lying and deceitful testimony that he will allow him to 
hear the cross throughout our province, supposing that some 
great gain will be the result, if through hatred to our per- 
son he shall be enabled in any way to inflict an injury upon 
the Church to which by his canonical profession he owes duty 
and obedience. But Christ, who from its first foundation, 
amid various storms and many and great tempests, has guided 
and cherished the church of Canterbury, has wrought mer- 
cifully in that, in full consistory, his falsehood and wickedness 
have been, by means of unexceptionable witnesses, made mani- 
fest. Wherefore, in the first place I return thanks to God, and in 
the next to yourselves and the rest of our brethren, who have 
withheld yourselves from all communion with him from the time 
that it was known that he had been condemned to excommuni- 
cation, and have ordered by public notice throughout your see, 
not only him, but the rest of those who have been excommuni- 
cated among you, to be avoided. In this has been made manifest 
your fidelity, and the constancy of your virtue has shone forth, 
which has determined that the threats of public power and of 
officials, equally with their blandishments, ought to be postponed 
to the commands of God. You have set at liberty your con- 
sciences, you have preserved your good name, while, both by 
the words of truth, and by the example of fortitude, you have 
taught that it is more becoming to obey God than man. In- 
asmuch, therefore, as the love of God, diffused so greatly by 
his Holy Spirit in your hearts, has gone forth to the public as a 
testimony of your well-doing, all servile fear being repulsed and 
laid aside, let this sincerity of yours feel assured that God will 
speedily beat down Satan under your feet, and will bring the 
contest to a happy issue ; and this, too, the more speedily 
and gloriously, the more fervently and constantly your truth 
sriall have been made manifest in the course on which you 
have begun. Wherefore, in the love of God, we do beg and 
entreat of you, and, by your fidelity, by your obedience, and 
by the sincere affection which you entertain towards your 
mother, the church of Canterbury, adjure you ; that in 
order to maintain the dignity and the rights of the church of 
Canterbury to which you have made profession of fidelity, you 
will arise and come to our rescue against the above-named 
archbishop, and send in writing to our lord the pope, and to 
the court, a testimony of the truth, such as it befits her sons 



316 AUNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1168. 

to bear for their mother church. For he who shall withhold 
it on the occasion of so unjust an attack, beyond all doubt 
ought to be esteemed as unfaithful, and worse than unfaithful, 
and one against whom right would demand that all the faith- 
ful should wage war even unto the death. Nor indeed can this 
course be productive of any danger, inasmuch as the truth is 
clear, and according to the saying, is manifest even to the 
blind. 83 But inasmuch as he is cursed who withdraws his sword 
from blood, and the evil-doer is to be scourged in order that the 
wise man may be instructed to his salvation ; whoever does 
not meet the parricide with a stone and a sword, renders him- 
self subject to the curses of the law. For he appears to give 
his consent thereto, who does not, when he can, reason with, or 
hinder him who commits such excesses. And, in order that 
it may not be more stringently demanded at our hands, if we 
any longer conceal from ourselves the great and manifest 
errors of those who persecute the Church and whom now for a 
period of nearly a whole five years, we have endured with great 
long-suffering, in hopes that they might come to a feeling of 
repentance, we denounce to your brotherhood as publicly 
excommunicated, Geoffrey, 84 archdeacon of Canterbury, and 
Robert his vicar, Richard de Ivechester, William Grffard, 
Earl Hugh, Richard de Lucy, Adam de Cheringes, as also those 
who against the rules of the sacred canons have received ec- 
clesiastical offices or benefices from lay hands, or taken unlawful 
possession of them of their own authority ; and likewise those 
who hinder the messages of our lord the pope, and of ourselves, 
from treating the necessities of the Church. We do therefore, 
by the authority of our lord the pope, and of ourselves, command 
you that you will hold, and will cause to beheld throughout your 
bishopric, these persons in suchwise as the discipline of the 
sacred canons has prescribed in the case of persons solemnly ex- 
communicated. We bid your brotherhood farewell in the Lord, 
and may it remember in the prayers of the holy to pray for us 
and the cause of God which is in our hands." 

In the same year, Guido de Lusignan slew Patrick, earl of 
Salisbury, when returning on a pilgrimage from Saint Jago 
[of Compostella] ; in consequence of which, Henry, king of 

83 In the original, "lippiset tonsoribus patens;" literally, "manifest 
to the blear-eyed, and the barbers." It is not clear what can have been 
the origin of this saying, if the text is correct. 

s * He has been previously called Gilbert. 



A.D 1168. DEATH OF KIKG BALDWIN. 317 

England, being greatly enraged, banished him from Poitou. 
On this, assuming the cross, he set out for Jerusalem, and 
remained there in the service of Baldwin the Leper, king of 
Jerusalem, and by reason of his probity, was greatly esteemed 
by the king and chief men of that kingdom. 

In order that the line of the Latin kings may be traced, 
who ruled in the holy city of Jerusalem, down to the times of 
Saladin, a few matters must be mentioned which had transpired 
before this period. It is necessary, therefore, to know, that 
after the taking of Antioch, Curberant having been overcome 
by Robert, duke of Normandy, the city of Jerusalem was taken 
by the Christians, and rescued from the hands of the pagans, 
in the year of grace one thousand and ninety-nine ; on which, 
by the choice of the whole of the army, Godfrey, duke of Lor- 
raine, son of Eustace the Elder, earl of Boulogne, was elected 
king of the holy city of Jerusalem. However, he refused to be 
crowned ; saying, that he would never wear a crown of gold, 
in the place where Christ had worn a crown of thorns. 

On his death without issue, his brother, Baldwin, suc- 
ceeded him in the kingdom, and was crowned king. He was 
the first of the Latin kings who was crowned in the holy city 
of Jerusalem : for before this period, as long as it had been in 
the hands of the Christians, its kings were Greeks. 

On the death of king Baldwin, his son, Baldwin, succeeded 
to the throne, and was crowned, having an only daughter 
to succeed him in the kingdom. On his decease, the chief 
men of the kingdom sent for Fulk, the brother of Geoffrey, 
earl of Anjou, and gave him in marriage the above-named 
daughter of king Baldwin, together with the kingdom of Jeru- 
salem ; on which they were crowned. By has wife, the 
daughter of king Baldwin, king Fulk was the father of two 
sons ; of whom, the first-born was named Baldwin, and the 
other, Amauri. Baldwin succeeded his father Fulk in the 
kingdom, and was crowned; and on his decease, without issue, 
his brother, Amauri, succeeded him in the kingdom, and was 
crowned. This Amauri took Babylon, and rendered it tri- 
butary to himself. He reigned eleven years, and was father of 
Baldwin the Leper, and of two daughters, of whom the eldest 
was called Sibylla, and the other, Milicent. 

Baldwin the Leper succeeded his father Amauri in the 
kingdom, and was crowned. He reigned eleven years, but 



318 ANNALS OP BOGER DE HOVEDMT. A.D. 1169. 

would never take a wife. In his days God wrought many 
wondrous things in his behalf in the land of Jerusalem. For 
although he was afflicted with leprosy, still, a multitude of 
the pagans was repeatedly routed by him and utterly de- 
stroyed. This Baldwin the Leper, by the advice of his chief 
men, sent for William, the marquis of Montferrat, and gave 
him to wife his sister, Sibylla, together with the earldom of 
Joppa. This marquis William had by Sibylla, his wife, one 
son, named Baldwin, whom Baldwin the Leper made his 
heir, and abdicating the kingdom, gave it to this youth Bald- 
win, his nephew, and caused him to be clowned. Shortly 
after, the marquis William, the father of the youth Bald- 
win, who was now king, departed this life, and Sibylla, his 
wife, the mother of the king, married the above-named Guido 
de Lusignan. Shortly after this, king Baldwin the Leper 
died, and the youth Baldwin, his nephew, reigned in his 
stead two years and a half. Guido de Lusignan, the earl of 
Joppa, gave Milicent, his wife's sister, in marriage to Amfrid 
de Tours. 

In the year of grace 1169, being the fifteenth year of the 
reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, Nigel, 
bishop of Ely, departed this life ; Godfrey of Finchale, a vene- 
rable recluse and holy monk, also departed unto the Lord. 

In the same year, Henry, king of England, fearing that the 
blessed Thomas, the archbishop of Canterbury, would pronounce 
sentence of excommunication against his own person, and lay an 
interdict on his kingdom, appealed in behalf of himself and 
his kingdom, to the presence of the Supreme Pontiff; and 
sending envoys to him, requested that he would send one 
or two legates a latere to England, to enquire into the dis- 
pute which existed between him and Thomas, the archbishop 
of Canterbury, and terminate it to the honor of God and of 
the Holy Church ; and also that the persons above-named, 
whom the archbishop of Canterbury had excommunicated, 
might in the meantime be absolved. Wherefore our lord the 
pope wrote to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Alexander to Henry, king of England. 
"Alexander the bishop, servant of the servants of God, 
to Henry, the illustrious king of the English, health and the 
Apostolic benediction. The envoys sent by your mightiness, 






A.D. 1169. 1ETTER OF POPE ALEXANDEB TO KING HEKKT 319 

namely, our well-beloved sons Robert Cumin and Ralph de 
Tameworde, 85 persons devoted to ourselves and to the Church 
of God, and, as we believe, most faithful servants to your 
royal highness, together with the letter which your excellency 
transmitted unto us by their hands, we have received with 
the more kindly feelings, and have with the greater favour and 
honor granted the prayer thereof, the more fully we were 
sensible that they had been sent by a mighty prince and most 
Christian king : to whom, indeed, we wish, so far as with the 
will of God we may, all glory and honor ; and whose advantage, 
in every way in which we becomingly may, both we and our 
brethren and the whole Church wish for the more ardently, the 
more that in our greatest necessity we have experienced your 
most devoted sincerity towards us. For our memory at no time 
hereafter will be able possibly to lose the recollection of the 
marks of duty shown to us by you at a time so opportune, nor 
will they by any lapse of time be overshadowed in the sight of 
the church. We have thought proper to send certain persons as 
legates a latere, according to your request, although it seemed to 
us most inconvenient and most difficult at this time to part with 
any, when we are standing in need of the presence and counsel of 
our brethren, and especially of those whom you require, being 
not unmindful however, as we have already mentioned, of 
your praiseworthy and distinguished dutifulness to us. These 
we have thought fit to send to the presence of your highness, 
with full powers to take cognizance of and give judgment upon 
the ecclesiastical matters which are the subject of dispute be- 
tween you and our venerable brother, the archbishop of Canter- 
bury, as also, the controversy which exists between the said 
archbishop and the bishops of your kingdom with regard to 
the appeal made unto ourselves, and such other matters in 
dispute in your kingdom as they shall be enabled to bring 
to a satisfactory conclusion, and, according as the Lord shall give 
them His assistance therein, to terminate the same in a can- 
onical manner. "We shall by all means also forbid the said arch- 
bishop in any way to attempt to molest, or disturb, or disquiet 
either yourself, or your people, or the kingdom entrusted to 
your government, until these matters in dispute shall have been 
Drought to a legitimate conclusion. But, if the aforesaid arch- 
bishop shall, in the meantime, pronounce any sentence upon 
w Tarn worth. 



320 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1169. 

you, or your kingdom, or any person in your realm, we do pro- 
nounce the same to be null and void, and not in any way to 
affect you. To put an end to such a course, and as a proof of 
our wishes, you are, in case necessity shall arise for so doing, 
to produce this present letter. But, otherwise, we do beg of 
your serene highness, and strongly recommend you, not to let 
this letter or the tenor thereof be known to any person whatso- 
ever, but to keep it entirely secret. And as for those persons of 
your household and your advisers, whom the said archbishop 
has already subjected to sentence of excommunication, the parties 
sent by us will, with the Lord's assistance, absolve them. But 
if, in the meantime, any one of them shall be in fear of imme- 
diate death, we do grant that he may be absolved by any bishop, 
or religious and discreet man, on the oath being administered 
to him, according to the custom of the Church, that if he shall 
recover he will consider himself bound to obey our mandates." 

Upon this, the above-mentioned legates of our lord the pope 
having arrived in Normandy, certain of the suffragans of the 
church of Canterbury wrote to the following effect : 

" Cure is preferable to complaint. But, our sins requiring 
the same, our holy mother the Church has been placed between 
the hammer and the anvil, and, unless the Divine mercy shall 
look down upon her, will shortly feel the blow of that hammer. 
For, the wickedness of the schismatics waxing strong, for defend- 
ing his faith and for his love of justice, our father has been exiled 
by our other father from his country, and the hardened mind of 
Pharaoh forbids him liberty to return to his see. Added to this, 
in things spiritual as well as in things temporal the church of 
Canterbury is sadly impoverished. Like a ship upon the sea de- 
prived of her pilot, she is buffeted to and fro, and is exposed to 
the winds, while, by the royal authority, her shepherd is for- 
bidden to remain within the territories of his own country. 
He, wise though he may be, at his own peril and that of his 
Church, as also of ourselves, has, together with himself, ex- 
posed us to the bitterness of penalties and of labours; not 
reflecting that to use soothing methods will not detract from 
his own power. And further, although with all our affec- 
tions we sympathize with his sufferings, he has proved ungrate- 
ful towards us, and, although we are in the same condemnation, 
ceases not to persecute us. For, between himself and the 
most serene king of the English, a certain controversy arose : 



A.D. 1169. LETTEE OF THE SUFFRAGAN BISHOPS. 321 

at the desire of both, a certain day was fixed upon, that, upon 
the same, with the mediation of justice, an end might be put to 
this controversy. Upon that day, in obedience to the royal 
command, the archbishops, bishops, and other heads of the 
Church, were convoked, in order that the more extensive 
the council then held, the more manifest might be the ex- 
posure of fraud and malice. On the day appointed, this 
disturber of the kingdom and of the Church presents himself 
before the face of the Catholic king, and, being distrustful of 
the nature of his own merits, arms himself with the resemblance 
of the cross of our Lord, as though about to come into the 
presence of a tyrant. Nor yet even at this was the king's 
majesty offended, but he entrusted the judgment of his cause 
to the fidelity of the bishops, that so he might be free from 
all suspicion. It remained, therefore, for the bishops to end 
the dispute by pronouncing judgment, that they might thereby 
bring the disputants to a reconciliation, and bury in oblivion the 
causes of their dissensions. He, however, came thither, and 
forbade sentence to be pronounced upon himself before the king, 
that so the royal mind might be the more violently inflamed 
to anger. The result of these excesses is, that the author thereof 
is in b6 duty bound to expose himself to the vengeance of every 
one, being ashamed to deprecate a merited retribution, in not 
pausing at offending a most powerful prince in the days of the 
persecution of the Church. For it is his offence that has re- 
doubled the weight of the blows of persecution. It would 
have been better for himself if he had placed a curb upon his 
prosperity, lest, while striving presumptuously to arrive at the 
summit of felicity, he might, in return for his presumption, 
be thrust down to a lower place. And, if the misfortunes of 
the Church did not move him, he ought at least to have been 
dfssuaded from acting in opposition to the king by the advance- 
ment, both in riches and honors, which the king had bestowed 
upon him. Whereas, on the other hand, he faces him as an 
adversary, and objects, that for him to stand in judgment 
before the king would be a diminution of the dignity of 
the Apostolic See. But if he was not aware that in that 
judgment there was but little derogatory to the dignity of the 
Church, still, it was his duty to have concealed his feelings for 

86 This is probably the meaning of the passage, but it is in an extremely 
corrupt state. 

VOL. I. T 



322 ANNALS OP BQGEB BE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1169. 

a time, in order that peace might be restored unto the Church. 
Again, another objection that he takes, ascribing to himself 
the title of father, is, that it seems to savour of arrogance for 
sons to meet together for the condemnation of their father, a 
thing that they ought by no means to do. But, if he really 
had been a father, in the first place his humility would have 
moderated the pride of his sons, in order that hatred of the 
father might not spring up in those sons. Therefore, most holy 
fathers, it is clear from what is stated above, that our adver- 
sary ought to fail in his pretences, being actuated by the ma- 
lignity of his hatred alone, and supported by no reasonable 
grounds whatsoever, and inasmuch as the care of all the 
churches is known at present to rest upon ourselves." 

When Thomas, the archbishop of Canterbury, and some of 
his fellow-exiles, came to an interview with the legates, on the 
octave of Saint Martin, between Gisors and Trie, the legates 
discoursed at length with the archbishop on the Christian 
charity of our lord the pope, the anxiety which the Roman 
Church had hitherto manifested in his behalf, their own 
labours and the perils of their journey, the mighty power 
of the king of England, the necessities of the Church, the 
wickedness of the times, the love and kindness which the 
king of England had manifested towards him, and the honor 
which the king had always paid him. They also added the 
complaints, and the injuries which the king of England com- 
plained that he had suffered at his hands, laying it to his 
charge, among other things, that he had excited the king of 
the Franks to wage war against him, and sought his advice 
how they might be enabled to appease such vast indignation, 
because they were well aware that no remedy could be ap- 
plied to such dangers without great humility, moderation, and 
marks of respect. 

But the archbishop of Canterbury, in all humility and meek- 
ness of spirit, after duly returning thanks to our lord the pope 
and to them, made answer to each point, upon true and pro- 
bable grounds, showing the emptiness of the king's complaints, 
and fully explaining the injuries and intolerable losses of the 
Church. And, inasmuch as they required of him humility and 
marks of respect, he answered that he would most willingly 
show all humility, and the greatest possible honor and respect, 
saving always the honor of God, the liberties of the Church, 



A.D. 11G9. THE ABCHBISHOP'S BEPLT 10 THE LEGATES. 323 

the dignities belonging to his own person, and the possessions of 
the churches; and if anything should seem to them to require 
to be added, or to be taken away, or to be changed, he en- 
treated that they would give him their advice, it being his fixed 
determination to acquiesce therein, saving always the conditions 
of his profession and orders. To this, however, they made an- 
swer, that they had come not to advise him, but to seek his 
advice, and to prepare the way for a reconciliation. 

They also made enquiry of the archbishop, whether, in the 
presence of the legates, he was willing to promise to observe 
the customs which the kings had made use of in the times of 
his predecessors, and thus, all complaints being hushed up, to 
be reinstated in the king's favour, and return to his see and 
the performance of his duties, and the enjoyment of peace by 
him and his people ? To this the archbishop made answer, that 
no one of his predecessors, under any of the kings, had been 
bound to make this profession, and that he, with the help of 
God, would never promise to observe customs, which were 
openly opposed to the law of God, and, besides that, rooted out 
the privileges derived from the Apostles, and destroyed the 
liberties of the Church ; which, also, our lord the pope, at Sens, 
in their presence, and in that of many others, had condemned, 
and some of which, he himself subsequently thereto, following 
the authority of our lord the pope, had subjected, together with 
those who observed them, to the penalties of excommunication, 
as the Catholic church in many councils is known to have done. 

Upon this, he was asked to promise, if not a confirmation of 
them, at least connivance and toleration on his part, or, not 
making mention in any way of the customs, to return to his see 
and his former state of tranquillity. To this the archbishop 
made answer : " It is a proverb among the people of our na- 
flon, that ' silence looks like assent;' " and observed that, while 
the king would appear to be left in possession of these customs, 
and would unjustly and violently compel the Church to the 
Observance of them, if all opposition should cease, through 
silence being obtained on his part, the authority of the le- 
gates being interposed for that purpose, the king would 
immediately appear to himself and to others to have gained 
his point in the contest. He also added, that he would go 
into exile, be perpetually proscribed, and, if God so ordained 
it, die, in defence of justice, rather than obtain a peace of this 






324 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEIf. A.D. 1169. 

description, to the loss of his salvation, and to the prejudice of 
the liberties of the Church. For that there is a God who, in 
such a case, forbids the priesthood to be silent, and, in case 
they dissemble, has prepared hell for their portion, where there 
will be no dissembling of their punishment. 

The book of the abominations 87 was also read by him, and 
he made enquiry of the cardinals, whether it was lawful for 
such things to be put in practice by Christians, much more 
concealed from their pastors ? 

They then proceeded to another question, enquiring whether 
he would be willing to abide by their judgment upon the mat- 
ters in dispute between himself and the king ? To this he 
made answer, that he fully confided in the integrity of his 
cause ; and that when he himself and his people, who had been 
for a long time left destitute, should have been fully restored to 
the enjoyment of everything, taking into consideration causes, 
and circumstances, and times, he would readily obey the law, 
and that he neither could nor would decline it, but, on the 
contrary, both where, and when, and how, it should be his 
duty, would submit to the judgment of him or them, by whose 
judgment, whether one or more, our lord the pope should have 
made it his determination to abide. That, in the meantime, he 
and his people could not be urged on to litigation, and not even 
poverty would have this effect, even though he should have 
been in want of victuals, had he not been aided with money 
by the most Christian king of the Franks. Yet he was unwil- 
ling, at the first glance, to shrink from judgment, even though 
he might have the best possible grounds for suspecting either 
of them, lest he might thereby seem to justify the king's 
cause, nor yet did he desire to engage in litigation before he 
had been entirely restored, in order that he might thereby 
be enabled to support his own cause. 

At this time Louis, king of the Franks, collecting a large 
army, entered Normandy, and burned the town of Andely, 
belonging to Hotrod, archbishop of Kouen, Henry, king of 
England, making no resistance thereto : this was done in 
revenge for Chaumont, a fine castle belonging to the king of 
France, which the above-named king of England had burned 
in the preceding year by his Welchmen. In the same year, 

91 This was a book containing anathemas against persons guilty of cer- 
tain practices therein censured by the Church. 



AD. 1170. KING HENKY COMES TO LONDON. 325 

Henry, king of England, took by storm a very strongly fortified 
castle, which was called Finuel, and levelled it with the 
ground . From the same year in which kings had ceased to reign 
in Brittany, two earls had begun to rule in their stead. But, 
inasmuch as all power is ever impatient of a partner, they 
harassed each other with various dissensions. Conan at 
length, by right of succession, having obtained both earl- 
doms, when he died, left as his heir his daughter by the sister 
of the king of the Scots. The king of the English taking her 
as a wife for his son Geoffrey, and showing himself active in 
the establishment of peace throughout Brittany, conciliated 
the good feelings of both the clergy and the commonalty. 

In the year 1170, being the sixteenth year of the reign of 
king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said king Henry 
kept the solemn festival at Nantes, in Brittany, on the day 
of the Nativity of our Lord, which took place on the fifth 
day of the week. After this, the king made a hostile attack 
upon the lands of earl Eudo, 88 and laid waste nearly the whole 
thereof, and compelled earl Eudo himself to surrender. 

After this, in the first week of the month of March, he crossed 
over from Normandy to England, between Barbeflet 89 and 
Portsmouth ; on which passage, after being tossed about by a 
most dreadful storm, from the hour of midnight until the ninth 
hour of the following day, with great difficulty he reached 
England and landed at Portsmouth. But nearly all the other 
ships that were with him were broken and shattered, and 
reached various ports of England just as the strength of the 
gale drove them along. One of them, however, which was a 
better and more recently built vessel than all the rest, but 
more unfortunate, went down, together with Henry de Agnelles 
^id his two sons, Gilbert de Sulemny, and master Ralph de 
Beaumont, a physician, and one of the king's household, to- 
gether with other men and women, to the number of four 
hundred. 

' Shortly after this, king Henry knighted David, the brother 
of William, king of the Scots. In the same year, king Henry 
passed the festival of Easter at Windsor. After this, the 
king came to London, and there deprived of their offices nearly 
all the sheriffs of England, and, having made inquisition as to 
their levies upon the oaths of the people of his kingdom, fined 
8 * Misprinted Ludo. 89 Harfleur. 



326 AXNAXS OF ItOGEB DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1170. 

them. After this, at the feast of Saint Barnabas 90 the Apostle, 
the said king held a great council at London, with the 
nobles and chief men of his kingdom, upon the coronation of 
his son, Henry ; and on the Lord's day following, which took 
place on the seventeenth day before the calends of July, the 
clergy and people assembling and agreeing thereto, he him- 
self caused the above-named Henry, his son, to be crowned 
and consecrated king at "Westminster, by Roger, arch- 
bishop of York, who was assisted in this duty by Hugh, 
bishop of Durham, Walter, bishop of Kochester, Gilbert, 
bishop of London, and Jocelyn, bishop of Salisbury ; no men- 
tion whatever being made of the blessed Thomas, archbishop of 
Canterbury, to whom by right of his see the coronation and 
consecration belonged. The day after this coronation, the 
king, his father, made "William, king of the Scots, and David, 
his brother, and the earls and barons of the kingdom, pay 
homage to the new king, and swear 'fealty to him against all 
men, saving their fealty to himself. 

When it became known to Louis, king of the Franks, that 
his daughter Margaret had not been crowned together with 
her husband, the king of England, he assembled a large army, 
and hostilely invaded Normandy. On hearing of this, the king of 
England, the father, leaving the king his son behind in England, 
crossed over into Normandy, and made peace with king Louis, 
at a conference held at Vendosme, on the festival of Saint 
Mary Magdalene, promising that next year he would cause his 
son to be crowned again, and his wife with him. On returning 
from this conference, the king, the father, came into Nor- 
mandy, and was attacked at Motamgran 9 ' by a grievous 
malady, on which he divided his dominions among his sons in 
the following manner: 

He gave to his son Eichard the dukedom of Aquitaine, and 
all the lauds which he had received with his mother, queen 
Eleanor ; and to his son Geoffrey he gave Brittany, with 
Alice, the daughter of earl Conan, whom he had obtained as 
his wife, from Louis, king of the Franks. To king Henry, 
his son, he gave Normandy, and all the lands which had be- 
longed to his father, Geoffrey, earl of Anjou. These three 
sons he also made do homage to Louis, king of France. To 

90 This seems a better reading than Saint Bernard. 
4(1 This is probably a mistake for Veruon. 



A.D. 1170. POPE AIEXAWDEE'S LETTEE TO THE PRELATES. 327 

John, his youngest son, who was as yet an infant, he gave the 
earldom of Mortaigne. A considerable time after this, king 
Henry, the father, on recovering from his illness, went on a 
pilgrimage to Saint Mary of Koquemadour. 

In the meantime, the blessed Thomas, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, now passing his sixth year in exile, made complaint to 
Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff, against Hoger, the archbishop 
of York, and the above-named four bishops who had assisted him 
at the coronation of the new king, in the province of Canter- 
bury ; whereupon, at his instance, the Supreme Pontiff excom- 
municated the bishops of London, Rochester, and Salisbury, 
and the archbishop of York, and suspended Hugh, the bishop 
of Durham, from all his episcopal duties. For which purpose 
he wrote to them to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Alexander to Roger, archbishop of York, and 
Hugh, bishop of Durham. 

"Alexander, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, 
to his venerable brethren, Pu>ger, archbishop of York, and 
Hugh, bishop of Durham, health and the Apostolical benedic- 
tion. Although you have shown yourselves praiseworthy 
and pleasing unto us in many respects, and we do sincerely 
embrace you in the arms of Christian love ; still, for all this, 
we ought not to omit that those things which have been done by 
you, and which, remain unconnected, beget death, and to remind 
you, and correct you in our zeal for what is right, as the Lord 
says by His prophet, 92 ' When I say unto the wicked, thou 
shalt surely die ; and thou givest him not warning, nor 
speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his 
Hfe ; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, and his 
blood will I require at thine hand.' For the persecution of the 
English Church, and the diminution of her liberties which have 
taken place through the conduct of your king, whether of his 
own accord, or whether rather at the suggestion of others, have 
for this long time past greatly afflicted our mind, and caused us 
no small grief and anxiety. For whereas it was his duty to 
have thought of correcting those things which have been wrong- 
fully done by his predecessors, rather adding prevarications to 
prevarications, he has both placed and established customs thus 
evil under the protection of the royal dignity. Under these, both 
92 Ezekiel iii. 18. 



328 ANNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1170. 

the liberties of the Church are destroyed, and the decrees of the 
successors of the Apostles are, as far as possible, deprived of their 
validity. Nor has he thought that it ought to suffice, if under 
him the Divine laws in the kingdom of England should be re- 
duced to silence and to nothingness, unless he should also trans- 
mit his sins to his heirs, and cause his kingdom long to exist 
without the ephod and without the pall. 93 For this reason it is 
that these usurpations, so unrighteous and so utterly unjusti- 
fiable, he has caused to be confirmed by your oath, and by those 
of others of our brethren and fellow bishops, and has pronounced 
as an enemy whatever person should think fit to differ from these 
unrighteous ordinances. This is proved by the exile of our ve- 
nerable brother, Thomas, the archbishop of Canterbury ; this is 
also shewn by the dreadful proscription of his clergy and kin- 
dred, and of those even who, still hanging at their mother's 
breasts, were crying in the cradle. Even the fear of death is 
appealed to, if the mind of any one is aroused, in contradiction to 
these enactments, a desire to obey the Divine laws. We ourselves, 
by whose judgment those prevarications ought to have been 
corrected or punished, were with much urgency on the occasion 
of a time of trouble pressed to confirm the same. Strong en- 
deavours were also made, and no efforts were spared, that we 
might, at a time when they had not been explained to us, con- 
fer upon these usurpations, the confirmation of the Apostolical 
authority. This indeed took place at the very beginning. In 
process oftime, however, the archbishop above-named being sent 
into exile for having performed the duty of his pastoral office, 
and frequently requesting from our assistance the customary aid 
of the Roman Church, we sent to the king before-mentioned, 
some of the best and most eminent of our brethren ; we also 
sent other ecclesiastical persons, and did imagine that by our hu- 
mility and forbearance his obduracy might be surmounted : and 
so it should have been, for Solomon says, ' By long forbear- 
ance is a prince softened, and a soft tongue breaketh anger.' 94 
But he, trifling. with our long-suffering by the manifold arts 
of his envoys, seems so utterly to have hardened his heart 
against our advice, that he will not curb his wrath against 

93 The " superhumerale," or " pall," was in reality the same garment 
as the ephod. 

91 Proverbs xxv. 15. In our version, " the bone" stands in place of 
" anger." 



A.D. 1170. POPE ALEXANDER'S LETTEB TO THE PRELATES. 329 

the above-named archbishop, nor allow any portion to be 
withdrawn, of those unrighteous statutes, but will rather 
afflict the church of Canterbury with the entire loss of its 
possessions, and by these means despoil it of its ancient dignity 
in the ecclesiastical office. For lately, when he wished his 
son to be crowned, despising the said archbishop, to whom 
that duty is said of ancient right to belong, by your hand, 
brother archbishop, he caused the crown of the kingdom to be 
placed on his head in the province of another. Besides, at his 
coronation, no surety was given, according to usual custom, for 
preserving the liberties of the Church, or indeed, according to 
report, even demanded ; but on the contrary, it is said to have 
been confirmed upon oath, that it is the duty of all to keep 
inviolate the customs of the kingdom, which they say were 
established by his grandfather, and by reason of which the 
dignity of the Church is endangered. Although in acting thus, 
the obstinacy of the above-named king greatly vexes us, yet 
we are still more moved by the weakness of yourselves and 
of our other fellow-bishops, who, and with grief we say it, 
have become as it were rams having no horns, and have fled 
without courage from before the face of their pursuer. For 
although, brother archbishop, it might possibly have been 
allowable for you to act thus in your own province, still, how 
it was allowable for you in the province of another, and of him 
in especial, who was almost the only one to go forth in exile 
for justice and thereby to give glory to God, we are unable to 
discover either upon the grounds of common sense, or according 
to the constitutions of the holy fathers. But should any one, 
by way of excuse for so great a betrayal, make it an ob- 
jection that in other kingdoms many and grave enormities 
are perpetrated, in truth we can make answer, that we find no 
kingdom that as yet has rushed into so great a contempt of the 
Divine laws, as to cause enormities so manifest to be pro- 
mulgated by the writings and oaths of bishops, unless, in- 
deed, any one should have the impudence to bring that for- 
ward, of which the schismatics who have been lately cut off from 
communion with the faithful, have with damnable and un- 
heard-of pride been guilty. Wherefore, inasmuch as, accord- 
ing to the words of the prophet, the evil has been done among 
you, to an extent beyond all other provinces in his usur- 
pations, and after having confirmed these unrighteous cus- 






330 AJfNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1170. 

toms by oath, you have not aroused yourselves to resume the 
shield of faith, in order that you might stand in the house of 
the Lord in the day of battle, but have laid your bodies oa the 
ground, that there might be a way for him to pass over you ; 
and lest if we should be any longer silent, we might, together 
with you, be involved on the day of judgment in the same sen- 
tence of damnation, by the authority of the Eoman Church, of 
which with the aid of the Lord we are the servant, we do sus- 
pend you from all duties of the episcopal office, hoping that at 
least, under discipline and paternal correction, you will return to 
a sense of your duty, and, as you ought, apply yourselves to 
defending the liberties of the Church. But if not even then you 
resume the zeal that ought to belong to your ecclesiastical office, 
then shall we, by the Lord's assistance, have recourse to that 
which is now impending over you. Be it then your care that 
that is not said to you, which was said to one by the prophet : 
' Because thou hast rejected what is holy, I will also reject 
thee, so that thou shalt be no priest to me.' 93 For, as we, 
God so disposing, according to His good pleasure, are seen to 
occupy the place of him who could be withheld from preaching 
the word of God neither by stripes nor by bonds, we are 
bound, not under an ambiguous expectation of peace, to place 
the money of the Divine word which has been entrusted to us 
in a napkin, and so keep it tied up until the hour for getting in 
the profit thereof shall arrive, and the creditor coming shall 
strictly demand of us an account thereof." 

In the meantime, Louis, king of the Franks, and the arch- 
bishops, bishops, and nobles of the kingdom of France, be- 
sought the Roman Pontiff in behalf of the archbishop of Can- 
terbury, by the love which they bore him, and with protesta- 
tions of implicit obedience, no longer to admit the excuses 
and delays which the king of England continually put for- 
ward, as he loved the kingdom of France and the honor of 
the Apostolic See. William, the bishop of Sens, also, being 
astonished at the desolate condition of the English church, 
repaired to the Apostolic See, and obtained of the Roman 
Church, that, an end being put to all appeals, the king of 
the English should be subjected to excommunication, and 
his kingdom to interdict, unless peace were restored to the 
church of Canterbury. Thus, at last, it pleased God, the 
dispenser of all things, to recompense the merits of His dearly 
93 Hos. iv. 6, slightly varied. 



A.D. 1170. AECHBISHO? THOMAS RETTJBNS TO ENGLAND. 



331 



beloved Thomas, and to crown his long labours with the vic- 
torious palm of martyrdom. He, therefore, brought the king 
of England to a better frame of mind, who, through the pater- 
nal exhortation of our lord the pope, and by the advice of 
the king of the Franks and of many bishops, received the 
archbishop again into favour, and allowed him to return to 
his church. 

Accordingly, peace was established between the archbishop 
and the king of England, on the fourth day before the ides of 
October, being the second day of the week, at Montluet, be- 
tween Tours and Amboise, upon which, everything being 
arranged, they returned, each to his place. Thomas, the 
archbishop of Canterbury, returned to the abbey of Saint 
Columba, where he had resided for nearly the last four years. 
But, one day while the said archbishop lay there, prostrated 
in prayer before a certain altar in the church, he heard a 
voice from heaven saying to him, " Arise quickly, and go unto 
thy see, and thou shalt glorify my Church with thy blood, and 
thou shalt be glorified in me." Thereupon, at the commence- 
ment of the seventh year of his banishment, when he was 
now beloved by God and sanctified by spiritual exercises, and 
rendered more perfect by the sevenfold grace of the Holy Ghost, 
he hastened with all speed to return to his see. For the pious 
father was unwilling any longer to leave the church of Canter- 
bury desolate ; or else it was, because, as some believe, he had 
seen in the spirit the glories of his contest drawing to a close, 
or through a fear that, by dying elsewhere, he might be 
depriving his own see of the honor of his martyrdom. 

As for his life, it was perfectly unimpeachable before God 
and man. To arise before daybreak did not seem to him a 
vain thing, as he knew that the Lord has promised a crown 
lo the watchful. For every day he arose before daybreak, 
while all the rest were asleep, and entering his oratory would 
pray there for a long time ; and then returning, he would 
awake his chaplains and clerks from their slumbers, and, the 
matins and the hours 95 of the day being chaunted, devoutly cele- 
brate the mass ; and every day and night he received three orfive 
flagellations from the hand of a priest. After the celebration 

' The " horae" were services performed with chaunts at certain hours 
in the day : they were seven in number, and were styled " matutina, 
prima, tertia, sexta, nona, vespera," and " completorium." 



332 ANNALS OF KOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1170 

of the mass, every day he re-entered his oratory, and, shutting 
the door after him, devoted himself to prayer with abundant 
tears ; and no one but God alone knew the manner in which 
he afflicted his flesh. And thus did he do daily unto his flesh 
until the hour for dining, unless some unusual solemnity or 
remarkable cause prevented it. On coming forth from his 
oratory he would come to dine among his people, not that 
he might sate his body with costly food, but that he might 
make his household cheerful thereby, and that he might fill 
the poor ones of the Lord with good things, whom, according 
to his means, he daily increased in numbers. And although 
costly and exquisite food and drink were set before him, still, 
his only food and drink were bread and water. 

One day, while the archbishop was sitting at the table of 
Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff, a person who was aware of this 
secret, placed before him a cup full of water. On the Supreme 
Pontiff taking it up, and tasting it, he found it to be the purest 
wine, and delicious to drink; on which he said: "I thought 
that this was water ;" and on replacing the cup before the arch- 
bishop, the wine immediately returned to its former taste of 
water. Oh wondrous change by the right hand of the Most 
High ! Every day, when the archbishop arose from dinner, 
unless more important business prevented him, he always de- 
voted himself to reading the Scriptures until the hour of 
vespers, at the time of sunset. His bed was covered with soft 
coverlets and cloths of silk, embroidered on the surface with 
gold wrought therein ; and while other persons were asleep, he 
alone used to lie on the bare floor before his bed, repeating psalms 
and hymns, and never ceasing from prayers, until at last, over- 
come with fatigue, he would gradually recline his head upon 
a stone put beneath it in place of a pillow : and thus would 
his eyes enjoy sleep, while his heart was ever watchful for the 
Lord. His inner garment was of coarse sackcloth made of 
goats' hair; with which his whole body was covered from the 
arms down to the knees. But his outer garments were remark- 
able for their splendour and extreme costliness, to the end that, 
thus deceiving human eyes, he might please the sight of 
God. There was no individual acquainted with this secret 
of his way of living, with the exception of two one of whom 
was Robert, canon of Merton, his chaplain, and the name of 
the other was Brun, who had charge of his sackcloth gar- 



A.D. 1170. PERSECUTION OF ABCHBISHOP THOMAS. 333 

ments, and washed them when necessary ; and they were bound 
by their words and oaths that, during his life, they would dis- 
close these facts to no one. 

After the transactions above related, archbishop Thomas 
came to Witsand, but, upon hearing that Roger, archbishop of 
York, and the bishops of London and Salisbury, were at Dover, 
for the purpose of meeting him, he was unwilling to proceed 
thither, but landed in England at Sandwich. Having thus 
crossed the sea, the archbishop and future martyr was received 
in his church with great thankfulness, and with honor and 
glory, and especially by the monks, in solemn procession, all 
weeping for joy, and exclaiming, as they gave thanks, "Blessed 
is he, who cometh in the name of the Lord." But he, like a 
good father, receiving them all with the kiss of peace, admo- 
nished them with paternal exhortations, and instructed them to 
love the brotherhood, to obey God, to persevere in doing good, 
and to strive even to the death for the law of God. 

At this period, Henry, king of England, the son of king 
Henry, was in England, and the Nativity of our Lord was 
approaching, which that king, with the nobles of his land, 
was about to celebrate with the usual solemnities. To this 
celebration it was the intention of the blessed Thomas, although 
not invited, to go. However, when he had come to London, 
Jocelyn, the queen's brother, came to him, and forbade him, in 
the king's name, to go any further, upon which the blessed 
Thomas returned to Canterbury. 

Accordingly, again was this champion of Christ afflicted with 
injuries and hardships still more atrocious, beyond measure 
and number, and, by public proclamation, enjoined not to go 
beyond the limits of his church. Whoever showed to him, 
or to any one of his household, a cheerful countenance, was held 
t8 be a public enemy. However, all these things the man of God 
endured with great patience, and staying among those of his 
own household, edified them all with his conversation and with 
words of exhortation : and once more the archbishop took his 
seat in his church, fearless, and awaiting the hour at which 
he should receive from God the crown of martyrdom. For, 
being warned by many beforehand, he knew that his lile 
would be but short, and that death was at the gates. - 

Upon this, as though he had but that moment commenced 
to live, he used all endeavours, by spiritual exercises, to 



334 ANNALS OF EOGEU DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1171. 

redeem the moments of his past life ; and knowing that this 
life is but a journey and a warfare, in order that he might be 
sanctified in body, and disembarassed in spirit by vices, 
armed with virtues, he girded himself up for the race, and pre- 
pared himself for the struggle of the conflict. Therefore, in 
finishing his race, he ran " not as uncertainly," and, in fight- 
ing well, he did not "fight as one that beateth the air." 93 
Then almost all his thoughts and discourse were upon the 
end of this life and the troubles of its path. Sometimes, 
also, in his discourses delivered to his brethren, the monks of 
the church of Canterbury, and the clergy and people of that 
city, he would say : "I have come to you to die among you." 
And sometimes he would say : "In this church there are 
martyrs, and, before long, God will increase the number of 
them." This he said, signifying by what death he should 
glorify the Lord. 

At this period Henry, king of England, the father, alleged 
that the archbishopric of Bourges of right belonged to the 
dukedom of Aquitaine, but Louis, king of France, in every 
way opposed that view. In consequence of this, a serious 
disagreement arose between them, and each raised a large 
army; upon which, the king of England with his forces 
marched into Berry, as far as Montluc, with the intention of 
going still further ; for, relying on the admission of the arch- 
bishop of Bourges when on the point of death and stating in 
his confession that by right the archbishopric of Bourges 
belonged to the dukedom of Aquitaine, he was in hopes that 
he should gain it. However, Louis, king of France, arrived 
there before him, upon which, the king of England, being 
deceived in his expectations, granted and accepted a cessation 
of hostilities until the feast of Saint Hilary. 

In the year of grace 1171, being the seventeenth year of 
the reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the 
said king was at Bure, in Normandy, on the day of the Nati- 
vity of our Lord, being the sixth day of the week; and queen 
Eleanor and his sons, Richard, Geoffrey, and John, were with 
him. In the same year, his son Henry, king of England, was in 
England. On the same day, the blessed Thomas, the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, being then at Canterbury, after delivering 
a sermon to the people, excommunicated Egbert de Broc, who, 
the day before, had cut off the tail of one of his sumpter-horses. 
95 1 Cor. ix. 27 



A.D. 1171. ASSASSINATION OF SAINT TKOMAS. 335 

Hardly had the father been residing one month in his see, 
when lo ! on the fifth day of the feast of the Nativity of our 
Lord, there came to Canterbury four knights, or rather sworn 
satellites of Satan, whose names were as follow : William 
de Tracy, Hugh de Morville, Richard Briton, and Reginald 
Fitz-Urse, men of families remarkable for their respectability, 
but destined, by their daring to commit so enormous a crime, 
to blemish the glories of knighthood and the honors of their 
ancestors with perpetual ignominy. Accordingly, these persons 
made their way into the presence of the archbishop, and, as 
nothing salutary 96 was the object of their message, in the malice 
they had conceived they omitted pronouncing any salutation, 
and addressed him in an insolent and haughty manner. 
Threats were exchanged on both sides, and threat was an- 
swered with threat. At last, leaving behind them abuse 
and insults, they departed : but, immediately after, they re- 
turned and broke into the cloister of the monks, with a large 
retinue of armed men, being also armed themselves. Now 
the archbishop, with meekness and self-possession, had gone 
before them to the choir of the church, the monks having 
entreated, nay, forced him, on account of the solemnity of 
the season, to perform the service at vespers. When he per- 
ceived these armed men behind him, in the middle of the 
cloisters, it might have been expected that their own malig- 
nant feelings would have warned them to leave the church ; 
but, neither did reverence for the solemn occasion dissuade 
them from their crime, nor the innocence of the patriarch 
prevent them from shedding his blood. Indeed, so entirely 
had their shameless determination to perpetrate the crime taken 
possession of them and blinded them, that they neither regarded 
the disgrace to their knighthood, nor took account of any dan- 
ger. Therefore, following the archbishop with headlong and 
heedless steps, with drawn swords, they entered the church, 
and furiously cried aloud, "Where is this traitor?" After 
which, no one making answer, they repeated, " Where is the 
archbishop?" Upon this, he, the confessor, and, shortly to be, 
the martyr in the cause of Christ, being sensible that under 
the first name he was falsely charged, and that, by virtue of 
his office, the other belonged to him, came down from the 

96 He puns upon the resemblance of " salus," " health," and " salu- 
tatio," " a salutation." 



336 AX^ALS OF ROGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1171. 

steps to meet them, and said, "Behold, here am I," showing 
such extraordinary presence of mind, that neither his mind 
seemed agitated by fear nor his body by trepidation. 

On this, in the spirit of his frenzy, one of these fell knights 
made answer to him, "You shall now die, for it is impossible 
for you to live any longer." To which the bishop made an- 
swer, with no less self-possession in his language than in his 
mind, " I am ready to die for my God, and for asserting jus- 
tice and the liberties of the Church ; but, if you seek my life, 
in the name of Almighty God, and under pain of excommu- 
nication, I forbid you, in any way, to hurt any other "person, 
whether monk, or clerk, or layman, whether great or small, 
but let them be as exempt from the penalty as they have 
been guiltless of the cause." These words of his would serve 
to express those of Christ in His passion, when He said, " If 
ye seek me, let these go their way." 

On this, the knights instantly laid hands on him and seized 
him, that, for the perpetration of their design, they might 
drag him out of the church, but were unable so to do. The 
archbishop, on seeing his murderers with drawn swords, after 
the manner of one in prayer, bowed his head, uttering these 
as his last words, " To God and to Saint Mary, and to the 
Saints, the patrons of this church, and to Saint Denis, I com- 
mend myself and the cause of the Church." After this, amid 
all these tortures, this martyr, with unconquerable spirit and 
admirable constancy, uttered not a word or a cry, nor heaved 
a sigh, nor lifted his arm against the smiter ; but, bowing 
his head, which he had exposed to their swords, held it un- 
moved until the deed was completed. 

Upon this, the above-named knights, fearing the multitude 
of persons of both sexes that came running to the spot, hast- 
ened the perpetration of the crime, lest possibly it might 
be left incomplete, and their intentions be frustrated thereby ; 
and while one of them was extending his arm and brand- 
ishing his sword over the head of the archbishop, he cut off. 
the arm of a clerk, whose name was Edward Grimere, and 
at the same time wounded the anointed of the Lord in the 
head. For this clerk had extended his arm over the head of 
the father, in order that he might receive the blow as he struck, 
or rather ward it off thereby. The righteous man still stood 
erect, suffering in the cause of righteousness, like the innocent 
96 St. John xviii. 8. 



A.D. 1171. ASSASSINATION OF ARCHBISHOP THOJIAS. 337 

lamb, without a murmur, without complaint, and, offering him- 
self up as a sacrifice to the Lord, implored the protection of 
the Saints. And, in order that no one of these fell satellites 
might be said to be guiltless in consequence of not having 
touched the archbishop, a second and a third atrociously struck 
the head of the suffering martyr with their swords, and clave 
it asunder, and dashed this victim of the Holy Ghost to the 
ground. The fourth, raging with a still more deadly, or rather 
fiendlike, cruelty, when prostrate and expiring, cut off his 
shorn crown, dashed in his skull, and, thrusting his sword into 
the head, scattered his brains and blood upon the stone pave- 
ment. In the mixture of the two substances the difference 
of colour seemed to remind any one, who considered the matter 
with due piety, of the twofold merits of the martyr. For, in 
the whiteness of the brains was shown the purity of his inno- 
cence, while the purple colour of the blood bespoke his martyr- 
dom. With both these becomingly arrayed, as though with a 
nuptial garment, the martyr Thomas was rendered a worthy 
guest at the heavenly table. Thus, even thus, the martyr 
Thomas become, by virtue of his long-suffering, a precious 
stone of adamant for the heavenly edifice, being squared by 
the blows of swords, was joined in heaven unto Christ, the 
headstone of the corner. Wherefore this our Abel, being made 
perfect by the glory of martyrdom, in a moment lived out 
many ages. 

Thus it was that, at the beginning of the seventh year of 
his exile, the above-named martyr Thomas struggled even unto 
the death for the love of God and the liberties of the Church, 
which had almost entirely perished as regards the English 
Church. He did not stand in fear of the words of the un- 
righteous ; but, having his foundation upon a firm rock, that 
is, upon Christ, for the name of Christ, and in the Church of 
Christ, by the swords of the wicked, on the fifth day of the 
Nativity of our Lord, being the day after Innocents' day, he 
himself an innocent, died. His innocent life and his death, 
as being precious in the eyes of God, innumerable miracles 
deservedly bespeak, which, not only in the place where he rested, 
but in divers nations and kingdoms, were wondrously shown. 

On the same day the passion of the blessed Thomas was re- 
vealed by the Holy Ghost to the blessed Godric, the anchorite, 
at Finchale, a place which is distant from Canterbury more than 

VOL. i. z 



338 AKNAiS OP BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1171. 

a hundred and sixty miles. The monks of the church of 
Canterbury, on this, shut the doors of the church, and so the 
church remained with the celebration of the mass suspended 
for nearly a whole year, until they had received a reconcilia- 
tion of the church 97 from our lord the pope Alexander. But 
the monks took up the body of their martyr, and the first night 
placed it in the choir, performing around it the service for the 
dead. It is also said, and with truthfulness, that when they 
had completed around the body the obsequies of mortality, and 
while he was lying on the bier in the choir, about daybreak he 
raised his left hand and gave them the benediction; after 
which, they buried him in the crypt. 

As for the knights who had perpetrated this unholy deed, 
instantly becoming conscious of the heinousncss of their con- 
duct, and despairing of forgiveness, they did not dare to 
return to the court of the king of England, but retired into 
the western 98 parts of England to Knaresborough, the town 
of Hugh de Morville, and there remained until they had become 
utterly despised by the people of that district. For all per- 
sons avoided any communication with him, and no one would 
eat or drink with them. The consequence was that they ate 
and drank by themselves, and the remnants of their victuals 
were cast out to the dogs, which, when they had tasted thereof, 
refused to eat any more. Behold the signal and deserved ven- 
geance of God ! that those who had despised the anointed of 
the Lord should be despised even by dogs. 

However, a considerable time after this, the four knights 
above-named, who felt the accusation of their own consciences 
for having perpetrated this deed, went to Alexander, the pope 
of Rome, and, being enjoined by him to do penance, set out for 
Jerusalem. Performing penance according to the pope's in- 
junctions, they died at Montenegro, and were buried at Jeru- 
salem before the doors of the Temple. The inscription on 
their tomb was to the following effect : " "Here lie the wretched 
men who martyred the blessed Thomas, archbishop of Canter- 

97 On the reconciliation of a church, it was consecrated anew by the 
bishop, and sprinkled throughout with holy water. 

98 Knaresborough, in Yorkshire, can hardly be said to be in the West of 
England. 

** The latter part of the epitaph is couched in the following jingle : 
"Annus millenus, centenus, septuagenus, 
Primus erat, primus quo ruit ense Thomas." 



A.D. 1171. ABCHBISHOP OF SENS TO POPE ALEXANDEB. 339 

bury. It was in the year one thousand one hundred and 
seventy-one that the primate Thomas died by their swords." 

The Letter of Louis, king of the Franks, to pope Alexander, on 
the death of the blessed Thomas. 

" To his lord and most holy father, Alexander, by the grace 
of God Supreme Pontiff, Louis, king of the Franks, health and 
due reverence. The man who commits violence upon his 
mother revolts against human laws, and he remembers not the 
kindness of his Creator, who is not saddened at violence of- 
fered to the Holy See. But more especially is there ground 
for condolence, and the novelty of a cruelty so unheard-of 
arouses a novelty in sorrow, in that wickedness, making an 
attack upon the holy one of God, has with the sword 
pierced the beloved son of Christ, and more basely even 
than cruelly stabbed him who was the light of the church of 
Canterbury. Let an unheard-of kind of retribution be invented. 
Let the sword of Saint Peter be unsheathed to avenge the 
martyr of Canterbury; inasmuch as, for the universal Church 
does his blood cry aloud, complaining not so much for himself 
as demanding vengeance for the whole Church. Behold ! at 
the tomb of the martyr, as we have had revealed unto us, the 
Divine glory is revealed in miracles, and by Him are Divine 
manifestations made where his remains are deposited, for whose 
name he so valiantly struggled. We bid your Holiness, and 
your brotherhood, farewell in the Lord." 

The Letter of William, archbishop of Sens, to pope Alexander, 
on the death of the blessed Thomas. 

" To his most holy father and lord, Alexander, by the grace 
<4 God, Supreme Pontiff, William, the humble servant of the 
church of Sens, health and due obedience with all duteous- 
ness. To your Apostleship, holy father, all power lias been 
granted in heaven and upon earth. In your hand is a two-edged 
sword ; over nations and over kingdoms are you appointed, to 
bind their kings in fetters, and their nobles in chains of iron. 
Behold therefore, my lord, and consider what vintage they 
have gathered in. For a wild boar from the wood has de- 
stroyed the vineyard of the Lord of Sabaoth, and a single 
wild beast has pastured thereon. The church of Canterbury, 
rather the Church universal, from the ends of the earth, in 

z 2 



340 ANNALS OP BOGEB. DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1172. 

your presence is pouring forth tears that drop blood, and 
sprinkled with bitterness, because she has been set up as 
a mark for the arrow, and has been made a reproach unto 
her neighbours. And those who behold her, wag their 
heads at her and say, where is their God ? But she weeping 
and turning back, is crying aloud in the ears of the Lord 
of Hosts, ' Avenge, Lord, the blood of thy servant and 
martyr, the archbishop of Canterbury, who has been slain, 
nay, crucified, for the liberties of the Church ! Holy father ! a 
thing horrible to be mentioned, a disgraceful crime, an enormous 
piece of flagitiousness has been perpetrated in your days ; a 
thing at which both the ears shall tingle of each that shall hear 
of it, the like of which has not been heard in Theman, 2 and has 
not been seen in Canaan. For another Herod, of the seed of 
Canaan and not of Judah, the offspring of vipers, sending his 
lictors from his side, has not been struck with horror at scar- 
ring with deep wounds the sign of the passion of our Lord, 
which he carried on his head, and at disfiguring with shame- 
ful marks the heavenly likeness. By reason whereof, as all 
the Church affirms, the cause and the penalty equally make him 
to be a martyr. The penalty is our grief, for the sufferings in- 
flicted on him : the cause was the rigour of the ecclesiastical 
censure, because he contended for the law of his God even, 
unto the death. It is therefore your part, most merciful 
father, keeper of the walls of Jerusalem, to apply a remedy to 
what is past, and to employ foresight for the future. For 
what place is there that can be safe, if the rage of a tyrant is 
to stain with blood the Holy of Holies? And is it with 
impunity to tear in pieces the vicegerents of Christ, the foster- 
children of. the Church ? Let then the ecclesiastical laws 
arousef-themselves, let ecclesiastical rights put on their ar- 
mour. Let the vengeance for the blood of this glorious mar- 
tyr, which cries aloud from England, enter into your presence. 
For cry aloud it will, and will arouse not only the earth but 
the heavens as well. And so consult for healing our sorrows, 
that you consult both for your own good name and the liber- 
ties of the Church. As to the rest, we have thought proper to 
inform the fatherly affection of your Holiness, that whereas you 
gave it as your command both to the lord archbishop of Rouen 
and to ourselves, that we should place under an interdict the 
A city of Edom, near Arabia Petraca. 



A.D. 1172. ARCHBISHOP OF SENS TO POPE ALEXANDEB. 341 

lands that belong to the king of England on this side the sea, if 
he should not keep the peace which he had promised to our 
lord of Canterbury of glorious memory ; adding also, that if 
either of us should be unable or unwilling to take part in 
carrying out the same, the other should nevertheless obey 
your commands ; the above-named archbishop of Rouen, after 
we had caused your letter to be presented to him, signified 
to us that he would come to the city of Sens, and would 
act according to the tenor of your mandate. But when 
he had come thither, together with the bishops of Lisieux, 
Evreux, and Worcester, and very many others, both clergy 
as well as laymen, of the household of the above-named king, 
after many shiftings and excuses on his part, he made an- 
swer, that he was on his road to your presence, and felt un- 
willing to pour forth too bitter a censure upon the above- 
named king. But we being sensible that whoever despises 
obedience to the Apostolic mandates, incurs the guilt of pagan- 
ism, according to the tenor of your mandate, with the common 
advice of our brethren, all the bishops, and of the abbats of 
Saint Denis, Saint Germain de Pres, Pontigny, Vaucouleurs, 3 
Le Mans, and several other religious and wise men, have 
pronounced sentence against his lands on this side the sea, and 
have in your name enjoined the said archbishop and bishops 
to cause the same to be observed. For we know that he has 
neither, as he had promised, restored his possessions, nor had 
established security for him, as his death gives proof. Through 
a native of the diocese of Canterbury, whom we sent to him, 
he has also signified unto us that he had given cause for his 
death, and that he had had him slain. For this reason, 
we do supplicate your clemency, that you will ratify the 
sentence before-mentioned, and, as befits your majesty, and is 
expedient for the safety of the Church, will cause it to be in 
Buchwise observed, that the honor of God and your own will 
may be preserved. And as for ourselves, who embrace your 
Holiness with that duteousness of which you are so well 
aware, we will by no means by reason hereof allow ourselves 
to be contemned. We wish you farewell, and as befits your 
majesty and holiness, so do." 

* The words in the text are, " et Ponti magni Walcellensis ;" it is not 
easy to say, with certainty, whether one or two abbeys are meant, and 
whether " Ponti magni" ought riot to be ' Pontiniaci." 



342 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1172. 

TJte Letter of Theobald, earl of Slots, to pope Alexander, on ike 
death of the blessed Thomas. 

" To his most reverend lord and father, Alexander, by the 
grace of God, Supreme Pontiff, Theobald, earl of Blois, and 
procurator of the kingdom of France, health and due obe- 
dience with filial subjection. It pleased your majesty, that 
between the lord archbishop of Canterbury and the king of 
England, peace should be restored, and renewed concord esta- 
blished. Wherefore, according to the tenor of your mandate, 
the king of England received him with a cheerful countenance, 
and with features that bespoke joyousness, and made promises 
to him of peace and restoration to favour. At this agreement 
and reconciliation I was present, and in my presence the lord 
archbishop of Canterbury complained to the king of the coro- 
nation of his son, whom with premature aspirations and ar- 
dent desire, he had caused to be promoted to the elevation of 
the royal dignity. The king of England, being guilty of this 
wrong, and being conscious of his guilt, gave to the archbishop 
of Canterbury a pledge confirmatory of his right, and promising 
that he would make satisfaction. The archbishop also made 
complaint of those bishops who, contrary to the right and the 
honor of the church of Canterbury, had presumed to intrude a 
new Icing upon the seat of royalty ; not through zeal for jus- 
tice, not that they might please God, but that they might 
propitiate a tyrant. With regard to these, the king granted 
him free licence and authority to pronounce sentence against 
them according as might seem fit and proper to you and to him- 
self. These things, in fact, I am prepared to attest, and to sub- 
stantiate to you either upon oath, or in any other way you may 
think fit. Upon this, a reconciliation having been made, the 
man of God fearing nothing, returned, that he might submit 
his throat to the sword, and expose his neck to the smiter ; and 
on the day after the day of the Holy Innocents, this innocent 
lamb suffered martyrdom ; his righteous blood was shed in 
the place where the viaticum of our salvation, the blood of 
Christ, was wont to be sacrificed. Those dogs of the court, 
the people of the king's household and his domestics, showed 
themselves true servants of the king, and guiltily shed in- 
nocent blood. The detestable circumstances of this mon- 
strous crime I would give you in detail, but I fear, lest it 



A.O. 1172- ABCHBISnOP OF SENS TO POPE ALEXANDER. 343 

might be ascribed to me as being done through hatred, and the 
bearers of these presents will recount it more at large, and with 
greater precision ; from their relation you will learn how great 
an accumulation of grief, how vast a calamity has befallen 
the universal Church, and the martyr of Canterbury. This 
calamity, with due regard to her honor, the mother Church 
of Eome cannot conceal from herself. For whatever is 
dared to be done against an only daughter, the same extends 
to her parent as well, nor without injury to the mother is 
the daughter made captive. TJnto you, therefore, does the 
blood of the righteous man cry aloud, demanding vengeance. 
May then, holy father, the Almighty Father aid and counsel 
you, who gave the blood of His Son to the world, that He 
might wipe away the guilt of the world, and cleanse the spots 
of our sins. May He both instil into you a wish for ven- 
geance, and the power of obtaining it, that so the Church, put 
to confusion by the magnitude of this unheard-of crime, may 
have reason to rejoice at the condign punishment thereof." 

The Letter of William, archbishop of Sens, to our lord the pope, 
against the king of England, in relation to the death of the 
blessed Thomas. 

" To his most loving father and lord, Alexander, by the grace 
of God Supreme Pontiff, William, the humble servant of the 
church of Sens, the spirit of counsel and fortitude, with all 
service of due obedience. While writing these lines, or rather 
before I had begun to write them, I stopped short and hesi- 
tated, being greatly in doubt in what kind of language I 
could present to the eyes of your clemency the atrocity of the 
crime lately perpetrated, and the enormity of the offence so 
lecently committed. And, indeed, I believe that the outcry 
of the world must have already filled the ears of your Holiness, 
who have your seat upon the watch-tower of the world, 
how that this, not king of the English, but enemy rather of the 
English and of the whole body of Christ, has lately committed 
wickedness against the holy one, the son of your right hand, 
whom you had confirmed unto yourself. His departure from 
this world, and the mode of his departure, even though perchance 
you may have heard from the diverse or adverse relation of 
any persons, I will faithfully and conscientiously relate what 
has been signified unto me by those who were present, and, in 



344 ANXALS OF ROGER BE HOVEDEX. A.D. 11/2. 

a few words, explain the circumstances of the perpetration of 
this crime, the enormity of which can hardly he ima- 
gined. During the Nativity of our Lord, on the day after 
the Feast of the Innocents, towards sunset, and about the 
hour of vespers, the executioners having gained admission, 
the three, namely, who had been the first to arrive, approached 
this valiant champion of Christ in a most threatening and in- 
solent manner ; the names of whom, that their memories may 
be visited with everlasting maledictions, I here insert, Hugh 
de Morville, William de Tracy, and Reginald Fitz-TIrse ; 
these, on their first approach, on being saluted by the man of 
God, did not return the salutation, inasmuch as, having 
entered upon the ways of perdition, they manifestly rejected 
all that was salutary ; but, on the contrary, contumeliously 
and malignantly thundered forth threats against him, if he 
did not, in obedience to the king's mandate, absolve the 
bishops who were suspended or excommunicated. On his 
making answer that this manifestly pertained to your province, 
as being the sole judge thereon, and that he could not think of 
claiming any himself where so great an authority was con- 
cerned ; they immediately, on the king's behalf, denounced 
him as a traitor, and instantly went forth to their company 
of soldiers. As they went forth they also ordered, in the 
king's name, those knights who belonged to the household 
of the man of God, upon peril of their lives and forfeiture 
of ail their honors, to go forth likewise, and silently and 
patiently await the result, A similar proclamation of the 
king was published throughout the city. But this single 
champion of Christ has, in our days, despised the threats of 
princes, and was with the greatest difficulty, by the persuasion 
of the knights, compelled to go forth from the place where he 
had already, as it were, received a foretaste of death : and this 
was done that he might not seem unwilling to meet his end. 
God, therefore, providing the mother church, dedicated in 
honor of Christ himself, entering the same, the anointed of 
the Lord was deemed worthy to be sacrificed for the name of 
Christ in the spot where each day Christ as well is offered up. 
This priest of the Most High, standing before the altar, and 
embracing in his arms the cross which he had been accustomed to 
have carried before him. and praying, voluntarily offered himself 
as a peace-offering to God between the cross and the horns of the 



A.D. 1172. ABCHBISHOP OF SENS TO POPE ALEXANDER. 345 

altar. For the hour of his passion was drawing nigh ; on 
bended knees, with throat extended, and neck bowed down, 
he received the cup of salvation, and was beheaded by the 
three executioners above-named, having been first reviled 
with insults and many reproaches, that in no way he might 
be defrauded of the example which he had before him in the 
passion of his Lord. And that, still more, the form thereof 
might find a remarkable resemblance in his case, at the same 
hour he prayed for his murderers, adding thereto, and earnestly 
entreating, that his household might be kept unhurt by the pre- 
sent evils. Therefore, alone, and not without the shedding of 
blood, did the priest enter into the Holy place. And inasmuch 
as, since the death of the holy man we have heard, from the 
frequent relation of many persons, that certain wonderful 
things, by the working of the Lord, have taken place, they 
ought not to be entirely omitted. For, it is said, and is stead- 
fastly affirmed, that, after his passion, he appeared in a vision 
to many, whom he informed that he was not dead, but living, 
and showed them, not wounds, but only the scars of wounds. 
Among these, he is said distinctly to have appeared to a cer- 
tain aged monk, named Neil, but in what way I will not 
descant upon, in order that too long a narrative may be 
avoided ; but the bearers thereof will faithfully and at large 
relate the circumstances. The story, too, about the blind 
man, who, immediately on his passion being ended, rubbed his 
eyes with the still warm blood and received his eyes and his 
sight, has been heard by all. There is also a story related by 
many, not unworthy of credit, relative to the tapers that were 
placed around his body, which, on being put out, after- 
wards were lighted again of themselves. And, a thing still 
more pleasing and miraculous, after all the obsequies of mor- 
tality had been performed around his body, while he was lying 
upon the bier in the choir, about dawn, raising his left hand, 
he gave the benediction. Arouse yourself, then, man of God, and 
put on the valour of those whose seat you hold ; on the one hand 
let pity, on the other let indignation, move you to smite the 
smiter of your son ; the one you owe to your son, the other 
to the tyrant : and so increase the glory upon earth of him whom 
God thus wondrously glorifies in heaven. But, to the other, 
award ignominy; who upon earth has so dreadfully persecuted 
God, and has smitten the sides of your own body, has torn 



3-16 A1TKALS OF BOGEK DE flOVEDEW. A.D. 1172. 

forth your entrails therefrom, and has trodden them under foot 
on the earth ; who has also, by the hands of I know not what 
uncircumcised and unclean wretches, so perfidiously, so in- 
humanly, slaughtered your son, whom alone you loved as 
though a mother; neither fearing to commit violence upon the 
father, nor taking compassion upon his age. Wherefore, those 
to whose ministry you have succeeded, to their zeal succeed 
as well. And, inasmuch as you see the wickedness of Ahab, 
let emulation of Elias move you. Ahab slew [Naboth] 
and took possession ; but, if we carefully weigh all the cir- 
cumstances of the crime perpetrated by Ahab, Ahab is justi- 
fied before this man. For this crime is one that by far 
deserves the first place among all the crimes of the wicked 
that are read of or related ; as, all the wickedness of Nero, 
the perfidiousness of Julian, and even the sacrilegious treachery 
of Judas does it exceed. For look at this, and consider what 
a personage, in what a church, what a time, too, for per- 
petrating the crime did he made choice of; namely, the 
Nativity of our Lord, the day after the feast of the Holy 
Innocents ; so that, since the old one, in our days a new Herod 
has risen up. The protection, too, that was publicly granted 
to him failed to recall the traitor from the commission of 
this wickedness. As though, too, of himself he was not 
sufficiently mad, he has had encouragers, who have given 
horns to a sinner, those false brethren, men to be detested 
by all churches throughout the world, namely, that devil 
Roger, the archbishop of York, Gilbert, bishop of London, and 
Jocelyn, bishop of Salisbury, not bishops but apostates ; 4 who 
have not secretly sold your son, their brother, but, in truth, 
have slain him, fearing neither the curse of the aged father, 
nor having regard for his sorrows or his age. That their 
life, both now and always henceforth, may be passed in 
bitterness, and their memory may be visited with eternal 
maledictions, may, Holy Father, your authority and your 
severity equally effect. Holy Father, we bid your Holiness 
farewell." 

In the meantime, Hotrod, archbishop of Eouen, Gilles, 
bishop of Evreux, and Roger, bishop of Worcester, with 
Richard Barre, and some others of the clerks and household 
of the king of England, set out to wait upon the Roman Pon- 

* It is pretty clear that " postaticos " is a misprint for " apostaticos." 






A.D. 1172. LETTER PROM HIS ENVOYS TO THE KINO. 347 

tiff, in behalf of the king of England and his kingdom. But 
the lord archbishop of Rouen, being worn out with infirmi- 
ties and old age, after having accomplished nearly half the 
journey, was able to proceed no further, but returned to Nor- 
mandy to his see, and the above-named bishops, with the 
king's clerks, proceeded on their journey. On arriving, they 
obtained with the greatest difficulty of the Supreme Pontiff 
that two cardinals, Theodinus and Albert, should come on 
behalf of our lord the pope to Normandy, in order to take cog- 
nizance of the dispute which existed between the king and 
the church of Canterbury, of the death of the martyr of 
Canterbury, and of other ecclesiastical dignities, and to give 
judgment thereon, according as God should suggest to them. 
On this, the persons who had gone to Rome wrote to our lord 
the king to this effect : 

" To their most dearly beloved lord, Henry, the illustrious 
king of England, duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl 
of Anjou, Robert, abbat of Yaucouleurs,* the archdeacon of 
Salisbury, Robert, archdeacon of Lisieux, Richard Barre, and 
master Henry, health and fealty in all things, and in all places 
obedience. Be it known unto your majesty, that Richard 
Barre went before us, and, amid great danger and hardships, 
preceded us to the court of our lord the pope. "We four, 
with the two bishops, the dean of Evreux, and master 
Henry, with great difficulty arrived at Sienna, where we were 
detained for some days, as the earl Macharius had closed the roads 
on every side, so that there were no means of egress for any 
one. As we four, together with the bishops, who greatly 
desired to proceed, were unable so to do, being beset with the 
greatest difficulty of judging how to act, by the common consent 
of all, we sallied forth secretly at midnight ; and thus, over the 
ridges of mountains, and through places almost inaccessible, 
with great fear and peril, we at last arrived at Tusculanum. 6 
Here we found Richard Barre, anxious, as he expressed himself, 
to sustain your honor, and skilfully, usefully, and unceas- 
ingly striving for the promotion of your interests, but, neverthe- 
less, in great trouble and sorrow, because our lord the pope 
had not received him, and other persons had not shewn them- 
selves affable and hospitable towards him. As for ourselves, on 

6 Probably " Wallatiae " is a misprint for " Valculeriae." It is, how- 
ever, possible that Valency is the place meant. 6 Now Frascati. 



348 AXXALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 11/2. 

our arrival, our lord the pope would neither see us, nor 
admit us to the kiss, nor at his foot. Indeed, most of the 
cardinals hardly deigned to give us a reception even with a 
word. In consequence of this, being long racked with anxious 
cares, in the bitterness of our spirit, we entreated those who 
were more faithfully attached to you, by every possible 
means, that, through their intervention, our lord the pope 
might in some way or other grant us the indulgence of an 
audience. At length, at their urgent request, the lord abbat 
of Vaucouleurs and Robert, archdeacon of Lisieux, who were 
not so strongly suspected, obtained a reception. But when they, 
on giving the salutation on your behalf, made mention of your 
name as being a most devoted son of the Church of Rome, the 
whole court cried aloud with one voice, "Forbear! forbear!" 
as though it were abominable to our lord the pope to hear men- 
tion made of your name. Upon this, they left the court, and 
returned at a later hour to our lord the pope, and gave him 
information as to the object of our mission, and what injunc- 
tions we had received from your majesty. They also related, 
in their order, each of the benefits you had conferred on the 
archbishop of Canterbury, and all the excesses and affronts 
he had been guilty of against your dignity. The whole of 
these matters were at first privately mentioned to him, and, 
afterwards, in the presence of our lord the pope and all the 
cardinals, they being confronted by two clerks of Canterbury, 
Alexander, and Gunther of Flanders. The fifth day of the week 
before Easter now drawing nigh, on which, according to usage 
of the Roman Church, our lord the pope is wont publicly to ab- 
solve or publicly to excommunicate, feeling certain that as to 
what regarded your grievances and those of your kingdom they 
had hitherto managed matters with the greatest foresight, 6 * we 
consulted those whom we knew to be faithful to your majesty; 
namely, the lord of Portuenza, the lord Jacinto, the lord of Pavia, 
the lord of Tusculanum, the lord Peter de Mirio (the lord John 
of Naples being absent), and begged them with the most urgent 
prayers and entreaties, that they would disclose to us the in- 
tentions of our lord the pope towards us, and what determina- 
tion he purposed to form on our case. However, the information 
they gave us in answer was nothing but what was ill-boding and 

6 * It is pretty clear that " prom diutissime " is a misprint for " provi- 
dentissime.'' 



A.D. 1172. LETTER OP EIS ENVOYS TO THE KINO. 349 

disgraceful to your highness; and we learned from their rela- 
tion and that of brother Francis, a trustworthy man, inter- 
rupted as it was by sobs, that, by the common advice of his 
brethren, our lord the pope had immutably determined on 
that day to pronounce sentence of interdict upon you by 
name, and upon all your dominions on both sides of the sea, 
and to confirm the sentence that had been pronounced against 
the bishops. Being, consequently, placed in a position of the 
greatest difficulty, we made the most stringent efforts, both 
through the cardinals and through those of our companions 
who had access to him, and through the people of his household, 
to induce him to pause in this design, or at least defer it 
until the arrival of your bishops. When this could not by 
any means be effected, we, as became us, and as we are bound 
in duty to you, being neither able nor bound to put up with 
disgrace to your own person and calamity to the whole of your 
dominions, having convened all our companions before certain 
of the cardinals, at length discovered a way for the preservation 
of your safety and honor, safe, and becoming, and advantageous 
to the whole of your dominions, as well as necessary for the 
bishops. 7 Hereby we averted from you, and from your do- 
minions, and from your bishops, the disgrace and peril that 
were impending, and exposed ourselves for obtaining this 
liberation to the whole of the danger, believing and having 
an assured hope that the whole matter will proceed according 
to what we believe to be your wishes, and according to what 
we feel assured ought to be your wishes. The lords bishop 
of Worcester and of Evreux, together with Robert, dean of 
Evreux, and master Henry, were shortly about to follow, and, 
indeed, we left them behind, anxious and vexed beyond mea- 
sure because they had not been able to come on according to 
nieir wishes, for the purpose of carrying out the business you 
had entrusted them with. 7 * However, it was their suggestion, as 
much as our own, that we should by some means or other 
precede them, in order to be enabled to prevent the dis- 
grace and mischiefs which our adversaries were preparing 

7 Bribery is probably the method thus covertly alluded to. 

7 * There must be some mistake in this, as master Henry is one of the 
five by whom the letter is addressed. It appears, however, from the com- 
mencement, probable that master Henry was left behind at Sienna, and 
that he really did not take part in the letter. 



350 ANSULS OF ROGEE DE HOVEDEN. A. D.I 172. 

for us ; for we were assured that serious troubles were in pre- 
paration for you at the court, and were in dread of the 
usual custom of that day. With wishes for your lasting pros- 
perity, we bid your highness farewell : be comforted in the 
Lord, and let your heart rejoice, inasmuch as, to your glory, the 
present clouds will be succeeded by serenity. On the Satur- 
day before Palm Sunday we arrived at the court, and the 
bearer of these presents has left us on Easter Day." 

In the meantime, there came into Normandy two cardinals, 
Gratianus and Vivianus, sent as legates a latere by Alexander, 
the Supreme Pontiff, who vexed the king of England by many 
and various annoyances, and wished to place him and his do- 
minions under interdict. But the king of England being 
warned of this beforehand, had, before their arrival, appealed 
to the presence of our lord the Supreme Pontiff, and by these 
means kept himself and his dominions unhurt by the exercise 
of their severity. 

Still, fearing the power of the Apostolic See, he hastened 
to the sea-shore, and crossed over from Normandy to Eng- 
land, giving orders that no person who should bring a brief, of 
whatever rank or order he might be, should be allowed to cross 
over, either from Normandy to England or from England to 
Normandy, unless he should first give security that he would 
seek to inflict neither evil nor injury upon the king or his 
kingdom. 

After this, the said king, collecting together a great fleet of 
ships, caused them to be laden with provisions and arms, and 
ordered them to meet at Milford Haven, which is near Pembroke. 
In the meantime, he also collected a large army of horse and 
foot, and came to Pembroke, in order to meet his fleet. These 
being assembled and everything duly arranged, he embarked, 
with his army, on board the fleet at Milford Haven, on Satur- 
day, the seventeenth day before the calends of November, and 
on the next day, with joy, effected a successful landing in 
Ireland, at a place which is called Croch, 8 distant eight 
miles from the city of Waterford, at the ninth hour of the 
day ; having crossed over with four hundred large ships, laden 
with warriors, horses, arms, and provisions. At the moment 
when he disembarked, a white hare sprang forth from a thicket, 
which was immediately captured and presented to him as an 
omen of victory. 

8 Cork. 



A. P. 1172. ACCOTWT OP THE IRISH BISHOPS. 351 

On the day after the arrival of the king of England in Ire- 
land, that is to say, on the fifteenth day before the calends of 
November, being the second day of the week and the feast of 
Saint Luke the Evangelist, he and the whole of his troops 
moved on to "Waterford, an episcopal city. Here he found 
William Fitz-Aldelm, his seneschal, and Robert Fitz-Bernard, 
with some other persons of his household, whom he had sent 
before him from England. Here he also stayed for a period of 
fifteen days, and there came to him, at his command, the king 
of Cork, the king of Limerick, the king of Ossory, the king 
of Meath, Reginald de Waterford, and nearly all the prin- 
cipal men of Ireland, with the exception of the king of Con- 
naught, who said that he was the rightful lord of the whole of 
Ireland. In addition to these, there came to the king of Eng- 
land, while staying here, all the archbishops, bishops, and 
abbats of the whole of Ireland, and acknowledged him as king 
and lord of Ireland, taking the oath of fealty to him and his 
heirs, and admitting his and their right of reigning over them 
for all time to come ; after which, they gave their charters 
to the same effect. After the example of the clergy, the 
above-named kings and principal men of Ireland received 
Henry, the king of England, in a similar manner, as lord and 
king of Ireland, and did homage to him, and swore fealty to 
him and his heirs against all men. 

It deserves to be known that, in Ireland, there are four arch- 
bishops and twenty-eight bishops, the names of whom, at 
this period, were as follows : Gelasius was archbishop of 
Armagh, and primate of the whole of Ireland; under him he had 
eight suifragan bishops, whose names were as follow : Odan, 
bishop, 9 Maurice, bishop of Clogher, Malethias, bishop of Down, 
Nehemias, bishop of Deny, Gilbert, bishop of Raphoe, Thad- 
dqiis, bishop of Connor, Christian, bishop of Ardagh, and 
Eleutherius, bishop of Clonmacnoise. Donatus, archbishop of 
Cashel, had under him ten suffragan bishops, whose names were 
as follow : Christian, bishop of Lismore, legate of the Apostolic 
See, the bishop of Emly, the bishop of Cloyne, the bishop of 
Ardmore, the bishop of Limerick, 10 the bishop of Kildare, the 

9 Probably bishop of Meath : but it is not stated in the text. Nearly 
all these names are mis-spelt, and it is next to impossible to tracfi some of 
them. They are in a state of almost hopeless confusion. 

10 This prelate is probably meant under the title " LucapniarensU 
episcopus." 



352 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1172. 

bishop of Waterford, the bishop of Ardfert, the bishop of Ross, 
and the bishop of Kilfenora. Laurentius, archbishop of Dub- 
lin, had under him five suffragan bishops, whose names were 
as follow : the bishop of Bistagh, the bishop of Ferns, the 
bishop of Leighlin, the bishop of Kindare, and the bishop of 
Ossory. 11 The fourth, being the archbishop of Tuam, had 
under him five suffragan bishops, whose names were as fol- 
low : the bishop of Kinferns, the bishop of Killala, the 
bishop of Moy, the bishop of Elphin, and the bishop of 
Aghadoe. 

All the above, both archbishops as well as bishops, acknow- 
ledged Henry, king of England, and his heirs, as their kings 
and lords for ever ; which they also confirmed by charter under 
their hands and seals. After this, the king of England sent 
Nicholas, his chaplain, and Ralph, archdeacon of Llandaff, his 
clerk, together with the archbishops and bishops of Ireland, 
to the city of Cashel, to hold a synod there, upon the ordinances 
of the Church. 

At this synod it was ordained that children should be 
brought to the church, and there baptized in clean water, 
being thrice dipped therein, in the name of the Father, and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And this was to be done 
by the hands of the priests, except in cases where fear of 
death prevented it, when it might be done by another person, 
and in any other place, on such occasion it being allowable to 
be done by any person, without regard to sex or order. It 
was also ordained that tithes should be paid to churches out of 
all possessions : and that all laymen who should think proper 
to have wives, should have them in conformity with the laws of 
the Church. The king of England also sent a copy of the 
charters of the whole of the archbishops and bishops of Ire- 
land to pope Alexander ; who, by the Apostolic authority, 
confirmed to him and his heirs the kingdom of Ireland, ac- 
cording to the tenor of the charters of archbishops and bishops 
of Ireland. 

These things being thus completed at Waterford, the king 
of England proceeded thence to Dublin, and remained there 
from the feast of Saint Martin until the beginning of Lent ; 
and here he ordered to be built, near the church of Saint 
Andrew the Apostle, without the city of Dublin, a royal 

11 In the text " Erupolensis " is perhaps a mistake for " Ossorensis." 



A. D. 1172. POPE ALEXANDEB TO THE AKCHB1SHOP OF BOUEGES. 353 

palace for his own use, constructed, with wonderful skill, of 
peeled osiers, according to the custom of that country. Here 
with the kings and principal men of Ireland, he held the usual 
festivities on the day of the Nativity of our Lord. 

In the meantime, Gilbert, bishop of London, and Jocelyn, 
bishop of Salisbury, sent to Rome and received letters of ab- 
solution, the tenor of which was as follows : 

The Letter of Pope Alexander to the Archbishop of Bourges. 

" Alexander the bishop, servant of the servants of God, 
to his venerable brethren, the archbishop of Bourges and the 
bishop of Nivernois, health, and the Apostolic benediction. 
We believe that it is not unknown to your brotherhood 
how Thomas of blessed memory, formerly archbishop of 
Canterbury, in obedience to our mandate, pronounced sentence 
of excommunication upon the bishops of London and Salis- 
bury : which we took due care to have ratified and confirmed 
by the authority of the Apostolic See. Now, inasmuch as 
the aforesaid bishops, being worn out with old age and infir- 
mity of body, and, one of them labouring under a malady, are 
not able to come to our presence : to you, in whose prudence 
and fidelity we have full confidence, we have thought proper 
to entrust their absolution, for which, envoys from Henry, 
the king of England, and the said bishops have made the most 
urgent application. Therefore, we do command your brother- 
hood, by these Apostolic writings, within one month from the 
time when the said messengers shall have returned home (as 
to the approach of the legates whom we have thought proper 
to send into those parts to take cognizance of this atrocious 
crime and misdeed which has been perpetrated and of the for- 
giveness of the king, that they have passed the Alps you 
*e not unaware), that, after having publicly received their 
oaths according to the custom of the Church, that they are 
ready to pay obedience to our mandate, you will absolve them 
from the ban of excommunication by pronouncing sentence 
of suspension for the same cause for which they were recently 
sentenced to excommunication, the said cause being still 
valid and of full effect. But if you shall be satisfied that 
the bishop of Salisbury, from labouring under the effects 
of disease, cannot come to you, then it is our pleasure that 
you shall attend upon him personally. Or if you shall be 



354 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEff. A.D. 1172. 

unable to attend upon him, then you are to send proper persons, 
in whom both you and we ourselves may be able to place full 
reliance, who, having publicly received his oath, in the pre- 
sence of the church, that he is ready to pay obedience to our 
mandates, may thereupon absolve him. But if, brother arch- 
bishop, it shall not be in your power to give attention to this 
matter, then do you, brother bishop, together with the abbat of 
Pontigny, give your most diligent attention to the injunctions 
which we have given. Given at Tusculanum, on the eighth day 
before the calends of May." 

In the same year, Avigouth El Emir Amimoli, the emperor of 
the Africans, crossed the African sea and landed in Spain with 
a strong hand and an outstretched arm, and, king Lupus, 
who was a pagan, being dead, took possession of his lands ; 
namely, Murcia and Valentia, and many other cities ; and 
then, by the advice of Ferdinand, king of Saint Jago, entered 
the lands of Alphonso, king of Castille, and took by storm the 
cities of Cuenca and Octa, is and slaughtered all the Christians 
whom he captured therein, with the exception of a few, whom 
he doomed to perpetual slavery. 

In the year of grace 1 1 72, being the eighteenth year of the 
reign of king Henry the Second, the said king was at Dublin, 
in Ireland, on the day of the Nativity of our Lord, which took 
place on Saturday, and there he gave a royal feast. Having 
stayed there until the beginning of Lent, he proceeded thence to 
the city of Wcxford, where he remained until Easter. While 
he was staying there, Theodinus and Albert, the cardinals who 
were sent as legates a latere by the Supreme Pontiif, came into 
Normandy. On their arrival being known, the king hastened 
to meet them ; but, before he left Ireland, he gave, and by 
his charter confirmed, to Hugh de Lacy the whole of the 
lands of Meath, with all their appurtenances, to hold in fee and 
hereditarily of himself and his heirs, by a hundred knights' 
service ; and gave in his charge the city of Dublin, and 
appointed him justiciary of Ireland. He also gave in charge 
to Robert Fitz-Bernard the city of Waterford and the city of 
Wexford, with their appurtenances, and ordered castles to be 
built therein. 

The festival of Easter approaching, the king's household 

13 Probably the place generally called " Octaviolca ;" though it is a 
matter of dispute what is the present name of the place so called. 



A.D. 1172. THE PTTBGATION OF KING HENET. 355 

crossed over from Ireland to England, on Easter Day, and 
landed at Milford Haven, near Pembroke. The king, how- 
ever, by reason of the solemnity of the day, was unwilling to 
embark, but embarked the day after, and landed in "Wales, 
near Saint David's. After this, the king repaired with all haste 
to Portsmouth, and, taking with him his son Henry, passed 
over from England to Normandy, and found the above-named 
cardinals at Caen, and, by their advice, made peace with 
Louis, king of the Franks, as to the coronation of his daugh- 
ter; and accordingly, with the consent and advice of the 
above-named cardinals, sent back the king, his son, to Eng- 
land, and with him Hotrod, archbishop of Rouen, Gilles, 
bishop of Evreux, and Roger, bishop of Worcester, for the 
purpose of crowning him and Margaret, his wife, the daugh- 
ter of Louis, king of France : on which, they crowned them 
in the church of Saint Swithin, at Winchester, on the 
sixth day before the calends of September, being the Lord's 
Day. Immediately after the coronation had taken place, his 
son, the king, with the queen, his wife, and the archbishop 
of Rouen, and the bishops of Evreux and Worcester, crossed 
over from England to Normandy. 

The Purgation of King Henry for the death of the blessed Thomas. 

Henry, the king of England, the father, king Henry, 
his son, Rotrod, archbishop of Rouen, and all the bishops 
and abbats of Normandy, met at the city of Avranches, in 
presence of the cardinals, Theodinus and Albert. In their 
presence, the king of England, the father, on the fifth day 
before the calends of October, being the fourth day of the 
week, and the feast of Saints Cosmus and Damianus, the 
Martyrs, proved his innocence in the church of Saint 
Andrew the Apostle, by oath, in the presence of the above- 
named cardinals, and of all the clergy and the people, upon 
the relics of the Saints, and upon the Holy Gospels, and that 
he had neither commanded nor wished that the archbishop of 
Canterbury should be put to death, and that, when he heard 
thereof, he was greatly concerned. But, inasmuch as he 
could not apprehend u those malefactors who slew Thomas, 

14 Roger of Wendover, however, says that they remained in the king's 
castle, at Knaresborough, for a whole year after the murder of the arch- 
bishop. 

A A 2 



356 AXNALS OF BOGEB DE KOVEDEX. A.D. 1172. 

archbishop of Canterbury, of blessed memory, and he feared 
that they had perpetrated that profane deed in consequence of 
his agitated state of mind and the perturbation in which they 
had seen him, he made oath that he would give satisfaction in 
the following manner : 

In the first place, he made oath that he would not with- 
draw from Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff, and his Catholic 
successors, so long as they should repute him to be a Catholic 
king. 

He also made oath that he would neither prevent appeals nor 
allow them to be prevented, but that they should be freely made 
in his kingdom to the Roman Pontiff in causes ecclesiastical ; 
yet so, that if any parties shoiild be suspected by him, they 
should give him security that they would not seek the injury 
of him or of his kingdom. 

He also made oath that, for a period of three years from 
the Nativity of our Lord then next ensuing he would assume 
the cross, and would in the following summer go in person to 
Jerusalem, unless he should remain at home by permission of 
Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff, or of his Catholic succes- 
sors : provided, that if in the meantime, by reason of urgent 
necessity, he should set out for Spain to war against the Sara- 
cens, then for so long a period as he should be engaged in that 
expedition he might defer setting out for Jerusalem 

Besides this, he made oath that in the meantime he would 
give to the Templars as much money as in the opinion of the 
brethren of the Temple would suffice for the maintenance of 
two hundred knights, for the defence of the land of Jerusalem, 
during a period of one year. 

Besides this, he remitted his wrath and displeasure against 
all those, both clergy and laity, who were in exile for the cause 
of Saint Thomas, and allowed them freely and peacefully 
to return home. 

He also made oath that the possessions of the church of 
Canterbury, if any had been taken away, he would restore in 
full, in the same state in which they were one year before 
the blessed Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, had departed 
from England. 

He also made oath that he would utterly abolish the customs 
which had been introduced in his time to the prejudice of the 
churches of his kingdom. 









A.D. 1172. THE CHARTEB OF ABSOLUTION OF THE KING. 357 

All these articles he made oath that he would observe faith- 
fully and without evil-intent. He also made his son,king Henry, 
swear to observe these articles, those excepted which only re- 
lated personally to himself. And, to the intent that the same 
might be retained in the memory of the Eoman Church, the 
king, the father, caused his seal to be set to the writing in 
which the above-stated articles were contained, together with 
the seals of the above-named cardinals. 

The Charter of Absolution of our lord the King. 

"To Henry, by the grace of God, the illustrious king of the 
English, Albert titular of Saint Laurentius in Lucinia, and 
Theodinus, titular of Saint Vitalis, cardinal priests, legates of 
the Apostolic See, health in Him who giveth health unto 
kings. That the things which take place may not come to be 
matter of doubt, both custom suggests and the ordinary re- 
quirements of utility demand that the same should be regularly 
stated at length in writing. For this reason it is that we have 
thought proper to have committed to writing those injunctions 
which we have given you, because you entertain a fear that 
those malefactors who slew Thomas of blessed memory, the late 
archbishop of Canterbury, proceeded to the commission of that 
crime in consequence of your agitated state of mind and the 
perturbation in which they saw you to be. As to which deed, 
however, you have of your own free-will exculpated yourself in 
our presence, to the effect that you neither gave command nor 
wished that he should be put to death ; and that, when news 
reached you of the same, you were greatly concerned thereat. 
From the ensuing feast of Pentecost, for the period of one 
year, you shall give as much money as in the opinion of the 
brethren of the Temple will suffice to maintain two hundred 
* knights for the defence of the land of Jerusalem during a 
period of one year. Also, from the Nativity of our Lord 
next ensuing, for a period of three years, you shall assume 
the cross, and shall in the ensuing summer in person set 
out for Jerusalem, unless you shall remain at home by the 
permission of our lord the pope, or of his Catholic successors ; 
provided that if, by reason of urgent necessity, you shall set 
out for Spain to war against the Saracens, so long a period as 
shall elapse from the time of your setting out you shall be 
enabled to defer setting out for Jerusalem. You shall not 



358 ANNALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1172. 

prevent appeals, nor allow them to be prevented ; but they 
shall freely be made to the Roman Pontiff, in causes eccle- 
siastical, in good faith, and without fraud and evil-intent, 
in order that causes may be considered by the Eoman Pontiff, 
and be brought to a conclusion by him ; yet so, that if any 
parties shall be suspected by you, they shall give you security 
that they will not seek the injury of you or of your kingdom. 
The customs which have been introduced in your time, to the 
prejudice of the churches of your kingdom, you shall utterly 
abolish. The possessions of the church of Canterbury, if any 
have been taken away, you shall restore in full, in the same 
state in which they were one year before the archbishop de- 
parted from England. Moreover, to the clerks and to the laity of 
either sex, you shall restore your protection and favor and their 
possessions, who, by reason of the before-named archbishop, 
have been deprived thereof. These things, by the authority of 
our lord the pope, we do, for the remission of your sins, enjoin 
and command you to observe, without fraud and evil-intent. 
Wherefore, to the above effect, in the presence of a multitude of 
persons, you have, as you venerate the Divine Majesty, made 
oath. Tour son, also, has made oath to the same effect, with 
the exception only of that which in especial related personally 
to yourself. You have also both made oath that you will not 
withdraw from our lord the pope, Alexander, and his Catholic 
successors, so long as they shall repute you, like your prede- 
cessors, to be Catholic kings. And further, that this may 
be firmly retained in the memory of the Roman Church, you 
have ordered your seal to be set thereto." 

The Letter of the same Cardinals to the archbishop of Ravenna. 

" To their venerable and beloved brother in Christ, Gilbert, 
by the grace of God, archbishop of Ravenna, Albert, by the 
Divine condescension, titular of Saint Laurentius inLucinia, and 
Theodinus, titular of Saint Vitalis, cardinal priests, legates of 
the Apostolic See, that which God has promised that He will 
grant unto the watchful. Inasmuch as we believe that you are 
desirous to hear somewhat relative to our present state and the 
progress of the business which was entrusted to our charge; we 
have thought proper by this present writing to inform your bro- 
therhood how God has dealt as towards ourselves and through 
the ministry of our humble exertions. Know, therefore, that 



A.D. 1172. LETTER OF THE CARDINALS. 359 

after the illustrious king of England had learned as a truth that 
we had arrived in his kingdom, laying aside every obstacle 
that might retard him, and omitting the transaction of press- 
ing business, he passed over from England into the Norman 
territories, and instantly sent unto us many messengers of 
honorable rank, enquiring of us in what place we would prefer 
to meet and hold a conference with him. It at length pleased 
us to meet for the purpose of holding a conference at the 
monastery of Savigny, where we might be aided by the prayers 
of religious men. We came thither, and thither also came 
many persons of either order from out of his.kingdom to meet 
us ; and we diligently treated, so far as we were able, upon what 
related to his own salvation and the obedience enjoined by us. 
As, however, we were unable to agree on all points, he with- 
drew from us, as though about to cross over to England, and we 
remained there with the intention of going the following day 
to the city of Avranches. However, on the next day, there 
came to us the bishop of Lisieux and two archdeacons, and 
that being conceded which we demanded, we proceeded to the 
city before-mentioned. At this place, on the Lord's Day, on 
which is sung ' Vocem jocunditatis, 1 lb we went forth to meet a 
considerable number of persons, as they did to meet us; and the 
king then fulfilled the conditions that had been made, with 
such extreme humility that, beyond a doubt, this maybe believed 
to be the work of Him who looks down upon the earth and 
maketh it to tremble. Still, how that he showed himself a 
fearer of God and an obedient son of the Church, it is not 
necessary, in the present brief narrative, to relate. For this 
his actions sufficiently manifest, and will manifest still more 
fully, according to the hopes that have been given us of the 
future. In the first place, therefore, as to the death of 
* Thomas, of blessed memory, the late archbishop of Canter- 
bury : not in consequence of our exacting it, but of his own 
free-will, touching the Holy Gospels, he purged his conscience, 
making oath to the effect that he had neither commanded nor 
wished that the said archbishop should be put to death ; and 
that, when he heard thereof, he was greatly concerned. But 
because what had been done he feared had been done through 
his instrumentality, he made the following oath as to giving 

13 " The voice of gladness :" the beginning of the introit for the fifth 
Sundav aftei Easter. 



360 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1172. 

satisfaction for the same. In the first place, he made oath 
that he will not withdraw from our lord the pope, Alexander, 
and his Catholic successors, so long as they shall repute him 
to be a Catholic king and a Christian. The same he also made 
his eldest son swear in the charter of absolution for the death 
of the blessed Thomas. He also promised on oath other things 
very necessary for the clergy and for the people ; all of which 
we have carefully and in their order as he swore them set forth 
in the charter of his absolution. He also promised other things 
of his own free-will to be carried out, which are not necessary 
in their order to be committed to writing. We have written to 
you to this effect, that you may know that he is obedient to 
God, and much more disposed to be duteous to the Divine 
will than heretofore he has been. In addition to this, you 
must know that his son made oath to the same effect with him- 
self in relation to the customs above-mentioned. Besides 
this, he publicly announced that he would repeat again, at 
Caen, all that had passed there, in presence of a greater assem- 
blage of persons, in order that there might be left to no one any 
room to doubt his sincerity. He has also released the bishops 
from the promise which they made to him as to observing 
the customs, and has promised that he will not exact this in 
future." 

On the following day, the above-named cardinals held a 
great synod there, together with the archbishop, bishops, and 
clergy of Normandy, and there they agreed to the decrees under- 
written, and enjoined that they should be strictly and invio- 
lably observed by all. 

The Decrees published at Avranches by the cardinals Albert 
and Theodinm. 

" Youths are, under no circumstance, to be admitted to the 
government of those churches, and the administration of those 
offices, in which there is the cure of souls. 

" Further, the sons of priests are not to be placed in the 
churches of their fathers. 

" Further, the laity are not to have a share of offerings made 
in the church. 

" Further, churches are not to be entrusted to the charge of 
vicars hired by the year. 

"Further, the priests of the larger churches, who have 



A.D. 1172. DECREES PTH3LISHED AT AVRANCHES. 361 

the means of so doing, are to be compelled to have another 
minister under them. 

"Further, priests are not to be ordained without having 
a sure title. 

" Further, churches are not to be let out at a yearly rent. 

" Further, let the minister who performs the duties of the 
church be deprived of no portion of one third part of the 
tithes. 

" Further, let those persons who hold tithes by hereditary 
right be at liberty to give them to some fitting clerk, whom- 
soever they may choose ; but upon this understanding, that, 
after him, they are to revert to the church to which of right 
they belong. 

" Let no man while his wife is still living enter into mo- 
nastic orders, and so, on the other hand, with regard to the 
wife, unless they shall have both passed the time for satisfying 
the lusts of the flesh. 

"Further, at the Advent of our Lord, to all who shall be 
able to obey, and especially to the clergy and the knighthood, 
let fasting and abstinence from flesh be enjoined. 

"Further, clerks are not to be appointed judges 16 to ad- 
minister the jurisdiction of secular powers ; and those who 
shall presume so to do, let them be expelled from their eccle- 
siastical benefices." 

But, as regards the new books relative to those excommu- 
nicated, the property of the dead that the priests receive, the 
benediction of brides, baptism, and the eight-and-forty pounds 
which are demanded for the absolution of those excommu- 
nicated, there was nothing settled, as the bishops of Nor- 
mandy were unwilling to receive a decree on those subjects. 
In the same synod, the archbishop of Tours claimed the 
archbishopric of Dol, as properly belonging to his own arch- 
bishopric, affirming that there ought not to be there an archi- 
episcopal see ; but the clergy of Dol stoutly maintained the 
contrary. 

These matters having been thus arranged, about the time 
of the feast of All Saints, the new king of England, by com- 
mand of the king, his father, crossed over with his queen from 
England to Normandy, though much against his will. When 

16 The text has " clerici Judrei," " Jewish clerks." This is clearly an 
error. The word is probably "judices," "judges." 



362 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1173. 

they had come to him, he immediately sent them to have an 
interview with the king of France ; for the king of France 
greatly longed to see his daughter and to converse with her. 
When they came to him in France they were received by 
him with great honor and joyousness, and stayed with him 
some days. 

From this circumstance great injury resulted to the king- 
dom of England, and to the kingdom of France as well. For 
Louis, king of France, who always held the king of England 
in hatred, counselled the new king of England, as soon as he 
should arrive in Normandy, to request the king, his father, to 
give him either the whole of England or the whole of Nor- 
mandy, where he himself might reside with his daughter. He 
further advised him, if his father should be willing to grant 
him neither of those countries, to return, together with his 
queen, to France to him. In the meantime, the king, dread- 
ing the deceit and malice of the king of France, which he had 
frequently experienced, sent to France for his son and his wife ; 
on which, having received permission from the king of France, 
agreably to the king's command, they returned into Nor- 
mandy. 

The festival of the Nativity of our Lord now approaching, 
the king proceeded towards Anjoii, and held his court there 
on the day of the Nativity of our Lord, leaving his son behind, 
together with his queen, in Normandy. 

In the same year, Adam de Port was charged with being a 
traitor to the king ; and, because on the king's summons he 
would not take his trial, he was outlawed from England. 

In the year of grace 1173, being the nineteenth year of the 
reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said 
king was, on the day of the Nativity of our Lord, at Chinon, 
in Anjou, and queen Eleanor was there with him, while the 
king, his son, and his wife were in Normandy. After the 
Nativity, the king, the father, sent for the king, the son, and 
they proceeded to Montferrat, in Auvergne, where they were 
met by Hubert, earl of Maurienne, who brought with him Alice, 
his eldest daughter. The king, the father, obtained her for the 
sum of four thousand marks of silver, as a wife for his son John, 
together with the whole of the earldom of Maurienne, in case 
the above-named earl should not have a son by his wife. But, in 
case he should have a son, lawfully begotten, then the 



A.D. 1173. TREATT WITH THE EARL OF MAURIENNE. 363 

above-named earl granted to them and to their heirs for ever 
Bxmsillon, with all his jurisdiction therein, and with all its 
appurtenances, and the whole of the county of Le Belay, as 
he then held the same ; likewise, Pierrecastel, with all its 
appurtenances, and the whole of the valley 'of Novalese, and 
Chambery, with all its appurtenances, and Aix, and Aspermont, 
and Rochet, and Montemayor, and Chambres, with the borough 
and the whole jurisdiction thereof. All these lying on this 
side of the mountains, with all their appurtenances, he granted 
to them immediately for ever. Beyond the mountains, also, he 
gave and granted to them and to their heirs forever, the whole 
of Turin, with all its appurtenances, the college of Canorech, 17 
with all its appurtenances, and all the fees which the earls of 
Cannes held of him, and their services and fealties. Also, 
in the earldom of Castro, he granted similar fees, fealties, and 
services. In the Val D'Aosta he granted to them Castig- 
lione, which the viscount D'Aosta held of him, to hold the 
same for ever against all men. All these the above-named 
earl granted to the said son of the king of England for ever, 
together with his daughter before-mentioned, as freely, fully, 
and quietly, in men and cities, castles, and other places of 
defence, meadows, leasowes, mills, woods, plains, waters, 
vallies, mountains, customs, and all other things, as ever 
he or his father had held or enjoyed all the same as under- 
written therein, or even more fully and freely. Further- 
more, the said earl was willing immediately, or whenever 
it should please our lord the king of England, that homage 
and fealty should be done by all his people throughout the 
whole of his lands, saving always their fealty to himself so long 
as he should hold the same. Moreover, he granted to them and 
In their heirs for ever, all the right that he had in the county 
of Grenoble, and whatsoever he might acquire therein. But 
in case his eldest daughter above-named should happen to die, 
whatever he had granted Avith the eldest, he did thereby grant 
the whole of the same, as therein written, together with his 
second daughter, to the son of the illustrious king of England. 
That the covenants above- written should be kept between 
our lord the king of England and the earl of Maurienne, both 
the earl of Maurienne himself, and the count de Cevennes, and 
nearly all the other nobles of his territory, made oath ; to 
17 Holinshed calls this place " Gavoreth." 



364 ANNALS Of JROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.b. 1173 

the effect that the earl of Maurienne would inviolably observe 
the said covenants; and if he should in any way depart 
therefrom, they made oath that, on the summons of our lord 
the king of England, or of his messenger, and even without 
any such summons, so soon as they should happen to know that 
the earl had so departed, they would, from the time of knowing 
thereof, surrender themselves as hostages to our lord the king 
of England, in his own realm, wherever he should think fit; 
and would remain in his custody until such time as they should 
have prevailed upon the earl to perform the king's pleasure- or 
have made an arrangement with the king, to his satisfaction. 

Furthermore, Peter, the venerable archbishop of Tarentaise, 
Ardune, bishop of Cevennes, William, bishop of Maurienne, 
and the abbat of Saint Michael, the Holy Evangelists being 
placed before them, at the command of the earl, steadfastly 
promised that, at the will and pleasure of the king, and 
at such time as he should think fit, they would excommuni- 
cate the person of the earl, and place his lands under inter- 
dict, if the earl should not observe the. agreement so made be- 
tween them ; that they would also do the same as to the per- 
sons of the earl's liegemen, and as to the lands of those through 
whom it should be caused, that the agreement so made between 
the king and the earl was not observed, and would hold those 
who should refuse to keep the peace and their lands under in- 
terdict, until satisfaction should have been made to our lord 
the king. 

Our lord the king made these covenants and the grants 
above- written, with and to the earl of Maurienne, and by his 
command the following made oath that by him the same should 
be observed : William, earl of MandevUle, William, earl of 
Arundel, Ralph de Fay, William de Courcy, William de 
Hinnez, Fulk Paynel, Robert de Briencourt, William Mainegot, 
Theobald Chabot, William de Munlufzun, Peter de Montesson, 
and Geoffrey Forrester . 

In addition thereto, it was to be understood that the earl might 
give his second daughter in marriage to whomsoever he would, 
without too greatly diminishing the earldom, after his eldest 
daughter should have been married to the king's son, either 
her lawful age allowing thereof, or through the dispensation of 
the Church of Rome ; and that it should be lawful for her pa- 
rents or for other persons to give from the lands, for the safety 



A.n. 1173. TREATY WITH THE EARL OF MAURIENNE. 365 

of her soul, without too greatly diminishing the earldom. Also, 
that the king should make payment immediately to the earl 
of one thousand marks of silver ; and that as soon as he should 
receive the earl's daughter, the latter should have at least 
another thousand marks of silver; and that whatever should 
remain unpaid of the five thousand marks, the earl should 
receive the same when the marriage should have taken place 
between the king's son and the earl's daughter, either by reason 
of lawful age or throughthe dispensation of the Church of Rome. 
But, if our lord the king, which God forbid, should chance 
to die first, or should depart from his territories, then, neither 
he nor they who, at his command had made oath and had given 
any security to the earl, should be bound by the covenants 
above- written, but only our lord the king, the king's son and 
his people. 

Accordingly, a few days having elapsed, there came into the 
territories of the king of England, on behalf of the earl of 
Maurienne, the marquis of Montferrat, Geoffrey de Plozac, and 
Merlo, his son, the chancellor of earl Richard, and Berlo de 
Cambot, and Peter de Bouet, his castellans, together with Peter 
de Saint Genese, and Peter de Turin, knights, and Geoffrey 
de Aquabella, and Ralph de Varci, burgesses. Touching the 
Holy Evangelists, these persons made oath that they would 
strictly cause the earl to observe the covenants made between 
the king and the earl, as to the son of the king and the daugh- 
ter of the earl, in such manner as they had been lawfully entered 
into, written, and understood. And, if he should not ob- 
serve the same, they made oath that, on the summons of 
the king or of his messenger, or even without any such sum- 
mons, if they should happen to know that the earl had de- 
parted therefrom, they would, from the time of knowing there- 
of, surrender themselves as hostages to the king in his own 
realm, and would remain in his custody until such time as 
they should have prevailed upon the earl to perform the king's 
pleasure, or have made an arrangement with our lord the king 
to his satisfaction. The before-named envoys also made 
oath that the earl should not give his second daughter 
in marriage until his eldest daughter should have been 
united in marriage with the king's son, either by reason 
of being of lawful age, or through the dispensation of the 
Church of Rome ; unless by the consent and desire of our lord 



S66 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEff. A.D. 1173. 

the king he should in the meantime have given her in marriage 
to some other person. They also made oath that, if the earl's 
daughter, or, which God forbid, the king's son, should chance 
to die before a marriage should have taken place between them, 
then the earl should repay to the king the whole of the money, 
or act according to the king's will and pleasure relative thereto, 
or pay it over to him to whom the king should assign the same ; 
and that they, the parties making the said oath, would, 
if the king should so wish, and at such time as he should so 
wish, surrender themselves as hostages in his realm and into 
his power until such time as the same should be paid. They 
likewise made oath that they would use their best endeavours 
to obtain the grant of Umbert the Younger, in order that 
thereby the king's son might have Kousillon and Pierrecastel, 
and whatever had been granted to him by the earl in the 
county of Le Belay. But if Umbert should happen to re- 
fuse to grant the same, then they made oath that the earl 
should give him lands in lawful exchange thereof, accord- 
ing to the arbitration of the abbat of Cluse, and of Reginald, 
archdeacon of Salisbury, or of other lawful persons thereto 
appointed by the king, if they should not be able to be 
present. 

After this, the king of England, the father, and the king, the 
son, came together to Limoges ; and thither Raymond, earl of 
Saint Gilles, came, and there did homage to both the kings of 
England, and to Richard, earl of Poitou, for Toulouse, to hold 
the same of them by hereditary right, by the service of ap- 
pearing before them at their summons, and staying with 
them and serving for forty days, without any cost on their 
part ; but if they should wish to have him longer in their 
service, then they were to pay his reasonable expenses. And 
further, the said earl of Saint Gilles was to give them from 
Toulouse and its appurtenances one hundred marks of silver, 
or else ten chargers worth ten marks a-piece. 

There also came to Limoges the earl of Maurienne, and de- 
sired to know how much of his own territory the king of Eng- 
land intended to grant to his son John ; and on the king ex- 
pressing an intention to give him the castle of Chinon, the castle 
of Lodun, and the castle of Mirabel, the king, his son, would 
in nowise agree thereto, nor allow it to be done. For he was 
already greatly offended that his father was unwilling to assign 



A.D. 1173. PRINCE HENRY REVOLTS FROM HIS FATHER. 367 

to him some portion of his territories, where he, with his wife, 
might take up their residence. Indeed, he had requested his 
father to give him either Normandy, or Anjou, or England, 
which request he had made at the suggestion of the king of 
France, and of those of the earls and barons of England and 
Normandy who disliked his father : and from this time it was 
that the king, the son, had been seeking pretexts and an oppor- 
tunity for withdrawing from his father. And he had now 
so entirely revolted in feeling from obeying his wishes, that 
he could not even converse with him on any subject in a peace- 
able manner. 

Having now gained his opportunity, both as to place and 
pccasion, the king, the son, left his father, and proceeded 
to the king of France. However, Eichard Barre, his chan- 
cellor, "Walter, his chaplain, Ailward, his chamberlain, and 
"William Blund, his apparitor, left him, and returned to the 
king, his father. Thus did the king's son lose both his feel- 
ings and his senses ; he repulsed the innocent, persecuted a 
father, usurped authority, seized upon a kingdom; he alone 
was the guilty one, and yet a whole army conspired against 
his father ; "so does the madness of one make many mad." 17 
For he it was who thirsted for the blood of a father, the gore 
of a parent ! 

In the meantime, Louis, king of the Franks, held a great 
council at Paris, at which he and all the principal men of 
France made oath to the son of the king of England that they 
would assist him in every way in expelling his father from 
the kingdom, if he should not accede to his wishes : on which 
he swore to them that he would not make peace with his 
father, except with their sanction and consent. After this, he 
swore that he would give to Philip, earl of Flanders, for his 
tomage, a thousand pounds of yearly revenues in England, 
and the whole of Kent, together with Dover castle, and Ro- 
chester castle ; to Matthew, earl of Boulogne, for his ho- 
mage, the Soke of Kirketon in Lindsey, and the earldom of 
Mortaigne, with the honor of Hay ; and to Theobald, earl 
of Blois, for his homage, two hundred 18 pounds of yearly 
revenues in Anjou, and the castle of Amboise, with all the 
jurisdiction which he had claimed to hold in Touraine ; and he 

17 " Unius dementia dementes efficit multos." 

18 A various reading makes it five hundred. 



368 ANNALS OF ttOGEE DE HOVEDEIf. A.D. 1173. 

also quitted claim to him of all right that the king his father 
and himself had claimed in Chateau Regnaud. All these gifts, 
and many besides that he made to other persons, he confirmed 
under his new seal, which the king of France had ordered to 
be made for him. 

Besides these, he made other gifts, which, under the same 
seal, he confirmed ; namely, to William, king of Scotland, for 
his assistance, the whole of Northumberland as far as the 
river Tyne. To the brother of the same king he gave for his 
services the earldom of Huntingdon and of Cambridgeshire, 
and to earl Hugh Bigot, for his services, the castle of Norwich. 

Immediately after Easter, in this year, the whole of the 
kingdom of France, and the king, the son of the king of 
England, Richard his brother, earl of Poitou, and Geoffrey, 
earl of Bretagne, and nearly all the earls and barons of Eng- 
land, Normandy, Aquitaine, Anjou, and Brittany, arose against 
the king of England the father, and laid waste his lands on 
every side with fire, sword, and rapine : they also laid siege to 
his castles, and took them by storm, and there was no one to 
relieve them. Still, he made all the resistance against them 
that he possibly could : for he had with him twenty thou- 
sand Brabanters, who served him faithfully, but not without 
large pay which he gave them. 

Then seems to have been fulfilled this prophecy of Merlin, 
which says : " The cubs shall awake and shall roar aloud, and, 
leaving the woods, shall seek their prey within the walls of 
the cities ; among those who shall be in their way they shall 
make great carnage, and shall tear out the tongues of bulls. 
The necks of them as they roar aloud they shall load with 
chains, and shall thus renew the times of their forefathers." 

Upon this, the king wrote letters of complaint to all the 
emperors and kings whom he thought to be friendly to him, rela- 
tive to the misfortunes which had befallen him through the 
exalted position which he had given to his sons, strongly ad- 
vising them not to exalt their own sons beyond what it was 
their duty to do. On receiving his letter, William king of 
Sicily wrote to him to the following effect : 

" To Henry, by the grace of God the illustrious king of 
the English, duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of 
Anjou, William, by the same grace, king of Sicily, the duke- 
dom of Apulia, and the principality of Capua, the enjoyment 



A.D. 1173. INVASION OF NOBHANDY. 369 

of health, and the wished-for triumph in victory over his 
enemies. On the receipt of your letter, we learned a thing 
of which indeed we cannot withoiit the greatest astonishment 
make mention, how that, forgetting the ordinary usages of 
humanity and violating the law of nature, the son has risen in 
rebellion against the father, the begotten against the begetter, 
the bowels have been moved to intestine war, the entrails 
have had recourse to arms, and, a new miracle taking place, 
quite unheard of in our times, the flesh has waged war against 
the blood, and the blood has sought means how to shed 
itself. And, although for the purpose of checking the violence 
of such extreme madness, the inconvenience of the distance does 
not allow of our power affording any assistance, still, with all the 
loving-kindness we possibly can, the expression of which, 
distance of place does not prevent, sincerely embracing your 
person and honor, we sympathize with your sorrow, and are 
indignant at your persecution, which we regard as though it 
were our own. However, we do hope and trust in the Lord, by 
whose judgment the judgments of kings are directed, that He 
will no longer allow your sons to be tempted beyond what 
they are able or ought to endure ; and that He who became 
obedient to the Father even unto death, will inspire them with 
the light of filial obedience, whereby they shall be brought to 
recollect that they are your flesh and blood, and, leaving the 
errors of their hostility, shall acknowledge themselves to be 
your sons, and return to their father, and thereby heal the dis- 
ruption of nature, and that the former union, being restored, 
will cement the bonds of natural affection." 

Accordingly, immediately after Easter, as previously men- 
tioned, the wicked fury of the traitors burst forth. For, raving 
with diabolical frenzy, they laid waste the territories of the king 
of England on both sides of the sea with fire and sword in every 
direction. Philip, earl of Flanders, with a large army, entered 
Normandy, and laid siege to Aumarle, and took it. Proceed- 
ing thence, he laid siege to the castle of Drincourt, which 
was surrendered to him ; here his brother Matthew, earl of 
Boulogne, died of a wound which he received from an arrow 
when off his guard. On his decease, his brother Peter, the 
bishop elect of Cambray, succeeded him in the earldom of 
Boulogne, and renouncing his election, was made a knight, but 
died shortly after without issue. 

VOL. I. B B 



370 ANNALS OP ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1173, 

In the meantime, Louis, king of the Franks, and the king of 
England, the son, laid siege to Verneuil ; but Hugh de Lacy 
and Hugh de Beauchamp, who were the constables thereof, 
defended the town of Verneuil boldly and with resolute 
spirit. In consequence of this, the king of France, after 
remaining there a whole month, with difficulty took a small 
portion of the town on the side where his engines of war 
had been planted. There were in Verneuil, besides the castle, 
three burghs ; each of which was separated from the other, 
and enclosed with a strong wall and a foss filled with water. 
One of these was called the Great Burgh, beyond the walls of 
which were pitched the tents of the king of France and his 
engines of war. At the end of this month, when the burghers 
in the Great Burgh saw that food and necessaries were failing 
them, and that they should have nothing to eat, being com- 
pelled by hunger and want, they made a truce for three days 
with the king of France, for the purpose of going to their lord 
the king of England, in order to obtain succour of him ; and 
they made an agreement that if they should not have succour 
within the next three days, they would surrender to him that 
burgh. The peremptory day for so doing was appointed on 
the vigil of Saint Laurence. 

They then gave hostages to the king of France to the above 
effect, and the king of France, the king of England, the son, 
and earl Robert, the brother of the king of France, earl 
Henry de Trois, Theobald, earl of Blois, and William, arch- 
bishop of Sens, made oath to them, that if they should sur- 
render the burgh to the king of France at the period 
named, the king of France would restore to them their hos- 
tages free and unmolested, and would do no injury to 
them, nor allow it to be done by others. This composition 
having been made to the above effect, the burgesses before- 
mentioned came to their lord the king of England, and an- 
nounced to him the agreement which they had made with the 
king of France and the king his son. 

On hearing of this, the king of England collected as large an 
army as he possibly could from Normandy and the rest of 
his dominions, and came to Breteuil, a castle belonging to 
Robert, earl of Leicester, which the earl himself, taking to 
flight on his approach, left without any protection. This 
the king entirely reduced to ashes, and the next day, for the 
purpose of engaging with the king of France, proceeded to a 



A.D. 1173. FLIGHT OP THE KING OP FRANCE. 371 

high hill, near Verneuil, with the whole of his army, and 
drew up his troops in order of battle. This too was the peremp- 
tory day upon which that portion of Verneuil was to be 
surrendered if it did not obtain succour. 

Upon this, Louis, king of the Franks, sent "William, arch- 
bishop of Sens, earl Henry, and earl Theobald, to the king of 
England, the father, who appointed an interview to be held be- 
tween them on the morrow ; and the king of England, to his 
misfortune, placed confidence in them ; for he was deceived. 
For on the morrow the king of France neither came to the in- 
terview, nor yet sent any messenger. On this, the king of Eng- 
land sent out spies to observe the position of the king of France 
and his army ; but while the spies were delaying their return, 
that portion of Verneuil was surrendered to the king of France 
to which he had laid siege. However, he did not dare re- 
tain it in his hands, having transgressed the oath which he 
had made to the burghers. For he neither restored to them 
their hostages, nor preserved the peace as he had promised ; 
but, entering the town, made the burghers prisoners, carried 
off their property, set fire to the Burgh, and then, taking to 
flight, carried away with him the burghers before-mentioned 
into France. 

When word was brought of this to the king of England, he 
pursued them with the edge of the sword, slew many of 
them, and took considerable numbers, and at nightfall ar- 
rived at Verneuil, where he remained one night, and ordered 
the walls which had been levelled to be rebuilt. But, in 
order that these events may be kept in memory, it is as well to 
know that this flight of the king of France took place on the 
fifth day before the ides of August, being the fifth day of the 
week, upon the vigil of Saint Laurence, to the praise and 
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, who by punishing the crime of 
perfidy, so speedily avenged the indignity done to his Martyr. 

On the following day, the king of England, the father, left 
Verneuil, and took the castle of Damville, which belonged to 
Gilbert de Tilieres, and captured with it a great number of 
knights and men-at-anns. After this, the king came to Rouen, 
and thence dispatched his Brabanters, in whom he placed 
more confidence than the rest, into Brittany, against Hugh, 
earl of Chester, and Ralph de Fougeres, who had now gained 
possession of nearly the whole of it. When these troops ap- 

B B 2 



372 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1173. 

preached, the earl of Chester and Ralph de Fougeres went 
forth to meet them. In consequence of this, preparations were 
made for battle ; the troops were drawn out in battle array, and 
everything put in readiness for the combat. Accordingly, the 
engagement having commenced, the enemies of the king of 
England were routed, and the men of Brittany were laid pros- 
trate and utterly defeated. The earl, however, and Ralph de 
Fougeres, with many of the most powerful men of Brittany, 
shut themselves up in the fort of Dol, which they had taken 
by stratagem ; 19 on which, the Brabanters besieged them on 
every side, on the thirteenth day before the calends of Septem- 
ber, being the second day of the week. In this battle there 
were taken by the Brabanters seventeen knights remarkable 
for their valour, whose names were as follows : Hascuil de 
Saint Hilaire, William Patrick, Patrick de la Laude, Haimer 
de Falaise, Geoffrey Farcy, William de Rulent, Ralph de 
Sens, John Boteler, Vicaire de Dol, William des Loges, William 
de la Motte, Robert de Treham, Payen Cornute, Reginald 
Pincun, Reginald de Champ Lambert, and Eudo Bastard. 19 * 
Besides these, many others were captured, both horse and foot, 
and more than fifteen hundred of the Bretons were slain. 

Now, on the day after this capture and slaughter, " Ru- 
mour, than which nothing in speed more swift exists," 20 
reached the ears of the king of England, who, immediately 
setting out on his march towards Dol, arrived there on the fifth 
day of the week, and immediately ordered his stone-engines, 
and other engines of war, to be got in readiness. The earl of 
Chester, however, and those who were with him in the fort, being 
unable to defend it, surrendered it to the king, on the seven- 
teenth day before the calends of September, being the Lord's 
Day ; and, in like manner, the whole of Brittany, with all its 
fortresses, was restored to him, and its chief men were carried into 
captivity. In the fortress of Dol many knights and yeomen were 
taken prisoners, whose names were as follow : Hugh, earl of 
Chester, Ralph de Fougeres, William de Fougeres, Hamo 21 

19 Our author evidently intends a pun here. " Incluserunt se infra 
turrim Doli, quam dolo ceperant." 

l * There are but sixteen named here. 

20 A quotation from Virgil 

" Fama, malum quo non aliud velocius ullum 
Mobilitate viget." 

21 Most of these names are evidently corrupt. After this name fql- 
lows " Ceones," evidently part of sonic other name. 



A. D. 1173. CONFERENCE BETWEEN HENEY AND LOUIS. 373 

L'Espine, Eobert Patrick, Ingelram Patrick, Richard de Love- 
cot, Gwigain Guiun, Oliver de Roche, Alan de Tintimac, Ivel, 
son of Ralph de Fougeres, Gilo de Castel Girun, Philip de 
Landewi, William de Gorham, Ivel de Mayne, Geoffrey de 
Buissiers, Reginald de Marche Lemarchis, Hervey de Nitri, 
Hamelin de Eni, William de Saint Brice, William de Chas- 
telar, William . de Orange, Ralph Waintras, Robert Boteler, 
Henry de Grey, Grimbald Fitz-Haket, Geoffrey Abbat, John 
Guarein, John de Breerec, Hugh Avenel, Hamelin de Pratelles, 
Swalo de la Bosothe, Secard Burdin, Walter Bruno, John 
Ramart, Hugh de Bussay, Jerdan de Masrue, Henry de Saint 
Hilaire, the brothers Hascuil, Bartholomew de Busserie, Her- 
bert de Buillon, Bauran de Tanet, Roland Fitz- Ralph, Roellin 
Fitz-Ralph, Geoffrey de Minihac, Guido Butefact, Celdewin 
Guiun, Ivel de Pont, Hamelin Abbat, Robert de Baioches, 
Elias d'Aubigny, Reginald Cactus, John de Curtis, Philip de 
Luvenni, Henry de Wastines, Henry de Saint Stephen, "Wil- 
liam Deschapelles, Roger des Loges, Bencellard de Serland, 
William de Bois Berenger, John de Ruel, Oliver de Mont- 
sorel, Hamund de Rochefort, Robert de Lespiney, John 
des Loges, Geoffrey Carlisle, Ralph de Tomal, Ralph le 
Poters, Gilbert de Croi, Ralph Pucin, Matthew de Praels, 
Richard de Cambrai, William le Francais, Oliver Rande, 
Ralph Ruffin, Springard, Roger de Chevereul, William des 
Loges, and many others, the names of whom are not written 
in this book. 

.After these victories which God granted to the king of Eng- 
land, the son of the empress Matilda, the king of France and 
his supporters fell into despondency, and used all possible 
endeavours, that peace might be made between the king of 
England and his sons. In consequence of this, there was at 
length a meeting between Gisors and Trie, at which Louis, king 
of the Franks, attended, accompanied by the archbishops, 
bishops, earls, and barons of his realm, and bringing with him 
Henry, Richard, and Geoffrey, the sons of the king of England. 
Henry, king of England, the father, attended, with the arch- 
bishops, bishops, earls, and barons of his dominions. 

A conference was accordingly held between him and his sons, 
for the purpose of establishing peace, on the seventh day before 
the calends of October, being the third day of the week. At 
this conference, the king, the father, offered to the king, his 



374 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOYEDEJT. A.D. 1173. 

son, a moiety of the revenues of his demesnes in England, 
and four fitting castles in the same territory ; or, if his 
son should prefer to remain in Normandy, the king, the 
father, offered a moiety of the revenues of Normandy, and all 
the revenues of the lands that were his father's, the earl of 
Anjou, and three convenient castles in Normandy, and one 
fitting castle in Anjou, one fitting castle in Maine, and one 
fitting castle in Touraine. To his son Eichard, also, he offered 
a moiety of the revenues of Aquitaine, and four fitting castles 
in the same territory. And to his son Geoffrey he offered all 
the lands that belonged, by right of inheritance, to the 
daughter of duke Conan, if he should, with the sanction of our 
lord the pope, be allowed to marry the above-named lady. The 
king, the father, also submitted himself entirely to the arbi- 
tration of the archbishop of Tarento and the legates of our 
lord the pope, as to adding to the above as much more of his 
revenues, and giving the same to his sons, as they should 
pronounce to be reasonable, reserving to himself the adminis- 
tration of justice and the royal authority. 

But it did not suit the purpose of the king of France that 
the king's sons should at present make peace with their father: 
in addition to which, at the same conference, Robert, earl of 
Leicester, uttered much opprobrious and abusive language to the 
king of England, the father, and laid his hand on his sword for 
the purpose of striking the king; but he was hindered by 
the byestanders from so doing, and the conference was imme- 
diately brought to a close. 

On the day after the conference, the knights of the king of 
France had a skirmish with the knights of the king of England, 
between Curteles and Gisors ; in which fight Ingelram, castel- 
lan of Trie, was made prisoner by earl "William de Mandeville, 
and presented to the king, the father. In the meantime, Robert, 
earl of Leicester, having raised a large army, crossed over 
into England, and was received by earl Hugh Bigot in the 
castle of Fremingham, 22 where he supplied him with all 
necessaries. After this, the said Robert, earl of Leicester, 
laid siege to Hakeneck, the castle of Ranulph de Broc, and 
took it; for, at this period, Richard de Lucy, justiciary of 
England, and Humphrey de Bohun, the king's constable, 
had marched with a large army into Lothian, the territory of 
the king of Scotland, for the purpose of ravaging it. 
23 Framlinghara, in Suffolk. 



A.D. 1173. KING HEKET AKHIVES IN ANJOTT. 375 

When, however, they heard of the arrival of the earl of Lei- 
cester in England, they were greatly alarmed, and laying all 
other matters aside, gave and received a truce from the king of 
Scotland, and, after hostages were delivered on both sides for 
the preservation of peaee until the feast of Saint Hilary, has- 
tened with all possible speed to Saint Edmund's. Thither 
also came to them Reginald, earl of Cornwall, the king's uncle, 
Robert, earl of Gloucester, and "William, earl of Arundel, 
On the approach of the festival of All Saints, the above-named 
earl of Leicester withdrew from Fremingham for the purpose 
of marching to Leicester, and came with his army to a place 
near St. Edmund's, which is known as Fornham, situate on 
a piece of marshy ground, not far from the church of Saint 
Genevieve. On his arrival being known, the earls, with 
a considerable force, and Humphrey de Bohun with three 
hundred knights, soldiers of the king, went forth armed 
for battle to meet the earl of Leicester, carrying before them 
the banner of Saint Edmund the king and Martyr as their 
standard. The ranks being drawn up in battle array, by 
virtue of the aid of God and of his most glorious Martyr Saint 
Edmund, they attacked the line in which the earl of Leicester 
had taken his position, and in a moment, in the twinkling of 
an eye, the earl of Leicester was vanquished and taken prisoner, 
as also his wife and Hugh des Chateaux, a nobleman of the 
kingdom of France, and all their might was utterly crushed. 

There fell in this battle more than ten thousand Flemings, 
while all the rest were taken prisoners, and being thrown 
into prison in irons, were there starved to death. As for the 
earl of Leicester and his wife and Hugh des Chateaux, and the 
rest of the more wealthy men who were captured with them, 
they were sent into Normandy to the king the father ; on which 
the king placed them in confinement at Falaise, and Hugh, earl 
of Chester, with them. 

On the feast of Saint Martin, king Henry, the father, entered 
Anjou with his army, and shortly after Geoffrey, lord of Hay, 
surrendered to him the castle of Hay. After this there 
were surrendered to him the castle of Pruilly and the castle 
of Campigny, which Robert de Ble had held against him. In 
this castle there were many knights and men-at-arms taken pri- 
soners, whose names were as follow : Haimeric de Ble, Baldwin 
de Brisehaie, Hugh de Laloc, Hugh de Danars, HughDelamotte, 



376 ANNALS OF EOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1174. 

William de Rivan, Simon de Bernezai, John Maumonie, Hubert 
Ruscevals, William Maingot, Saer de Terreis, John de Cham- 
pigny, Walter de Powis, Brice de Ceaux, Haimeric Ripant, 
Robert L' Anglais, Grossin Champemain, Isambert Wellun, 
Geoffrey Carre, Payen Juge, William Bugun, Castey, vas- 
sal of Saer de Terreis, Guiard, vassal of John Maumonie, 
Roger, vassal of William Rivan, Peter, vassal of John 
de Champigny, Philip, vassal of Hugh le Davis, Russell, 
vassal of Hubert Ruscevals, Vulgier and Haimeric, vassals 
of Peter de Poscy, Osmund, Everard, and Geoffrey, vassals 
of Haimeric de Ble, Gilbert and Albinus, vassals of Hugh 
de Laloc, Brito and Geoffrey, vassals of Walter Powis, Hai- 
meric and Peter, vassals of Hugh Delamotte, and Brito and 
Sunennes, vassals of Simon de Bernezai. 

In the same year, Louis, king of the Pranks, knighted 
Richard, the son of king Henry. In this year, also, Robert the 
prior of Dare, who was bishop elect of the church of Arras, re- 
nounced that election, and was elected bishop of the diocese 
of Cambrai, but before he was consecrated was slain by his 
enemies. In the same year, Henry, king of England, con- 
trary to the prohibition of his son, king Henry, and after 
appeal made to our lord the pope, gave the archbishopric 
of Canterbury, to Richard prior of Dover, the bishopric of 
Bath to Reginald, son of Jocelyn, bishop of Salisbury, the 
bishopric of Winchester to Richard de Ivechester, archdeacon 
of Poitou, the bishopric of Hereford to Robert Folliot, the 
bishopric of Ely to Geoffrey Riddel, archdeacon of Canter- 
bury, and the bishopric of Chichester to John de Greneford. 
After this, at the time of the feast of Saint Andrew, the king 
of England, the father, took Vend6me by storm, which was 
held against him by Bucard de Lavardin, who had expelled 
therefrom his father, the earl of Vendome. 

In the year of grace 1174, being the twentieth year of 
the reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the 
said Henry spent the festival of the Nativity of our Lord at 
Caen in Normandy, and a truce was made between him and 
Louis, king of the Franks, from the feast of Saint Hilary until 
the end of Easter. In the same year, and at the time above- 
named, Hugh, bishop of Durham, at an interview held between 
himself and William, king of the Scots, on the confines of the 
kingdoms of England and Scotland, namely at Revedeur, gave 



A. D. 1174. THE EABL OF FEBREBS SACKS NOTTINGHAM. 377 

to the above-named king of the Scots three hundred marks of 
silver from the lands of the barons of Northumberland, for 
granting a truce from the feast of Saint Hilary until the end of 
Easter. 

In the meantime, Roger de Mowbray fortified his castle at 
Kinardeferie, in Axholme ; w and Hugh, bishop of Durham, 
fortified the castle of Alverton. 24 After Easter, breaking the 
truce, Henry, the son of the king of England, and Philip, earl 
of Flanders, having raised a large army, determined to come 
over to England. 

In the meantime, William, king of the Scots, came into 
Northumberland with a large force, and there with his Scotch 
and Galloway men committed execrable deeds. For his 
men ripped asunder pregnant women, and, dragging forth the 
embryos, tossed them upon the points of lances. Infants, 
children, youths, aged men, all of both sexes, from the highest 
to the lowest, they slew alike without mercy or ransom. The 
priests and clergy they murdered in the very churches upon 
the altars. Consequently, wherever the Scots and the Gallo- 
way men came, horror and carnage prevailed. Shortly after, 
the king of the Scots sent his brother David to Leicester, 
in order to assist the troops of the earl of Leicester ; but be- 
fore he arrived there, Reginald, earl of Cornwall, and Richard 
de Lacy, justiciary of England, had burned the city of Leices- 
ter to the ground, together with its churches and buildings, 
with the exception of the castle. 

After Pentecost, Anketill Mallory, the constable of Leicester, 
fought a battle with the burgesses of Northampton, and de- 
feated them, taking more than two hundred prisoners, and 
slaying a considerable number. Shortly after, Robert, earl of 
Ferrers, together with the knights of Leicester, came at day- 
break to Nottingham, a royal town, which Reginald de Lucy 
had in his charge ; and having taken it, sacked it, and then 
set it on fire, carrying away with him the burgesses thereof. 

At this period, Geoffrey, bishop elect of Lincoln, son of 
king Henry, 25 took the castle of Kinardeferie, and levelled 
it with the ground. Also, Robert 26 de Mowbray, the con- 

23 In Lincolnshire. ** North Allerton, in Yorkshire. 

25 His eldest illegitimate son. 

26 Called above, Roger : which is the name given by the other chro- 
niclers. 



378 ANNALS OF KOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1174. 

stable of the same castle, while going towards Leicester to ob- 
tain assistance, was taken prisoner on the road, by the people of 
Clay, and detained. Earl Hugh Bigot also took the city of 
Norwich by storm, and burned it. In addition to this, the 
bishop elect of Lincoln, with Roger, the archbishop of York, 
laid siege to Malasert, a castle belonging to Roger de Mowbray, 
and took it, with many knights and men-at-arms therein, and 
gave it into the charge of the archbishop of York. Before 
he departed, he also fortified the castle of Topcliffe, which he 
delivered into the charge of William de Stuteville. 

In the meantime, Richard, the archbishop elect of Canter- 
bury, and Reginald, the bishop elect of Bath, set out for Rome, 
for the purpose of confirming their own elections and those of 
the other bishops elect of England. To oppose them, king 
Henry, the son, sent to Rome Master Berter, a native of Or- 
leans. When the said parties had come into the presence 
of pope Alexander, and the cardinals, and our lord the pope 
had greatly censured the absence of the other bishops elect of 
England, and the archbishop elect of Canterbury had done all 
in his power to exculpate them, our lord the pope asked, with 
still greater earnestness, why the bishop elect of Ely had not 
come; on which Berter of Orleans made answer: "My lord, 
he has a Scriptural excuse;" 26 to whom the pope made 
answer : " Brother, what is the excuse ?" on which the other 
replied : " He has married a wife, and therefore cannot come." 
In the end, however, although there was a great altercation 
and considerable bandying of hard language on both sides be- 
fore our lord the pope and the cardinals, our lord the pope 
confirmed the election of the archbishop of Canterbury : on 
which, Reginald, the bishop elect of Bath, wrote to his master 
the king of England to the following eifect : 

" To Henry, the illustrious king of England, duke of Nor- 
mandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, his most dearly 
beloved lord, Reginald, by the grace of God, bishop elect 
of Bath, health in Him who gives health to kings. Be it 
known to the prudence of your majesty, that, at the court 
of our lord the pope, we found determined opponents from 
the kingdom of France, and others still more determined from 
your own territories. In consequence of this, we were obliged 
to submit to many hardships there, and to make a tedious stay, 
till at last, at our repeated entreaties, by the co-operation of 
26 Alluding to St. Luke xiv. 20. 



A.D. 1174. THE KING OF THE SCOTS BESIEGES CABLISLE. 379 

the Divine grace, the obduracy of our lord the pope was so far 
softened, that, in the presence of all, he solemnly confirmed 
the election of the lord archbishop elect of Canterbury; and after 
having so confirmed his election, consecrated him on the Lord's 
day following. On the third day after his consecration, he 
gave him the pall, and a short period of time having inter- 
vened, conferred on him the dignity of the primacy. In ad- 
dition to this, it being our desire that he should have full 
power of inflicting ecclesiastical vengeance upon those men of 
your realms who have iniquitously and in the treachery of their 
wickedness, raised their heel against your innocence, we did, 
after much solicitation, obtain the favour of the bestowal by our 
lord the pope of the legateship on the same province. As for 
my own election, and those of the others, they are matters still 
in suspense ; and our lord the pope has determined to settle and 
determine nothing with regard to us, until such time as your son 
shall have been brought to a reconciliation. However, we put 
our trust in the Lord that the interests of myself, and of all 
the other bishops elect, may be safely entrusted to the prudent 
care of my lord the archbishop of Canterbury." 

In the same year, at the feast of the Nativity of Saint John 
the Baptist, Eichard de Lucy laid siege to the castle of Hun- 
tingdon, on which the knights of that castle burned the town 
to the ground. Kichard de Lucy then erected a new castle 
before the gates of the said castle of Huntingdon, and gave 
it in charge to earl Simon. 

In the meanwhile, William, king of the Scots, laid siege to 
Carlisle, of which Robert de Vals had the safe keeping ; and, 
leaving a portion of his army to continue the siege, with the 
remainder of it he passed through Northumberland, ravaging 
the lands of the king and his barons. He took the castle 
of Liddel, the castle of Burgh, the castle of Appleby, the 
castle of Mercwrede, and the castle of Irebothe, which was 
held by Odonel de Umfraville, after which he returned to the 
siege of Carlisle. Here he continued the siege, until Robert 
de Vals, in consequence of provisions failing him and the 
other persons there, made a treaty with him on the follow- 
ing terms, namely, that, at the feast of Saint Michael next 
ensuing, he would surrender to him the castle and town of 
Carlisle, unless, in the meantime, he should obtain succour 
from his master the king of England. 



380 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1174. 

On this, the king of the Scots, departing thence, laid siege to 
the castle of Prudhoe, which belonged to Odonel de Umfra- 
ville, but was unable to take it. For Robert de Stuteville, 
sheriff of York, William de Vesci, Ranulph de Glanville, 
Ralph de Tilly, constable of the household of the arch- 
bishop of York, Bernard de Baliol, and Odonel de Umfraville, 
having assembled a large force, hastened to its succour. 

On learning their approach, the king of Scotland retreated 
thence, and laid siege to the castle of Alnwick, which belonged 
to William de Vesci, and then, dividing his army into three 
divisions, kept one with himself, and gave the command of 
the other two to earl Dunecan and the earl of Angus, and Ri- 
chard de Morville, giving them orders to lay waste the 
neighbouring provinces in all directions, slaughter the people, 
and carry off the spoil. Oh, shocking times ! then might you 
have heard the shrieks of women, the cries of the aged, the 
groans of the dying, and the exclamations of despair of the 
youthful ! 

In the meantime, the king of England, the son, and Philip, 
earl of Flanders, came with a large army to Gravelines, for 
the purpose of crossing over to England. On hearing of this, 
the king of England, the father, who had marched with his 
army into Poitou, and had taken many fortified places and 
castles, together with the city of Saintes, and two fortresses 
there, one of which was called Fort Maror, as also the cathedral 
church of Saintes, which the knights and men-at-arms had 
strengthened against him with arms and a supply of provisions, 
returned into Anjou, and took the town of Ancenis, which be- 
longed to Guion de Ancenis, near Saint Florence. On taking it, 
he strengthened it with very strong fortifications, and retained 
it in his own hands, and then laid waste the adjoining parts of 
the province with fire and sword ; he also rooted up the vines 
and fruit-bearing trees, after which he returned into Normandy, 
while the king, his son, and Philip, earl of Flanders, were still 
detained at Gravelines, as the wind was contrary, and they were 
unable to cross over. On this, the king of England, the father, 
came to Barbeflet, 27 where a considerable number of ships had 
been assembled against his arrival, and, praised be the name of 
the Lord ! as it pleased the Lord, so did it come to pass ; who, by 
His powerful might, changed the wind to a favourable quarter, 
27 Harfleur. 



A.D. 1174. THE KING OF THE SCOTS IS TAKEN PRISONER. 381 

and thus suddenly granted him a passage over to England. Im- 
mediately on this, he embarked, and, on the following day, 
landed at Southampton, in England, on the eight day before 
the ides of July, being the second day of the week, bringing 
with him his wife, queen Eleanor, and queen Margaret, 
daughter of Louis, king of the Franks, and wife of his son 
Henry, with Robert, earl of Leicester, and Hugh, earl of 
Chester, whom he immediately placed in confinement. 

On the day after this, he set out on a pilgrimage to the tomb 
of Saint Thomas the Martyr, archbishop of Canterbury. On his 
approach, as soon as he was in sight of the church, in which 
the body of the blessed martyr lay buried, he dismounted 
from the horse on which he rode, took off his shoes, and, 
barefoot, and clad in woollen garments, walked three miles to 
the tomb of the martyr, with such humility and compunction 
of heart, that it may be believed beyond a doubt to have been 
the work of Him who looketh down on the earth, and maketh 
it to tremble. To those who beheld them, his footsteps, 
along the road on which he walked, seemed to be covered with 
blood, and really were so ; for his tender feet being cut by the 
hard stones, a great quantity of blood flowed from them on to 
the ground. When he had arrived at the tomb, it was a holy 
thing to see the affliction which he suffered, with sobs and 
tears, and the discipline to which he submitted from the hands 
of the bishops and a great number of priests and monks. Here, 
also, aided by the prayers of many holy men, he passed the 
night, before the sepulchre of the blessed Martyr, in prayer, 
fasting, and lamentations. As for the gilts and revenues 
which, for the remission of his sins, he bestowed on this church, 
they can never under any circumstance be obliterated from the 
remembrance thereof. In the morning of the following day, 
mfter hearing mass, he departed thence, on the third day be- 
fore the ides of July, being Saturday, with the intention of 
proceeding to London. And, inasmuch as he was mindful of 
the Lord in his entire heart, the Lord granted unto him the vic- 
tory over his enemies, and delivered them captive into his hands. 

For, on the very same Saturday on which the king left 
Canterbury, William, king of the Scots, was taken prisoner at 
Alnwick by the above-named knights of Yorkshire, who had 
pursued him after his retreat from Prudhoe. Thus, even 
thus; "How rarely is it that vengeance with halting step 



382 AlTOAtS OF EOGER DE HOYKDEK. A.D. 1174. 

forsakes the pursuit of the wicked !" M Together with him, 
there were taken prisoners Richard Cumin, William de Mor- 
timer, William de 1'Isle, Henry Revel, Ralph de Ver, Jor- 
dan le Fleming, Waltheof Fitz-Baldwin de Bicre, Richard 
Maluvcl, and many others, who voluntarily allowed them- 
selves to be made prisoners, lest they might appear to have 
sanctioned the capture of their lord. 

On the same day, Hugh, count de Bar sur Seine, nephew of 
Hugh, bishop of Durham, effected a landing, at Herterpol 29 with 
forty knights and five hundred Flemings, for whom the before- 
named bishop had sent ; but in consequence of the capture of 
the king of Scotland, the bishop immediately allowed the 
said Flemings to return home, having first given them allow- 
ance and pay for forty days. Count Hugh, however, together 
with the knights who had come with him, he made to stay, and 
gave the castle of Alverton 30 into their safe keeping. 

These things having taken place, Uctred, the son of Fergus, 
and Gilbert his brother, the leaders of the men of Galloway, 
immediately upon the capture of their lord the king of the 
Scots, returned to their country, expelled the king's thanes 
from their territories, and slew without mercy those of 
English or French origin whom they found therein. The 
fortresses and castles which the king of the Scots had fortified 
in their territories they laid siege to, and, capturing them, 
levelled them with the ground. They also earnestly entreated 
the king of England, the father, at the same time presenting 
him many gifts, to rescue them from the rule of the king of 
Scotland, and render them subject to his own sway. 

In the meantime, Louis, king of the Franks, hearing that the 
king of England, the father, had crossed over, and that the king 
of Scots was taken prisoner, with whose misfortunes he greatly 
condoled, recalled the king of England the son, and Philip, earl 
of Flanders, who were still staying at Gravelines ; and after they 
had returned to him, laid siege to Rouen on all sides, except 
that on which the river Seine flows. 

The king, the father, on hearing of the capture of the king 
of the Scots, rejoiced with exceeding great joy, and after a thanks- 
giving to Almighty God and the blessed martyr Thomas, set out 

28 " Raro antecedentem scelestum deserit poena pede claudo." 
- a Hartlepool. 3u North Allerton. 



A.D. 1174. KING HENRY SAILS FOE NOltMANDT. 383 

for Huntingdon, and laid siege to the castle, which was surren- 
dered to him on the Lord's day following, being the twelfth day 
before the calends of August. The knights and men-at-arms 
who were in the castle threw themselves on the king's mercy, 
safety being granted to life and limb. Immediately upon 
this, the king departed thence with his army towards Frem- 
ingham, 31 the castle of earl Hugh Bigot ; where the earl 
himself was, with a large body of Flemings. The king, on 
drawing nigh to Fremingham, encamped at a place which is 
called Seleham, and remained there that night. On the follow- 
ing day, earl Hugh Bigot came to him, and, making a treaty of 
peace with him, surrendered to him the castle of Fremingham, 
and the castle of Bungay, and with considerable difficulty ob- 
tained the king's permission that the Flemings who were with 
him might without molestation return home. At this place, 
the horse of Tostes de Saint Omer, a knight of the Temple, 
struck the king on the leg, and injured him considerably. On 
the following day, namely, on the seventh day before the 
calends of August, the king departed from Seleham, and pro- 
ceeded to Northampton ; on his arrival at which place William, 
king of the Scots, was brought to him, with his feet fast- 
ened beneath a horse's belly. There also came to him Hugh, 
bishop of Durham, who delivered to him possession of the 
castle of Durham, the castle of Norham, and the new castle 
of Alverton, which he had fortified, and, after considerable 
difficulty, obtained permission that his nephew, the count de 
Bar, and the knights who had come with him, might return to 
their own country. Roger de Mowbray also came thither to 
him, and surrendered to him the castle of Tresk, 32 and the 
earl of Ferrers delivered up to him the castles of Tutesbury, 33 
and of Duffield; Anketill Mallory also and William de Dive, 
constables of the earl of Leicester, surrendered to him the 
castles of Leicester, of Mountsorrel, and of Groby. 

Thus then, within the space of three weeks, was the whole 
of England restored to tranquillity, and all its fortified places 
delivered into the king's hands. These matters being arranged 
to his satisfaction, he speedily crossed over from England 
to Normandy, and landed at Barbeflet on the sixth day 
before the ides of August, being the fifth day of the week, 

31 Fraailingham, in Suffolk. ::D Thirsk. y ' Tutbury. 



384 AKNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A. D. 1171. 

taking with him his Brabanters and a thousand "Welchmen, 
together with "William, king of the Scots, Robert, earl of 
Leicester, and Hugh, earl of Chester, whom he placed in con- 
finement, first at Caen, and afterwards at Falaise. 

On the same day on which the king landed at Barbeflet, he 
met on the sea -shore Richard, archbishop of Canterbury, on 
his return from Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff, with the pall 
and legateship and primacy of the whole of England, together 
with Reginald, bishop of Bath, whom the said archbishop 
had consecrated at Saint John de Maurienne, on their re- 
turn from Rome. The king, however, did not wish to de- 
tain them with him, but sent them on to England. After 
this, on the Lord's day next ensuing, the king, the father, arrived 
with his Brabanters and Welchmen at Rouen, which the king 
of France and the king of England, the son, were besieging 
on one side, while on the other there was free egress and 
ingress. On the following morning, the king sent his Welch- 
men beyond the river Seine ; who, making way by main force, 
broke through the midst of the camp of the king of France, 
and arrived unhurt at the great forest, and on the same day 
slew more than a hundred of the men of the king of France. 

Now, the king of France had been staying there hardly a 
month, when, lo ! the king of England, the father, coming from 
England, opened the gates of the city, which the burgesses had 
blocked up, and sallying forth with his knights and men-at- 
arms, caused the fosses which had been made between the army 
of the king of France and the city, to be filled up with logs of 
timber, stones, and earth, and to be thus made level. As for 
the king of France, he and his men remained in their tents, 
and were not inclined to come forth. The rest of the peo- 
ple of the king of England took up their positions for the 
defence of the walls, but no one attacked them ; however, a 
part of the army of the king of France made an attempt to 
destroy their own engines of war. 

On the following day, early in the morning, the king of 
France sent the weaker portion of his army into his own terri- 
tories ; and, with the permission of the king of England, fol- 
lowed them on the same day to a place which is called Mal- 
aunay, and lies between Rouen and the town called Tostes ; 
having first given security by the hand of "William, arch- 
bishop of Sens, and of earl Theobald, that on the following day 



A. D. 1174. CONFEEENCE BETWEEN HENEY AND HIS SONS. 385 

he would return to confer with the king of England on making 
peace between him and his sons. The king of France, how- 
ever, did not keep his engagement and his oath, and did not 
come on the following day to the conference, hut departed into 
his own territories. 

However, after the expiration of a few days, he again sent 
the above-named archbishop of Sens and earl Theobald to the 
king of England, appointing a day for the conference, to be 
held at Gisors, on the Nativity of Saint Mary. When they met 
there they could not come to an agreement, on account of 
Richard, earl of Poitou, who was at this time in Poitou, be- 
sieging the castles and subjects of his father. In consequence 
of this, they again held another conference between them, upon 
the festival of Saint Michael, between Tours and Amboise, 
on which occasion they agreed to a truce on these terms : 
that the said Richard, earl of Poitou, should be excluded from 
all benefit of the truce, and that the king of France and the 
king of England, the son, should give him no succour what- 
ever. Upon these arrangements being made on either side, 
the king of England, the father, moved on his army into 
Poitou ; on which, Richard, earl of Poitou, his son, not daring 
to await his approach, fled from place to place. When he 
afterwards came to understand that the king of France, and 
the king, his brother, had excluded him from the benefit of 
the truce, he was greatly indignant thereat; and, coming 
with tears, he fell on his face upon the ground at the feet of his 
father, and imploring pardon, was received into his father's 
bosom. These events took place at Poitou, on the eleventh day 
before the calends of October, being the second day of the 
week ; and thus, the king and his son Richard becoming re- 
j2onciled, they entered the city of Poitou. 

After this, they both set out together for a conference held 
between Tours and Amboise, on the day before the calends of 
October, being the second day of the week and the day after 
the feast of Saint Michael. Here the king, the son, and 
Richard and Geoffrey, his brothers, by the advice and consent 
of the king and barons of France, made the treaty of peace 
underwritten with the king their father : 

"Be it known unto all present as well as to come, that, by 
the will of God, peace has been made between our lord the 
king and his sons, Henry, Richard, and Geoffrey, on the 

VOL. i. c c 



S86 A2TXAL3 OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEtf. A.D. 1174. 

following terms : Henry, the king, the son of the king, and 
his brothers aforesaid, have returned unto their father and to 
his service as their liege lord, free and absolved from all oaths 
whatsoever which they have made between themselves, or 
with any other persons, against him, or against his subjects. 
All liegemen and barons who, for their sake, have abandoned 
their fealty to their father, they have released from all oaths 
whatsoever which they have made to themselves ; and, freely 
acquitted from all oaths and absolved from all covenants which 
they had made to them, the same have returned to their 
homage and allegiance to our lord the king. Also, our lord 
the king, and all his liegemen and barons, are to receive pos- 
session of all their lands and castles which they held fifteen 
days before his sons withdrew from him. So, in like manner, 
his liegemen and barons who Avithdrew from him and followed 
his sons, are to receive possession of their lands which they 
had fifteen days before they withdrew from him. Also, our 
lord the king has laid aside all displeasure against his barons 
and liegemen who withdrew from him, so that by reason 
thereof he will do no evil to them, so long as they shall faith- 
fully serve him as their liege lord. And, in like manner, the 
king, his son, has pardoned all, both clerks as well as laymen, 
who took part with his father, and has remitted all displeasure 
against them, and has given security into the hand of our lord 
the king, his father, that he will not do, or seek to do, in all his 
life any evil or harm to those who obeyed him, by reason of 
their so doing. Also, upon these conditions, the king gives 
to the king, his son, two suitable castles in Normandy, at 
the option of his father, and fifteen thousand pounds, Anjouin, 
yearly revenue. Also, to his son Kichard he gives two suitable 
mansions in Poitou, whence evil cannot ensue to the king, 
and a moiety of the revenues of Poitou in ready money. To 
his son Geoffrey he gives, in ready money, the moiety of 
what he would receive in Brittany on his marriage with the 
daughter of earl Conan, whom he is to take to wife ; and after, 
by the license of the Roman Church, he shall have taken 
her to wife, then he shall have the whole of the revenues 
accruing by that marriage, in such manner as is set forth in 
the deed executed by earl Conan. But, as to the prisoners 
who have made a composition with our lord the king before 
this treaty was made with our lord the king, namely, the 



A.D. 1174. TEEATY OF PEACE BETWEEN HENEY iND HIS SONS. 387 

king of Scotland, the earl of Leicester, the earl of Chester, 
and Ralph de Fougeres, and their pledges, and the pledges of 
the other prisoners whom he had hefore that time, they are to 
be excepted out of this treaty. The other prisoners are, how- 
ever, to be set at liberty on both sides ; but upon the under- 
standing, that our lord the king shall take hostages as pledges 
from such of his prisoners as he shall think fit, and as shall be 
able to give the same; and from the rest he shall take security 
by the assurance and oaths of themselves and of their friends. 
As for the castles which have been built or fortified in the 
territories of our lord the king since the war began, they 
are, subject to the king's wishes thereon, to be reduced to the 
same state in which they were fifteen days before the war 
began. Further, be it known, that king Henry, the son, has 
covenanted with our lord the king, his father, that he will 
strictly observe all gifts in almoign which he has given, or 
shall give, out of his lands, and the gifts of lands which 
he has given, or shall give, to his liegemen for their services. 
He has also covenanted that he will strictly and inviolably 
confirm the gifts which the king, his father, has made to his 
brother John ; namely, a thousand pounds of yearly revenues 
out of his demesne lands and escheats in England at his own 
option, together with their appurtenances ; also the castle of 
Nottingham with the county thereof, and the castle of Marl- 
borough with its appurtenances ; also, in Normandy, one thou- 
sand pounds, Anjouin, of yearly revenue, and two castles in 
Normandy at the option of his father ; and in Anjou and 
the lands which belonged to the earl of Anjou, one thousand 
pounds, Anjouin, of revenue, as also one castle in Anjou, one 
castle in Touraine, and one castle in Maine. It has also been 
covenanted by our lord the king, in the love which he bears 
to his son, that all those who withdrew from him after his 
son, and offended him by such withdrawal, may return into 
the territories of our lord the king under his protection. 
Also, for the chattels which on such withdrawal they carried 
away, they shall not be answerable : as to murder, or treason, 
or the maiming of any limb, they are to be answerable accord- 
ing to the laws and customs of the land. Also, as to those who 
before the war took to flight for any cause, and then entered 
the service of his son, the same may, from the love he bears to 
his son, return in peace, if they give pledge and surety that they 



388 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1174. 

will abide their trial for those offences of which, before the 
war, they have been guilty. Those, also, who were awaiting 
trial at the time when they withdrew to his son, are to return 
in peace, upon condition that their trials are to be in the same 
state as when they withdrew. Henry, the king, the son of 
our lord the king, has given security into the hands of his 
father that this agreement shall on his part be strictly ob- 
served. And, further, Henry, the king's son, and his brothers, 
have given security that they will never demand of our lord 
the king, contrary to the will and good pleasure of our lord 
the king, their father, anything whatever beyond the gifts 
above-written and agreed upon, and that they will withdraw 
neither themselves nor their services from their father. Also, 
Richard, and Geoffrey, his brother, have done homage to their 
father for those things which he has given and granted unto 
them ; and, whereas his son, Henry, was ready and willing 
to do homage to him, our lord the king was unwilling to 
receive the same of him, because he was a king ; but he has 
received security from him for the same." 

In the same year, a dissension arose between Uctred and 
Gilbert, the sons of Fergus, and chieftains of the men of Gallo- 
way, on which Malcolm, the son of Gilbert, took Uctred by 
treachery, and, after depriving him of his virility and putting 
out his eyes, caused him to be put to death. 

In this year, also, Richard, archbishop of Canterbury, con- 
secrated, in England, at Canterbury, Richard, bishop of Win- 
chester, Robert Folliot, bishop of Hereford, Geoffrey Riddel, 
bishop of Ely, and John, bishop of Chichester. In the same 
year, nearly the whole of the city of Canterbury was burned to 
the ground, together with the metropolitan church of the Holy 
Trinity. In this year, also, died William Turbe, bishop of 
Norwich. 

In the same year, peace and final reconciliation were es- 
tablished between Roger, archbishop of York, and Hugh, bishop 
of Durham, upon the following terms : " The chapel and burial- 
ground of Alverton shall remain in the hands of the prior of 
Hexham, on condition that the archbishop shall not insist on any 
person being buried there, nor shall the bishop hinder it. The 
church of Hexham shall receive the chrism and oil from the 
bishop of Durham, according to its present usage : the prior 
of Hexham shall also attend the synod of Durham. The 






A.E. 1174. TREATY BETWEEN THE SEES OF YORK AND DURHAM. 389 

clerks and canons of Hexham shall receive ordination from 
the bishop of Durham. The parishioners of Hexham, at the 
time of Pentecost, if they shall think fit, shall visit the church 
of Durham without any compulsion on the part of the hishop 
or of his people, and without any prohibition on the part of the 
archbishop or of his people. Also, if their people shall presume 
to act contrary to this, their masters themselves shall correct 
them. The prior of Hexham shall try all ecclesiastical causes of 
that parish, without power to inflict fines, though with liberty 
to impose penance. On the decease of the present prior, Ri- 
chard, the bishop of Durham, shall have the same authority in 
the appointing of another prior, which the said prior, Richard, 
and the prior of Gisburne, and Peter, brother of the prior of 
Bridlington, have sworn that the church of Durham had in 
the appointing of the said prior, Richard, if indeed they shall 
have sworn that it had any. The archbishop shall not demand 
synodal fees of the churches of Saint Cuthbert, the names of 
which, in the archdeaconry of Cleveland, are as follow : the 
church of Hemmingburgh, the church of Schepwick, the church 
of Alverton, the church of Bretteby, the church of Osmun- 
derley, the church of Seigestun, the church of Lee, the church 
of Oterington, the church of Crake, and the church of Holteby ; 
in the archdeaconry of York ; the church of All Saints in 
Ousegate, the church of Saint Peter the Little, and half 
of the church of the Holy Trinity, in Sudersgate ; 34 and, 
in the archdeaconry of the treasurer; the church of Hove- 
den, 35 the church of Welleton, the church of Brentington, 
and the church of Walkinton. But if the clergy of the said 
churches, or the laity of the demesne manors of Saint Cuth- 
bert, situate in Yorkshire, shall be guilty of anything that 
deserves ecclesiastical correction, the same shall be amended 
by the archbishop, such a summons being first issued, that 
the bishop or his officer shall be able to be present thereat." 
The above articles were confirmed by the archbishop and the 
bishop, who mutually gave their word that they would, with- 
out fraud or deceit, observe the same so long as they two should 
live, and without prejudice to the church of either after the 
decease of the other. In addition to which, the archbishop 
similarly gave his word to the bishop that he would in no 

* Perhaps that part of York now called Skeldergate. 
K Howden, in Yorkshire, the native place of our author. 



390 AtfNALS OF ROGEB, DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 11/5. 

matter annoy him or his church, or any one in his bishopric, 
until the cause should have been first taken open cognizance 
of in due course of judgment. 

In the year of grace 1175, being the twenty-first year of 
the reign of king Henry the Second, son of the empress Ma- 
tilda, the said king was at Argenton, in Normandy, during the 
festival of the Nativity of our Lord. At the Purification of 
Saint Mary, he and the king, his son, were at Le Mans, 
whence they returned into Normandy, and held a conference 
with Louis, king of the Franks, at Gisors. Having come thence 
to Bure in Normandy, the king, the son, in order that he might 
remove all mistrust from his father's mind, did homage to him 
as his liegeman, and swore fealty to him against all men, in the 
presence of Rotrod, archbishop of Rouen, Henry, bishop of 
Bayeux, William, earl of Mandeville, and Richard de Humez, 
liis constable, and many other persons of the household of 
both kings. 

At the festival of Easter, the two kings were at Caesar's 
Burgh, 36 and, after Easter, they proceeded to Caen to meet 
Philip, earl of Flanders, who shortly before had assumed the 
cross of the pilgrimage to Jerusalem. The king, the father, 
prevailed upon him to release the king, the son, from all cove- 
nants which he had made with him during the period of the 
hostilities ; and the earl of Flanders delivered into the king's 
hands the documents of the king, the son, which he had rela- 
tive to the above-named covenants. On this, they confirmed 
to the earl the yearly revenues which he had been in the habit of 
receiving in England before the war. 

The king, the father, also sent his son Richard into Poitou, 
and his son Geoffrey into Brittany, with orders that the castles 
which had been buUt or fortified during the time of the war, 
should be reduced to the same state in which they were fifteen 
days before the war began. After this, the king, the father, 
and the king, the son, crossed over, and landed in England, at 
Portsmouth, on the seventh day before the ides of May, being 
the sixth day of the week. On coming to London, they found 
Richard, archbishop of Canterbury, about to hold a synod at 
Westminster on the Lord's day before the Ascension of our 
Lord ; to which synod came nearly all the bishops and abbats 
of the province of Canterbury. Before the kings above-named, 
26 Cherbourg. 



A.D. 1175. DECBEES OF THE SYNOD OF WESTMINSTER. 391 

and the bishops and abbats, Richard, the archbishop of Can- 
terbury, standing on an elevated place, published the decrees 
underwritten : 

" Synods are called together in. the Church of God, in con- 
formity with the ancient usage of the fathers, in order that 
those who are appointed to the higher office of the pastoral 
charge, may, by institutions based upon rules subjected to their 
common consideration, reform the lives of those submitted to 
their care, and, with a judgment better informed, be able to 
check those enormities which are incessantly springing up. 
We therefore, rather adhering to-the rules of our forefathers who 
adhered to the true faith, than devising anything new, have 
thought it advisable that certain definite heads should be 
published by us ; which by all of our province we do enjoin to be 
strictly and inviolably observed. For all those who shall pre- 
sume to contravene the enactments of this holy synod, we deem 
to be transgressors of the sacred canons. 

37 "If any priest or clerk in holy orders, having a church or 
ecclesiastical benefice, shall publicly keep a harlot, and after 
being warned thereon a first, second, and third time, shall not 
put away his harlot, and entirely separate himself from her, 
but shall rather think fit to persist in his uncleanness, he shall 

J/be deprived of all ecclesiastical offices and benefices. But if any 
persons below the rank of sub-deacons shall have contracted 
marriage, let them not by any means be separated from their 
wives, except with their common consent that they shall do so 
and enter a religious order, and there let them with constancy 
remain in the service of God. But if any persons of the rank 
of sub-deacon or above the same, shall have contracted mar- 
riage, let them leave their wives, even though they should be 
unwilling and reluctant. Also, on the authority of the same 

* epistle we have decreed, that the sons of priests are not, hence- 
forth, to be instituted as clergymen in the churches of their 
fathers ; nor are they, under any circumstances whatsoever, 
to hold the same without the intervention of some third person. 

38 " Clerks in holy orders are not to enter taverns for the pur- 
pose of eating and drinking, nor to be present at public drinkings, 
unless when travelling, and compelled by necessity. And it' 

37 Taken from the decretal epistle of pope Alexander III. to Roger, 
bishop of Worcester. * From the decrees of the council of Carthage. 



J 



392 ANNALS OP ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1175. 

any one shall be guilty of so doing, either let him put an 
end to the practice, or suffer deprivation. 

39 "Those who are in holy orders are not allowed to give judg- 
ment on matters of life and death. Wherefore, we do forbid 
them either themselves to take part in dismemberment, or to 
order it to be done by others. And if any one shall be guilty 
of doing such a thing, let him be deprived of the office and 
position of the orders that have been granted to him. We do 
also forbid, under penalty of excommunication, any priest to 
hold the office of sheriff, or that of any secular public officer. 40 

41 " Clerks who allow their hair to grow, are, though against 
their will, to be shorn by the archdeacon. They are also not 
to be allowed to wear any garments or shoes, but such as are 
consistent with propriety and religion. And if any one shall 
presume to act contrary hereto, and on being warned shall 
not be willing to reform, let him be subject to excommunica- 
tion. 

42 " Inasmuch as certain clerks, despairing of obtaining ordina- 
tion from their own bishops, either on account of ignorance, or 
irregularity of life, or the circumstances of their birth, or a 
defect in their title, or youthful age, are ordained out of their 
own province, and sometimes even by bishops beyond sea, or else 
falsely assert that they have been so ordained, producing 
unknown seals to their own bishops ; we do enact that the 
ordination of such shall be deemed null and void, and, under 
pain of excommunication, we do forbid that they shall be 
employed by any one in the performance of his duties. The 
bishop also, within our jurisdiction, who knowingly and wilfully 
shall ordain any such person or employ him after the con- 
ferring of such orders, 43 for so ordaining or employing him, let 
him know that he is suspended from his office until he shall 
have made due satisfaction. Likewise, inasmuch as the Church 
of God, according to the verity of the Gospel, ought to be 
the house of prayer, and not a den of thieves, and market 
for blood; under pain of excommunication we do forbid 41 

39 From the decrees of the council of Toledo. 

40 Praepositi," though a very general appellation, probably means here, 
reeve, mayor or provost. 4l From the decrees of the council of Agatha. 

43 From various decrees of popes Urban and Innocent, and of the 
councils of Chalcedon and Carthage. 

43 There is not improbably an omission in the text here. 

44 Some words are evidently omitted here. 



A.D. 1175. DECREES OP THE SYNOD OF WESTMTNSTEK. 393 

secular causes, in which the shedding of blood or bodily punish- 
ment is likely to be the result, to be tried in churches or 
in churchyards. For it is absurd and cruel for judgment of 
bloodshed to be discussed in the place which has also been 
appointed a place of refuge for the guilty. 

45 "It has been told us, that it is the custom in some places for 
money to be given for receiving the chrism, as also for baptism 
and the communion. (This as a 46 simoniacal heresy a holy 
council held in detestation, and visited with excommunication, i 
We do therefore enact, that in future nothing shall be demanded 
either for ordination, or for the chrism, or for baptism, or for ex- 
treme unction, or for burial, or for the communion, or for dedi- 
/ cation ; but the gifts of Christ are to be bestowed freely with 
a gratuitous dispensation. If any person shall presume to act 
in defiance hereof, let him be excommunicated. 

47 " Let no prelate, on receiving a monk, or canon, or nun, 
presume to take or demand money from those who come to adopt 
the monastic life, under pretence of any agreement whatsoever. 

48 " Let it be allowable for no one under the name of a 
dowry to transfer a benefice to any person, or to exact money 
or any emolument on the pretext of an agreement for the pre- 
sentation of any person thereto. If he shall do so, and upon 
trial shall confess or be convicted of the same, relying both on 
our own and on the royal authority, we do enact that he shall 
be for ever deprived of the patronage of the said church. 

49 "According to the decreesof the fathers, we do, underpenalty 

of excommunication, forbid that monks or clerks shall carry on 

/ business for the sake of profit, and that monks shall hold farms 

of the clergy or of the laity, or that the laity shall hold the 

benefices of the Church to farm. 

so "Whoever would appear to belong to the clergy, let them ' 
not take up arms, nor yet go about in armour ; but by their reli- 
gious habits, let them reconcile the name of their profession to 
the religious character of their manners. If they despise this 
injunction, then, as contemners of the holy canons and pro- 
faners of the ecclesiastical authority, let them be mulcted with 
the loss of their proper rank : inasmuch as they cannot servj 
both God and the world. 

15 From the decrees of the council of Trebour. ^ The text U 

evidently corrupt here. *? From the decreesof pope Urban. 

A new decree. 49 From the decrees of the Fathers. 

40 By decree of the council of Meaux. 



394 ANNALS OF KOGEE DE HOVEDEX. A. D. 1175. 

51 "Also, with regard to vicars, who on their promise and oath 
are bound to their parsons, we have thought proper to enact, 
that if, despising their promise or the obligation of their oath, 
they shall falsely take upon themselves the character of parson, 
and set themselves up against their parsons, and if they shall 
upon trial confess thereto or be convicted thereof, then for the 
future they are not to be admitted in the same bishopric to the 
discharge of the duties of their office. 

52 "All tithes of the land, whether of corn or of fruit, are the 
Lord's, and are sanctified unto Him. But, inasmuch as many 
are found unwilling to give tithes, we do enact, that according 
to the commands of our lord the pope, they shall be ad- 
monished a first, second, and third time, to give tithes in full 
of corn, wine, fruits of trees, young of animals, wool, lambs, 
butter, cheese, flax, hemp, and other things which are renewed 
yearly ; and if, upon being admonished, they do not make 
amends, let them understand that they are subject to excom- 
munication. 

"And further, let the imperial sanction put a check upon liti- 
gation, and the audacity of those who inconsiderately appeal to 
law, by condemning them to pay the costs, and various other 
remedies. And inasmuch as this is known to be in unison 
with the holy institutions, we do order, that for the future, in 
such actions for the recovery of money as shall be tried among 
clerks, the party who is the loser shall be condemned to pay 
costs to his opponent. As for him who shall not be able to 
make such payment, I leave him to be punished at the discre- 
tion of his bishop. 

53 ti -yy e (j fi n( j i n ^g k ]y H s t only ten prefaces M that are to 
be received : the first on the first Sunday after Easter, 53 ' Et 
te quidem omni tempore.' 1 The second on Ascension Day, 

51 From a decree of pope Alexander the Third, addressed to the bishop 
of Norwich. 6i From the decrees of the council of Rouen. 

53 From a decree of pope Pelagius. 54 The preface or introduction 
to the canon of the mass. 

55 In the text " in Albis Paschalibus." This was the Sunday more gene- 
rally called "Dominica in Albis," the word " depositis" being under- 
stood ; as on that day, according to the Roman ritual, those lately bap- 
tized laid aside the white garments which they had assumed on the 
Sunday before Easter. 

1 This preface, according to the Roman ritual, is read from Holy Satur- 
day until the Ascension ; it begins, " It is truly meet and just, right and 
available to salvation to praise thee, Lord." 



A.D. 1175. DECREES OF THE SYNOD OF WESTMINSTEft. 395 

' Quipost resurrectionem^ The third at Pentecost, ' Qui 
ascendens super omnes coelos.' 3 The fourth upon the nativity, 
' Quia per incarnnti Verbi mysterium.'* The fifth upon the 
Epiphany of our Lord, ' Quia cum renigenitus turn.' 3 The 
sixth upon the festivals of the Apostles, ' Et te Domine sup- 
plicitur exorare.' 6 The seventh on the Holy Trinity, ' Qui 
cum renigenito tuo. n The eighth upon the Cross, ' Qui salutem 
humani generis.' 8 The ninth is only to he repeated during the 
fast of Lent, ' Qui corporali je/unio.' 9 The tenth upon the 
blessed Virgin, ' Et te in veneratione leata Harm.' 10 Upon 
the authority therefore of this decree, and of our lord, the pope 
Alexander, we do strictly enjoin, that no person shall, under 
any circumstances whatever, presume to add anything to the 
prefaces above-mentioned. 

86 " We do forbid any one to give the Eucharist to any person 
dipped into the chalice as being a requisite part of the commu- 

2 This preface is read from Ascension Day till Whitsun Eve. It be- 
gins : " Who after his resurrection appeared openly to all his disciples, 
and in their presence ascended into heaven." 

3 This is read from Whitsun Eve till Trinity Sunday ; and in votive 
masses of the Holy Ghost. It begins, " Who ascending above all the 
heavens, and sitting at thy right hand, sent down the promised Holy 
Spirit upon the children of adoption." 

4 This is read from Christmas day till the Epiphany; on Corpus 
Christi and during its octave ; and on our Lord's transfiguration. It be- 
gins, " Since by the mystery of the word make flesh, a new ray of thy 
glory has appeared to the eye of our souls." 

5 This is read on the Epiphany and during its octave. It begins, 
" Because when thy only begotten son appeared in the substance of our 
mortal flesh." 

6 This begins, " It is truly meet and just, right and available to salva- 
tion humbly to beseech thee." 

7 This is read on Trinity Sunday, and every other Sunday in the year 
Ifcat has no proper preface. It begins, " Who together with thy only 
begotten son and the Holy Ghost art one God and one Lord." 

8 This is read from Passion Sunday till Maunday Thursday, and in 
masses of the Holy Cross and of the Passion. It begins, " Who hast ap- 
pointed the salvation of mankind to be wrought on the wood of the 
cross." 

9 This is read in Lent till Passion Sunday. It begins, " Who by this 
bodily fast extinguishest our vices." 

10 This is read on festivals of the Virgin Mary, the purification excepted. 
It begins, "And that we should praise, bless and glorify thee on the [festival 
then celebrated] of the blessed Virgin Mary, ever a Virgin." 

68 From a decree of pope Julius. 



396 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1175. 

nion. For we do not read that Christ gave the bread to the 
others, having first dipped it, but only to that one of the dis- 
ciples, whom the sop, when dipped, was to show to be his 
betrayer, and not that it formed any characteristic of the in- 
stitution of this Sacrament. 

* 7 " We do command that the Eucharist shall not be consecrat- 
ed in any other than a chalice of gold or silver, and from hence- 
forth we do forbid any bishop to bless a chalice of pewter. 

58 " Let no one of the faithful, of what rank soever, be married 
in secret, but, receiving the benediction from the priest, let him 
be publicly married in the Lord. Therefore, if any priest 
shall be found to have united any persons in secret, let him be 
suspended from the duties of his office for the space of three 
years. 

59 tt Where there is not the consent of both parties, it is not a 
marriage ; therefore, those who give female children in the 
cradle to male infants effect nothing thereby, unless both of 
the children shall agree thereto after they have arrived at the 
years of discretion. On the authority therefore of this decree, 
we do forbid that in future any persons shall be united in mar- 
riage, of whom either the one or the other shall not have 
arrived at the age appointed by the laws, and set forth by the 
canons, unless it shall at any time chance to happen that by 
reason of some urgent necessity, a union of such a nature ought 
to be tolerated for the sake of peace." 

In this synod, also the clerks of Koger, archbishop of York, 
asserted the right of the church of York to carry the cross in 
the province of Canterbury. They also asserted, on the same 
occasion, on behalf of the archbishop of York, that the bishopric 
of Lincoln, the bishopric of Chester, the bishopric of Worces- 
ter, and the bishopric of Hereford, ought by right to belong to 
the metropolitan church of York ; and they summoned the 
said archbishop of Canterbury on this question to the pre- 
sence of the Roman Pontiff. They also summoned the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury before the Roman Pontiff, for the alleged 
injustice of the sentence of excommunication which he had 
pronounced against the clergy of the archbishop of York, who, 
with his sanction, officiated in the church of Saint Oswald, at 
Gloucester, because they had refused to come to him upon his 

67 From a decree of the council of Rheims. S8 From a decree of 

pope Ormisdas. S9 From a decree of pope Nicholas. 



A.B. 1170. SlTRREirDEE OF THE CASTLE OF BEISTOl. 397 

summons in the same manner as the clergy of his own pro- 
vince did. 

At this synod also, the clergy of the church of Saint Asaph 
requested the archbishop of Canterbury, that by virtue of the 
obedience due to him, he would order Godfrey, bishop of the 
church of Saint Asaph, to return to that see, with the ponti- 
fical dignity of which he was invested, or else that the above- 
named archbishop would appoint another bishop in his place. 
For this Godfrey had left his bishopric, being compelled so to 
do by poverty, and the hostile invasions of the Welch ; and 
coming into England, had been kindly and honorably received 
by the most Christian king Henry ; who also gave the vacant 
abbacy of Abingdon into his charge, until such time as he 
should be at liberty to return to his own see. 

In consequence of this application, the said archbishop of 
Canterbury, at the instance of the before-named clergy, and 
by the advice of Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff, as also by 
the counsel of his venerable brother bishops, at this synod, 
called upon the said Godfrey, in virtue of his obedience, either 
to return to his own see, or else freely and absolutely to 
deliver up the pastoral care which had been placed in his 
hands. 

Upon this, Godfrey, being in hopes that the abbacy of Abing- 
don, which had been delivered into his charge, would remain in 
his hands, no one compelling him so to do, resigned his bishop- 
ric into the hands of the archbishop of Canterbury, freely and 
absolutely delivering up to him the ring and pastoral staff. 
And so, being deceived, he lost them both ; for the king gave 
the bishopric of Saint Asaph to Master Ada, a Welchman, and 
the abbacy of Abingdon to a certain monk. 

6 Robert, earl of Gloucester, at tliis period surrendered to the 
ng of England the castle of Bristol, of which the king had 
never before been able to gain possession. In the same year, 
on the octave of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, both, 
the kings came to Woodstock, and were met there by Richard, 
archbishop of Canterbury, Richard, bishop of Winchester, 
Reginald, bishop of Bath, Jocelyn, bishop of Salisbury, Roger, 
bishop of Worcester, Geoffrey, bishop of Ely, John, bishop of 
Chichester, Walter, bishop of Rochester, Bartholomew, bishop 
of Exeter, and Hugh, bishop of Durham, who had come 
thither on business of their own. There also came thither all 



398 AJTNALS OF BOGEB, DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 11T5. 

the abbats of the province of Canterbury ; and they held a 
great synod on the election of a pastor to the pontifical see of 
the church of Norwich, and on the election of pastors to the 
abbeys which were then vacant throughout England ; namely, 
the abbey of Grimsby, the abbey of Croyland, the abbey of 
Thorney, the abbey of Westminster, the abbey of Saint Augus- 
tine, at Canterbury, the abbey of Battle, the abbey of Hyde 
at Winchester, the abbey of Abingdon, the abbey of Abbots- 
bury, and the abbey of Michelney. 60 John of Oxford, the king's 
clerk, was elected to the bishopric of Norwich, and was con- 
secrated by Richard, archbishop of Canterbury. The abbeys 
before-mentioned were also distributed among religious men, 
as seemed good to our lord the king and the above-named 
archbishop. 

In the same year, pope Alexander confirmed the election of 
Geoffrey, bishop elect of Lincoln. In this year, also, the king, 
the father, impleaded all the clergy and laity of his kingdom 
who, in the time of the wars, had committed offences against 
him in his forests, and as to the taking of venison, and ex- 
acted fines of them all, although Richard de Lucy gave a war- 
ranty that all this was done with his sanction, and by command 
of the king, sent from beyond sea. 

After this, the two kings proceeded to Tork, where they 
were met by William, king of the Scots, and his brother 
David, together with nearly the whole of the bishops and 
abbats, and other principal men of his dominions. And at 
this place was renewed the treaty and final reconciliation which 
the said king of Scotland had made with his lord the king of 
England, the father, at Falaise, while he was his prisoner, in 
presence of the king, his son, Roger, archbishop of York, 
Hugh, bishop of Durham, and the earls and barons of Eng- 
land, as also of the bishops and abbats, earls and barons of 
the kingdom of Scotland. This charter of confirmation thereof 
was read to the following effect in the church of Saint Peter, 
at York : 

" William, king of Scotland, becomes the liegeman of our lord 
the king, against all the men of Scotland and for all the rest 
of his dominions ; and has done fealty to him as his liege lord, 
in the same manner in which other men, his own liegemen, are 
wont to do unto himself. In like manner he has done homage 
60 In Somersetshire. 



A.D. 1175. SrBMISSIOX OF THE KIITG OP SCOTLAND. 399 

to king Henry, his son, saving always his fealty to our lord 
the king, his lather. 

" All the bishops, abbats, and clergy of the king's territory 
of Scotland, as also their successors, shall do fealty to our lord 
the king as their liege lord, according to his pleasure, and to 
his son, king Henry, and their heirs, in such manner as his 
other bishops are wont to do unto him. 

" Also, the king of Scotland, and David, his brother, and 
the barons and the rest of his subjects, have agreed that the 
Church of Scotland shall from henceforth pay such obedience to 
the Church of England as it ought in duty to pay, and was wont 
to pay in the times of the kings of England, his predecessors. 

" In like manner Richard, bishop of Saint Andrews, Richard, 
bishop of Dunkeld, Geoffrey, abbat of Dunfermline, and Her- 
bert, prior of Coldingham, have agreed that the Church of 
England shall again have that authority over the Church of 
Scotland which of right it ought to have, and that they will not 
oppose the rights of the Church of England. And they have 
given security as to this agreement, in. that they have as lieges 
done fealty to our lord the king and to his son Henry. 

" The same shall be done by the rest of the bishops and the 
clergy of Scotland, according to the covenants made between our 
lord the king and the king of Scotland, and his brother David 
and his barons. The earls also, and barons and other subjects 
of the kingdom of the king of Scotland, from whom our lord 
the king shall wish to receive the same, shall do homage to 
him against all men and fealty as their liege lord, in such 
manner as his other subjects are wont to do, as also to his son 
king Henry and his heirs, saving always their fealty to our 
lord the king, his father. In like manner the heirs of the 
king of Scotland and of his barons and of his subjects shall do 
nomage and allegiance to the heirs of our lord the king against 
all men. 

" Further, from henceforth the king of Scotland and his sub- 
jects shall harbour no fugitive from the territories of our lord the 
king by reason of felony, either in Scotland or in any other of 
his territories, unless he shall be willing forthwith to take his 
trial in the court of our lord the king and to abide by the judg- 
ment of the court. But the king of Scotland and his men shall 
arrest him with all possible speed, and shall deliver him up to 
our lord the king, or to his justiciaries or bailiffs in England. 



400 ATHfALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1175. 

" And if any fugitive from the territories of the king of Scot- 
land, by reason of felony, shall be in England, unless he shall 
be willing to take his trial in the court of the king of 
Scotland, and abide by the judgment of the court, he shall not 
be harboured in the lands of the king, but shall be delivered 
unto the men of the king of Scotland, when he shall have 
been found by the bailiffs of our lord the king. 

" Further, the men of our lord the king shall hold their 
lands which they have held and ought to hold, against our lord 
the king and his men, and against the king of Scotland and his 
men. And the men of the king of Scotland shall hold their 
lands which they have held and ought to hold, against our lord 
the king and his men. 

" By way of security for the strict observance of the said 
covenants and final agreement so made with our lord the king 
and his son Henry and their heirs, on part of the king of 
Scotland and his heirs, the king of Scotland has delivered 
unto our lord the king the castle of Eoxburgh, the castle 
of Berwick, the castle of Geddewerde, 61 the castle of the 
Maidens, 62 and the castle of Striveline, 63 unto the mercy of 
our lord the king. In addition to which, for the purpose of 
ensuring the performance of the said covenants and final 
agreement, the king of Scotland has delivered unto our lord 
the king his brother David as a hostage, as also earl Dunecan, 
earl Waltheof, earl Gilbert, the earl of Angus, Eichard de 
Morville, his constable, Nes Fitzwilliam, Eichard Cumin, 
Walter Corbet, Walter Olifard, 64 John de Vals, William de 
Lindesey, Philip de Colville, Philip de Baluines, Eobert Fren- 
bert, Eobert de Burneville, Hugh Giffard, Hugh Eiddel, Walter 
de Berkeley, William de la Haie, and William de Mortimer. 
But when the castles shall have been delivered up, William, 
king of Scotland, and his brother David shall be set at liberty. 
The earls and barons above-named shall, after each of them 
shall have delivered up his hostage, namely, a lawful son, 
those who have one, and the rest their nephews or next heirs, 
and after the castles, as above-mentioned, shall have been sur- 
rendered, be set at liberty. 

"Further, the king of Scotland and his before-named barons 

61 Jedburgh. M " Castellum puellarum." The castle of Edinburgh 
was so called. c Stirling. H Probably Oliphant. 



A.D. 1175. THE SCOTS SWEAB FEALTY TO KENEY. 401 

have pledged their word that with good faith and without evil 
, intent, and with no excuse whatever, they will cause the 
bishops and barons and other men of their land who were not 
present when the king of Scotland made this treaty with our 
lord the king, to make the same allegiance and fealty to 
our lord the king and to his son Henry, which they themselves 
have made, and, like the barons and men who were here 
present, to deliver as hostages to our lord the king whomso- 
ever he shall think fit. 

" Further, the bishops, earls, and barons have agreed with our 
lord the king and his son Henry, -that if the king of Scotland, 
by any chance, shall withdraw from his fealty to our lord the 
king and to his son, and from the aforesaid covenants, in such 
case they will hold with our lord the king, as with their liege 
lord, against the king of Scotland, and against all men at 
enmity with the king; and they will place the dominions 
of the king of Scotland under interdict, until he shall return 
to his fealty to our lord the king. 

"That the covenants aforesaid shall be strictly observed, and 
in good faith, and without evil intent, by William, king of 
Scotland and David his brother, and by his barons above- 
named, and their heirs, the king of Scotland himself, and David 
his brother, and all his said barons, have pledged themselves 
as liegemen of our lord the king against all men, as also of his 
son Henry, saving their fealty to his father ; the following 
being witnesses hereto : Richard, bishop of Avranches, John, 
dean of Salisbury, Robert, abbat of Malmesbury, Ralph, abbat 
of Mundeburg, Herbert, archdeacon of Northampton, "Walter 
de Coutances, Roger, the king's chaplain, Osbert, clerk of the 
chamber, Richard, son of our lord the king, earl of Poitou, 
Geoffrey, son of our lord the king, earl of Brittany, William, 
%arl of Essex, Hugh, earl of Chester, Richard de Humezt, 
constable and earl of Mellent, Jordan Thessun, Humphrey 
de Bohun, William de Courcy, seneschal, and Gilbert Malet, 
seneschal of Falaise." 

The aforesaid having been recited in the church of Saint 
Peter, at York, in the presence of the before-named kings of 
England [and Scotland], 65 and of David, brother of the king of 
Scotland, and of the whole of the people, the bishops, earls, 
barons, and knights of the territories of the king of Scotland, 
65 This word is not iu the text, but is clearly omitted by mistake. 

VOL. I. D D 



402 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOYEDEN. A.D. 1175. 

swore fealty to our lord, the king of England, and to his son 
Henry and his heirs, as their liege lords against all men. 

In the meantime, Philip, earl of Flanders, took prisoner a 
knight named "Walter de Fontaines, one sprung of a noble 
family, and conspicuous before all his compeers in feats of 
arms ; making a charge against him that he had unlawfully 
known the countess of Flanders. On this, the said "Walter, 
intending to make denial thereof, offered to prove his inno- 
cence in any way whatever, affirming that he had never known 
the countess, nor had ever had it in his thoughts to know her. 
The earl, however, would not allow him so to clear himself ; 
but in the fury of his wrath gave orders that he should be put 
to death by being beaten with clubs. Accordingly, the execu- 
tioners seized him, and, binding him hand and foot, beat him 
with clubs, and hung him up half dead by the feet, with his 
head hanging downwards in a filthy sewer, and thus, being 
suffocated by the stench from the sewer, he ended his life 
most shockingly. 

Upon this, JElismus and the other sons of the before-named 
Walter de Fontaines, and Jacques de Avennes, and the rest of 
their relations, 'fortifying their castles, rose in rebellion against 
the earl, and laid waste his lands with fire and sword ; and 
thus at length compelled him to give them satisfaction for the 
death of the said Walter de Fontaines. 

In the same year, Richard, earl of Poitou, son of Henry, king 
of England, laid siege to Chatillon, beyond Agens, which 
Arnold de Boiville had fortified against him, and refused to 
surrender. Accordingly, having arranged there his engines 
of war, within two months he took it, together with thirty 
knights, and retained it in his own hands. 

In the same year king Henry, the father, held a great council 
at Windsor, on the octave of the feast of Saint Michael, the 
king, his son, Richard, archbishop of Canterbury, and the 
bishops of England being present, and in presence of Laurence, 
archbishop of Dublin, and the earls and barons of England. 
At this council the Catholic archbishop of Tuam, Cantordis, 
abbat of Saint Brandan, and master Laurence, chancellor of 
Roderic, king of Connaught, made the underwritten final treaty 
and agreement with our lord the king, the father, on behalf 
of Roderic, king of Connaught : 

" This is the final treaty and agreement made at Windsor on 



A.D. 1175. TBEATY BETWEEN KING EODEEIC AND KING HENBY. 403 

the octave of Saint Michael, in the year of grace one thousand 
one hundred and seventy-five, between our lord the king of 
England, Henry, son of the empress Matilda, and Eoderic, king 
of Connaught, by the Catholic archbishop of Tuam, Cantordis, 
abbat of Saint Brandan, and master Laurence, chancellor of the 
king of Connaught ; that is to say 

" The king of England grants to the above-named Eoderic, 
his liegeman, the kingdom of Connaught, so long as he shall 
faithfully serve him, so as to be king thereof under him and 
ready to do him service as his liegeman, that he shall hold 
his lands as well and as peaceably as he held the same be- 
fore our lord the king of England entered Ireland, always 
paying him tribute, and that he shall hold all the rest of that 
land and the inhabitants of that land in subjection to himself, 
and shall exercise justice over them in such way that they 
shall pay full tribute to the king of England, and by his hand 
preserve their rights. And those who now hold lands, are to 
hold the same in peace so long as they shall observe their 
fealty to the king of England, and fully and faithfully render 
tribute and his other rights which they owe to him by the 
hand of the king of Connaught, saving in all things the rights 
and honor of our lord the king of England and of himself. 

" And if any of them shall become rebels against the king of 
England and himself, and shall be unwilling by his hand to 
render tribute and his other rights unto the king of England, 
and shall withdraw from their fealty to the king ; he shall take 
judicial cognizance of them, and remove them therefrom. 
And if of himself he shall not be able to carry out his sentence 
upon them, the constable of the king of England and his 
household in that land shall aid him in so doing, when they 
shall have been called upon by him, and shall themselves see 
that it is necessary so to do. And by reason of this treaty, the 
aforesaid king of Connaught shall render tribute each year to 
our lord the king, that is to say, for every ten animals one skin, 
such as may be approved by dealers, both from the whole of 
his own lands, as also from those of others. 

" Except that, as to those lands which our lord the king has 
retained as of his own demesne and as of the demesne of his 
barons, he shall not make entry thereupon, that is to say, t)ub- 
linwith its appurtenances, and Meath with all its appurte- 
nances, as wholly and fully as ever the Marchat Vamaileth 

DD2 



404 ANNALS OP ROGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1175. 

Lachlin, or any who held it of him, held the same. Also, with 
the further exception of Wexford, with all its appurtenances, 
that is to say, with the whole of Leighlin : and with the ex- 
ception of Waterford, with the whole of the land that lies be- 
tween "Waterford and Dungarvan, so that Dungarvan with all 
its appurtenances be included in the said land. 

" And if the Irish who have taken to flight shall wish to re- 
turn to the lands of the barons of the king of England, they 
are to return in peace on paying the above-named tribute which 
others pay, or doing the ancient services which they were in 
the habit of doing for their lands ; this latter to be at the will 
and option of the lords. And if any of them shall refuse to re- 
turn to their lord the king of Connaught, he is to compel them 
to return to their lands, that they may remain there under his 
protection, and the king of Connaught is to receive hostages from 
all whom our lord the king of England has entrusted to him, 
at the will of our lord the king and of himself. He himself 
also shall give hostages at the will of our lord the king of 
England, of one sort or another, and they shall do service unto 
our lord the king each year with their dogs and birds, by way 
of making payment. And nothing whatever, on any land 
whatsoever belonging to our lord the king shall they withhold 
against the will and command of our lord the king. Wit- 
nesses hereto : Richard, bishop of Winchester, Geoffrey, bishop 
of Ely, Laurence, archbishop of Dublin, Geoffrey, Nicholas, 
and Roger, the king's chaplains, William, earl of Essex, Richard 
de Lucy, Geoffrey de Perche, Reginald de Cor tinea," and many 
others. 

At the same council the king of England gave the bishopric 
of Waterford to Master Augustin, a native of Ireland, that 
see being then vacant there, and he sent him into Ireland 
with Laurence, archbishop of Dublin, to be consecrated by 
Donatus, archbishop of Cashel. In the same year, there was in 
England, and in the countries adjoining, a deadly mortality 
among mankind, so milch so, that on most days seven or eight 
bodies of the dead were carried out to burial. And immedi- 
ately after this deadly mortality, a dreadful famine ensued. 

In the same year, a short time before the feast of All Saints, 
there came to England a cardinal, whose name was Huge- 
zun, 66 a legate from the Apostolic See, for whom our lord the 

67 He is more generally called Hugo de Petril Leonis. See p. 406. 



A.D. 1175. DEPBIVATION OF WILLIAM DE WALTERVILLE. 405 

king had sent to Eome. He found our lord, the king, staying 
at Winchester, on which, the king went forth to meet him, 
his son Henry being with him, and they received him with all 
becoming honor. Our lord, the king, prolonging his stay 
for some days at Winchester, treated, at very great length, on 
the restoration of peace between Roger, the archbishop of 
York, and Richard, the archbishop of Canterbury, the chapel 
of Saint Oswald at Gloucester, and the carrying of the cross 
of the archbishop of York. 

At length, by the management of the king, an arrangement 
was made between the above-named archbishops to the fol- 
lowing effect. The archbishop of Canterbury released and ac- 
quitted to the archbishop of York the chapel of Saint Oswald, 
at Gloucester, from all jurisdiction on his part, as though it 
were a private chapel belonging to our lord the king. He 
also absolved the clerks of the archbishop of York, whom he 
had excommunicated ; and as to the carrying of the cross, and 
the other disputes which existed between their churches, they 
agreed to abide by the decision of the archbishop of Rouen and 
other neighbouring bishops of the kingdom of France. And 
upon this, they were to keep the peace between them for the 
space of five years ; upon condition that neither of them should 
seek to do any harm or injury to the other until the said con- 
troversy should have been settled, and brought to a due con- 
clusion by the above-named archbishop and the other bishops. 
Also, the above-named cardinal, Hugezun, gave to our lord, 
the king, permission to implead the clergy of his kingdom for 
offences against his forests and taking venison therein. 

In the same year, Richard, archbishop of Canterbury, de- 
prived William de Walterville, abbat of Saint Peter de Burgh, 68 
f because he had broken into the cloisters of his abbey, and 
attempted to carry off with a violent and armed band of men 
the relics of the Saints, together with an arm of Saint Oswald, 
the king and Martyr ; in the defence of which, some of the 
monks and servants of the church were wounded, and others 
slain. However, the chief and especial cause of this de- 
privation was, that our lord the king hated him on account 
of his brother Walter de Walterville, whom, together with 
other enemies of the king, he had harboured during the time 
of the hostilities. In the same year, died Reginald, earl of 

68 Peterborough. 



406 



ANNALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEN. 



A.D. 1176. 



Cornwall, the king's uncle, at Certeseie, 67 and was buried at 
Beading. 

In the year of grace 1176, being the twenty -second year 
of the reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the 
said king and king Henry, his son, were at Windsor during 
the festival of the Nativity of our Lord. On the same day, 
the before-named cardinal deacon, Hugezun, titular of Saint 
Michael de Petra Leonis, and legate of the Apostolic See, 
was at York with Roger, archbishop of York. After the 
Nativity of our Lord, at the feast of the Conversion of Saint 
Paul, our lord the king, the father, came to Nottingham, 68 and, 
there held a great council, 69 on the statutes of his realm, and 
in the presence of the king, his son, and of the archbishops, 
bishops, earls, and barons of his realm, by the common consent 
of all, divided his kingdom into six parts, to each of which 
he appointed three justices itinerant, whose names are as 
follow : 



( HUGH DE CEESSY 
1 < WALTER FITZ-ROBEBT 
( ROBEET MANTEL 



I HUGH DE GUNDEVILLE 
2 < WILLIAM FITZ-RALPH 
( WILLIAM BASSET 



/ ROBEET FITZ-BEENAED 
] RICHARD GIFFARD 
( ROGEE FITZ-REMFBAY 



C NORFOLK 
SUFFOLK 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE 
HUNTINGDONSHIRE 
BEDFORDSHIRE 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE 
ESSEX 
HEETFOEDSHIEE 

LlNCOLNSHIEE 

NOTTINGHAMSHIEE 

DEBBYSHIBE 

STAFFOEDSHIEE 

WAEWICKSHIEE 

NOETHAMPTONSHIKE 

LEICESTERSHIRE 

KENT 

SURREY 

SOUTHAMPTONSHIRE"" 

SUSSEX 

BERKSHIRE 

OXFOEDSHIEE 



67 Chertsey, in Surrey. ** This is a mistake for Northampton. 

69 These councils were the origin of our parliaments. Holimhed calls 
the present one a parliament. '' Hampshire. 



117C. 



THE ASSIZES OF NORTHAMPTON. 



407 



( WILLIAM FITZ-STEPHEN 
] BEKTBAM DE VEEDTJN 

( TtTRSTAN FlTZ-SlMON 



( RALPH FITZ- STEPHEN 
5 ] WILLIAM RUFFE 

( GlLBEET PlPAED 



( ROBERT DE WALS 

I RALPH 73 DE GLANVILLE 

I ROBEET PlKENOT 



( HEEEFOEDSHIRE 
) GLOUCESTERSHIRE 
\ WOECESTEESHIEE 
\_ SALOPESH1EE 70 

( WlLTSHIEE 

I DORSET 

( SOMERSET 

I DEVONSHIEE 
[ CORNWALL 

ETJERWIKESHTRE 71 

RlCHMONDSHIEE 

LANCASTEE 
COTJPLAND 72 
WESTMORELAND 
NOETHUMBERLAND 

k CUMBEELAND 



After which, the king caused all the above-named justices 
to swear upon the Holy Evangelists, that they would with good 
faith, and without evil intent, observe these assizes under- 
written, and cause them to be inviolably observed by the people 
of his realm.. 

THE ASSIZES OF KING HEKRT. 

First ordained at Clarendon, and re-enacted at Northampton. 

" If any person shall be charged before the justices of our 
lord the king, with murder, or larceny, or robbery, or the 
harbouring of men guilty of the same, or coining,' 4 or arson, 
then upon the oath of twelve knights of the hundred, and, if 
there shall be no such knights, upon the oath of twelve free and 
lawful men, and upon the oath of four men of each vill of the 
hundred, he is to be tried by judgment of water, 75 and if he is 

70 Shropshire. 71 Yorkshire. 

71 Part of the present county of Northumberland. 

73 The name of this celebrated lawyer was Ranulph, not Radulph or 
Ralph. 

74 The crime of " falsoneria" seems to have been that of coining, or of 
using means to debase the currency. 

75 " Judtcium aqua?." The party thus tried was thrown into cold 
water ; if he swam, he was considered guilty ; but if he sank, he was pro- 
nounced innocent. 



408 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 117G. 

cast, he is to lose one foot. At Northampton it has been 
added, to vindicate the rigour of justice, that in like manner 
he is to lose his right hand, together with his foot, and to 
abjure the realm, and be banished therefrom within the space 
of forty days. But if he shall be acquitted on trial by water, 
then let him find sureties and remain in the realm, unless 
he shall again be charged with murder, or any base felony, by 
the commons of the county and of the lawful knights of the 
country : on which, if he shall be charged in manner aforesaid, 
even though upon judgment by water he shall be acquitted, 
nevertheless, within forty days, he is to depart from the realm, 
and carry with him his chattels, saving always the right of his 
superior lord, and, being at the mercy of our lord the king, he 
is to abjure the realm. This assize shall hold good from the 
time that the assize was made at Clarendon up to the present 
. time, and from henceforth, so long as it shall seem good to our 
lord the king, in cases of murder, treason, and arson, and in 
all the matters aforesaid, with the exception of trifling thefts 
and robberies, which took place in the time of the war, such 
as of horses, cattle, and things of less consequence. 

" It shall be lawful for no one, either in a borough or vill, 
to entertain 76 in his house for more than one night any stranger 
for whose forthcoming he shall be unwilling to give security, 
unless he who is so entertained shall have some reasonable 
essoign, 77 which the landlord of the house is to shew to his 
neighbours, and when he departs he is to depart before the 
neighbours, and in the daytime. 

" If any person shall be arrested for murder, or for larceny, 
or for robbery, or for coining, and shall make confession of the 
same before the chief 78 of the hundred or borough, and be- 
fore lawful men, or of any other felony which he has com- 
mitted, he shall not be allowed afterwards before the justices to 
make denial of the same. And if, without arrest, he shall 
make confession before them of anything of this nature, of this 
also he shall not be allowed before the justices to make denial. 

"If any freeholder shall die, his heirs are to remain in such 
seisin as their father had on the day on which he was living 
and dead, both as to his fee and his chattels ; of which they 

76 " Hospital! " is clearly a misprint for " hospitare." 77 A valid 

excuse by reason of sickness or infirmity. 78 Generally called the 

" burghreeve." 



A. D. 1176. THE ASSIZES OF NOETHAMPTON. 409 

are to make division according to the devise of the deceased, 
and then to seek his lord and to pay him his relief 79 and other 
things which they are bound to pay him out of their fee. And 
if the heir shall happen to be under age, the lord of the fee is 
to receive his homage and to keep him in his charge so long as 
he is entitled ; and, if there are several lords, then let them 
receive his homage, and let him do unto them what he is bound 
to do. The wife also of the deceased is to have her dower and 
the part of his chattels which belongs to her. And if the. lord 
of the fee shall refuse to give seisin of the fee to the heirs of 
the deceased at their demand, then the justices of our lord the 
king are to cause a jury of twelve lawful men to be impannelled, 
to enquire what seisin the deceased had in the same on the 
day on which he was living and dead. And, according as 
they shall find, so are they to make restitution to the heirs. 
And if any person shall do the contrary of this, and be 
attainted thereof, let him be amerced. 

" The king's justices are to cause view to be made, by a jury, 
of disseisins sur-assize that have been made since the period 
when our lord the king came to England, shortly after peace 
had been made between him and the king his son. 

" The justices are to receive the oaths of fealty to our lord 
the king before the close of Easter, 80 and at the latest before 
the close of Pentecost, from all earls, barons, knights, and 
freeholders, and from the serfs as well who shall wish to re- 
main in the realm ; and he who shall refuse to do fealty, is to 
be taken as an enemy to our lord the king. Also, the jus- 
tices are to command all persons who have not yet done 
homage and allegiance to our lord the king, to come to them 
at a time which they shall appoint, and do homage to the king 
and allegiance to him as their liege lord. 

" The justices are to exercise all rights and jurisdictions that 
belong to our lord the king and to his crown, by writ of our 
lord the king, or of those who shall be in his place, as to fees 
held by half-knight's service 81 and below it ; unless the question 
be of such importance that it cannot be settled without the 
presence of our lord the king, or of such a nature that the 

79 This was due from the new tenant, when of full age, at the death 
of the ancestor, to the lord of the feud. 

80 This took place on the Sunday after Easter. 

81 Reference is perhaps made to lands held by the " milites parvi," who 
did not hold by entire knight-service. 



410 AXffAiS OF ROGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1176. 

justices shall refer it to him, or to those who shall be in his 
place, in consequence of their doubts. Still, to the best of 
their ability, they are to exert themselves to consult the con- 
venience of our lord the king. 

" Throughout those counties through which they are to go, 
they are to hold assizes for the trial of wicked thieves and 
evil-doers to the land ; the same being held by consent of the 
king, and of his son, and of his subjects. 

" Also, the justices are to take precaution that the castles 
already dismantled are quite dismantled, and that those which 
are to be dismantled are utterly razed to the ground. And, if 
they do not, our lord the king will desire to have the judg- 
ment of his court on them as contemners of his commands. 

" The justices are to make enquiry as to escheats, and 
churches, and lands, and female wards, 82 that are at the dis- 
posal of our lord the king. 

" The bailiffs of our lord the king are to be answerable in 
the exchequer both for the rents of assize, and their other 
levies which they make in their bailiwicks ; with the excep- 
tion of those which relate to the shrievalty. 

" The justices are to make enquiry as to the keepers 83 of the 
[royal] castles, both who they are, and how much they owe, 
and where ; and, after that, they are to report thereon to our 
lord the king. 

"A robber, immediately he is taken, is to be given into the 
custody of the sheriff; and, if the sheriff is absent, then he 
is to be taken to the nearest castellan, and let him take charge 
of him until such time as he shall deliver him over to the 
sheriff. 

" The justices are to cause, according to the custom of the 
country, enquiry to be made for those who have withdrawn 
from the kingdom ; and, unless they are ready to return within 
a time named, and to take their trial in the court of our lord 
the king, they are to be outlawed ; and the names of those out- 
lawed are to be brought at Easter and at the feast of Saint 
Michael to the exchequer, and are to be sent immediately to 
our lord the king." 

84 The female wards over whom he had the "jus maritagii," or right 
of giving in marriage. 

83 These seem to be the same officers that are called by Fleta " villici 
castrorum," or " stewards of the king's manors." 



AD. 1175. THE POPE'S ZEGATE HOLDS A COUNCIL. 411 

To the aforesaid council held at Northampton, came Wil- 
liam, king of the Scots, in obedience to the command of our 
lord the king, bringing with him Kichard, bishop of Saint 
Andrews, Jocelyn, bishop of Glasgow, Richard, bishop of 
Dunkeld, Christian, bishop of Whitherne, Andrew, bishop of 
Caithness, and Simon de Touy, bishop of Moray, together 
with the other bishops, abbats, and priors of his kingdom. 
When they had come before our lord the king of England, our 
lord the king commanded, by the fealty which they owed 
him, and the oath of fealty which they had made to him, that 
they should show the same obedience to the Church of Eng- 
land which they were in duty bound, and used to show, in the 
times of the kings of England, his predecessors. 

On this, they made answer to him that they never had paid 
obedience to the Church of England, nor was it their duty so 
to do; to which, Roger, archbishop of York, made reply, and 
alleged that the bishops of Glasgow and the bishops of Whit- 
herne had been subject to the church of York in the time of 
the archbishops, his predecessors; and, relative thereto, he 
satisfactorily pointed out the privileges granted by the Roman 
Pontiffs. Jocelyn, bishop of Glasgow, made reply to these 
assertions to the following effect : " The church of Glasgow is 
in especial the daughter of the Church of Rome, and is exempt 
from all subjection to either archbishops or bishops ; and, if 
the church of York has at any time had authority over the 
church of Glasgow, it is clear that, in future, she deserves to 
hold no dominion whatsoever over her." 

As Richard the archbishop of Canterbury was using his 
best endeavours that the Church of Scotland might be ren- 
dered subject to the church of Canterbury, he prevailed upon 
the king of England to allow the bishops of Scotland to re- 
turn to their own country without yielding any subjection to 
the Church of England. 

In the same year, at mid-Lent, the above-named Hugezun, 
cardinal, titular of Saint Michael de Petra Leonis, and legate 
of the Apostolic See, came to London to hold a council there. 
Here he was met by the archbishops of Canterbury and York, 
and all the bishops and abbats of England, with great num- 
bers of the clergy. The said cardinal took his seat at West- 
minster, in the chapel of the Infirm Monks, and the bishops 
and abbats with him, each in his place, according to his rank 



412 ANNALS OF BOGEB, DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1176, 

and dignity. But a dispute arose between the archbishops of 
Canterbury and York, which of them ought to sit on the 
right hand of the cardinal ; and on the archbishop of York 
attempting to seat himself there, 84 the servants of the lord 
archbishop of Canterbury rushed upon him and threw him to 
the ground, kicked him with their feet, and tore his hood. 
Upon this, the people there assembled dispersed, and the cardinal 
took to flight and hid himself from before their faces, and thus 
was the council prevented from being held. But, after both 
sides had made appeal to the Supreme Pontiff, each of them 
complained to the king of the wrongs which he had suf- 
fered. 

In this year, the king, the father, was at Winchester during 
the festival of Easter, and Richard, earl of Poitou, and Geof- 
frey, earl of Brittany, with the permission of the king, their 
father, crossed over from England to Normandy. Immediately 
Richard, earl of Poitou, arrived in Poitou, he assembled a large 
army, and fought a battle with the Brabanters, between Saint 
Hegrin and Buteville, and routed them. 

After this, he waged war against Aimeric, viscount de Li- 
moges, because he had broken the peace with him. He 
then laid siege to a castle which is called Aesse, and took 
it, together with forty knights who formed its garrison. 
After this, he laid siege to the city of Limoges, and took it, 
and then proceeded to Poitou to meet the king, his brother, 
who had come thither to aid him ; after which they laid siege 
to Neufchatel, 86 and took it. After its capture, the king, his 
brother, was unwilling to prolong his stay with him, but, listen- 
ing to bad advice, took his departure. Richard, earl of Poitou, 
however, now laid siege to Molineux, a castle of the viscount 
of AngoulSme, and took it, and in it William Taillefer, count 
of Angouleme, Buger, his son, and Aimeric, viscount of Li- 
moges, the viscount of Ventadour, and the viscount of Cam- 
banais. The count of Angouleme also delivered up to the earl 
of Poitou the castle of Buteville, the castle of Archiac, the 
castle of Montimac, the castle of Lachese, and the castle of 
Melpis. 

84 According to the account given by Gervaise he actually tried to seat 
himself in the lap of the archbishop of Canterbury. The translation given 
of it by Holinshed is highly amusing, but hardly suited to ears polite. 

85 In Normandy, about twenty miles from Dieppe. 



A.D. 1176. MAHRIAGE OF THE PRINCESS JOAKWA. 413 

The king, the son, on his return, upon coming to Poitiers, 
took Adam de Chirchedowne, his vice-chancellor, who was a 
clerk of Geoffrey, the prior of Beverley, chancellor of the 
king, the son, and caused him to be beaten with sticks, charg- 
ing him with having disclosed his secret counsels to the king, 
his father; and after being thus beaten, he had him led naked 
through the streets of the city of Poitiers, while, being still 
whipped, proclamation was made by the voice of a herald, 
" Thus does he deserve to be disgraced who reveals the secrets 
of his master." 

In the same year, there came to England, from "William, 
king of Sicily, the bishop of Troia, the archbishop elect of 
Capua, and count Florio, as envoys to Henry, king of Eng- 
land, the father, and asked of him his daughter Joanna in 
marriage for "William, king of Sicily, their .master. A council 
upon the matter being accordingly held in London, the king, 
the father, with the consent of all the bishops, earls, and 
barons of the kingdom, gave his daughter to the king of 
Sicily. And with this assent, the king first sent to the king 
of Sicily the bishop of Troia, John, bishop of Norwich, Paris, 
archdeacon of Rochester, Baldwin Bulot, and Richard de Cam- 
ville ; and in the meantime prepared for his daughter, Joanna, 
the things necessary for her equipment and journey. After 
these were all completed in a becoming manner, the king sent 
his daughter, Joanna, to be married to William, the king of 
Sicily. When she had arrived at Palermo, in Sicily, toge- 
ther with Gilles, bishop of Evreux, and the other envoys of our 
lord, the king, the whole city welcomed them, and lamps, so 
many and so large, were lighted up, that the city almost seemed 
to be on fire, and the rays of the stars could in no way bear 
comparison with the brilliancy of such a light: for it was 
by night that they entered the city of Palermo. The said 
daughter of the king of England was then escorted, mounted 
on one of the king's horses, and resplendent with regal gar- 
ments, to a certain palace, that there she might in becom- 
ing state await the day of her marriage and coronation. 

After the expiration of a few days from this time, the be- 
fore-named daughter of the king of England was married to 
William, king of Sicily, and solemnly crowned at Palermo, 
in the royal chapel there, in presence of Gilles, bishop of 
Evreux, and the envoys of the king of England, who had been 



414 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1176. 

sent for that purpose. She was married and crowned on the 
Lord's day before the beginning of Septuagesima, being the 
ides of February; and was with due honor endowed with the 
county of Saint Angelo, the city of Siponto, the city of Vesta, 
and many other castles and places. Whereupon, the king of 
Sicily executed in her favour his charter, as follows : 

The Charter of William, king of Sicily, ichich he executed in 
favour of Joanna, daughter of Henry, king of England, as to 
her dowry. 

" In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost, Amen. Amid the other blessings of peace, the 
nuptial tie binds and fastens the most strongly the unison and 
the concord of human affairs; a rite, both venerable from 
the weightiness of its obligations, remarkable in the circum- 
stances of its institution, and sanctioned by universal usage, 
from the beginning of the world and of time ; of which the 
virtues and the comeliness, inasmuch as it has derived its origin 
from Divine institution, have neither contracted blemish from 
sin, nor have been sensible of any diminution by desuetude, 
through the lengthened ages of past time. Moreover, to this 
venerable and mysterious institution this honor is added, that 
the consent of the man and of the woman to enter matrimony, 
typifies the sacramental bond of Christ and His Church. Being 
therefore led by the nature of this great and mysterious insti- 
tution, and by veneration for the same, we, William, by the 
favour of the Divine grace, king of Sicily, and of the dukedom of 
Apulia, and of the principality of Capua, do unite unto ourselves 
by the laws of matrimony and the bond of wedlock, with the 
Divine sanction and under happy auspices, the maiden Joanna, 
of royal blood, and the most illustrious daughter of Henry, the 
mighty king of the English ; to the end, that her fidelity and 
chaste affection may produce the blessings of the married state, 
and that by her a royal offspring may, by the gift of God, here- 
after succeed us in the kingdom, which, both by reason of its 
endowment with all virtues, and of its title by birth, by the Di- 
vine grace, both may and ought to be raised to the throne of this 
realm. But, inasmuch as it is befitting our exalted position that 
so noble and illustrious an alliance should be honored with a be- 
coming dowry, by this present writing we do give, and as a 
dowry, do grant to the before-named queen, our most dearly be- 



A.D. 1176. MARRIAGE CHAETEE OF THE PRINCESS JOANNA. 415 

loved wife, the county of Mont Saint Angelo, the city of 
Siponto, and the city of Vesta, with all the rightful tenements 
and appurtenances thereof. We do also grant for her service, out 
of the tenements of count Godfrey, Alesina, Peschiza, 86 Bicum, 
Caprile, Barano, and Filizi, and all other places which the 
said count is known to possess as of the honor of the said 
county of Mont Saint Angelo. In like manner, we do also 
grant for her service, Candelari, Saint Clair, 87 Castel Pagano, 
Bersenza, and Cagnano. We do also grant, that there shall be 
as of the honor of the said dowry, the monastery of Saint Mary 
de Pulsano, and the monastery of Saint John de Lama, with all 
the tenements which those monasteries hold of the honor of 
the aforesaid county of Saint Angelo upon condition that the 
queen, our aforesaid wife, shall always recognize all the rights 
of our heirs, who by our ordinance shall succeed us in the king- 
dom, and shall do unto our said heirs, fully and unreservedly, 
all services for the tenements above- written, according as the 
tenure in fee thereof shall require, and shall always observe 
her fealty to them. Wherefore, in remembrance of the said 
gift and grant, and for the inviolable establishment thereof, 
we have commanded this present charter 88 to be written by the 
hand of Alexander, our notary, and, the golden bulla, our seal, 
being impressed thereon, to be confirmed with our said seal, 
and graced therewith. Unto which, by our command, the 
personages of our household and others have subscribed their 
names in manner following: 

I WALTER, archbishop of Palermo. 

I ALFANTJS, archbishop of Capua. 

I RICHARD, bishop of Syracuse. 

I BARTHOLOMEW, bishop of Agrigento. 

I REGINALD, archbishop of Bari. 

I NICHOLAS, first archbishop of Messina. 

I RTJFFTJS, archbishop of Cosenza. 

I THEOBALD, bishop and abbat of the royal monastery of 
Saint Mary Nuova. 

I ROBERT, bishop of Catana. 

88 Hardly any of these places can now be traced under these names. 

87 This is probably the name of the place, though in the text it is 
called f ' Sanctum clericum." 

88 Called by the singular name of " privilegium," which was the usual 
name of charters confirming grants to churches. 



416 ANNALS OF ROGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1176. 

I GUIDO, bishop of Cephalea. 
I EBIAS, bishop elect of Troia. 
I JUSTUS, bishop of Massa. 
I ROBERT, bishop of Tricarico. 
I PETEK, bishop of Caiazzo. 
I JOHN, bishop of Potenza. 

I ROBERT DE BlZINO. 

I ROBERT MALCTTTENANZ. 
I ALEXANDER GTJPILLENZI. 

I MATTHEW, vice-chancellor of our lord the king. 
I KOBERT, count of Caserta. 
I AMPHTJSUS, count of Scrulac. 
I JOCELYN, count of Loret. 
I HUGH, count of Cattazaro. 
I RICHARD, count of FUNDANO, admiral. 
I WALTER DE MOAC, admiral of the king's ship Fortunatus. 
I ALDEWIN DE CANDIDA, seneschal of our lord the king. 
I BERARDUS GENTILI, constable of the private palace of 
Maisnede. 

I RICHARD SACRI, keeper of the records in the royal palace. 
I BAMALISDE MONTEFORT, chief justiciary. 
I PERSICUS, chief justiciary of the royal court. 
I FREDERIC, justiciary of the royal court. 

Given at the nourishing city of Palermo by the hands of 
Walter, the venerable archbishop of Palermo, Matthew, vice- 
chancellor of the king, and Richard, the venerable bishop of 
Syracuse, members of the household of our lord the king, in 
the year from the incarnation of our Lord one thousand one 
hundred and seventy-seven, in the month of February, being 
the tenth year of the indiction ; and in the eleventh year of 
the happy reign of our lord William, by the grace of God, 
the mighty and most glorious king of Sicily, of the dukedom 
of Apulia, and of the principality of Capua, Amen. 

[Sealed with the seal of William, king of Sicily.] 

[Here follows in the original, the form of the bulla or seal, 
which contains around the margin the words "Dextera Domini 
fecit virtutem. Dextera Domini exaltavit me. Dextera Domini 
fecit virtutem." " The right hand of the Lord hath created my 
might. The right hand of the Lord hath exalted me. The right hand 
of the Lord hath created my might'' 1 In the central portion is a 



A.D. 11/6. TB.UCE BETWEEN THE ABCHBISHOPS. 417 

cross surmounted by the words " DivinS, favente elemental Wil- 
lielmus rex Sicilise et ducatus Apuliae et principatus Capuae." 
" By the favour of the Divine mercy, William, king of Sicily, 
of the dukedom of Apulia, and of the principality of Capua.' 1 The 
cross is supported by the following words. " Hoc signum sibi 
praeferri a vexillifero facit cum ad bellum aliquod procedit." 
" This sign he causes to be borne before him by his standard-bearer 
when he goes forth to battle."] 

In the same year pope Alexander sent Vivianus, cardinal 
priest, as legate from the Apostolic See to Scotland and the 
adjoining islands, and Ireland and Norway, to hear causes 
ecclesiastical, and to determine the same according as God 
should assist him therein. When he arrived in England, our 
lord the king sent to him Eichard, bishop of Winchester, and 
Geoffrey, bishop of Ely, to ask him by whose authority he had 
presumed to enter his kingdom without his permission. Upon 
this question being put to him, the above-named cardinal was 
greatly alarmed, and, to give satisfaction to the king, made 
oath that he would do nothing connected with his legateship 
against his wishes ; upon which, liberty was given him to pass 
through the kingdom into Scotland, and our lord the king 
found his escort and expenses until he arrived in the domi- 
nions of the king of Scotland. 

In the same year, Geoffrey, bishop of Ely, was charged before 
the king by Roger, archbishop of York, with having laid violent 
hands upon him at the before-mentioned synod, which Huge- 
zun was to have held at London; however, he proved his 
innocence, by declaring on his word of truth that he had not 
laid violent hands on him, and the same was attested by the 
above-named archbishop of Canterbury, on the Word of our 
Lord ; whereupon Roger, archbishop of York, and Geoffrey, 
bishop of Ely, were reconciled. 

In addition to this, at the urgent request of our lord the 
king, the archbishops of Canterbury and York agreed to 
terms between them for the space of five years, both as to the 
dispute which existed between them relative to the blows 
inflicted on the archbishop of York, as well as the other ques- 
tions which were the causes of contention bet ween them and their 
churches, submitting themselves entirely to the arbitration 
and decision of the archbishop of Rouen and of the bishops 
of the kingdom of France ; and they made oath that they would 

TOL. I. E E 



418 AOTTA1S OF ROGER DE HOVEDEH. A.D. 1176. 

abide by their decision, and that neither of them would in the 
meantime seek to do any harm or injury to the other. 

In the same year, William, earl of Gloucester, son of earl 
Eobert, brother of the empress, gave his daughter in marriage 
to John, the son of the king of England, together with the 
earldom of Gloucester, in case he should be able to marry the 
said damsel with the sanction of our lord the pope. In return 
for this grant, the king of England, the father, gave to the 
elder daughters of the said earl two hundred pounds of yearly 
revenues in England, namely, to the wife of Amaurus, earl of 
Evreux, one hundred pounds, and to the wife of Richard, earl 
of Clare, one hundred pounds. 

In the same year died Philip, brother of Louis, king of 
the Franks, and archbishop of Rheims, and was succeeded by 
William, archbishop of Sens, he making this exchange of arch- 
bishoprics with the permission of Alexander, the Supreme 
Pontiff. In this year also, master John 88 of Salisbury, formerly 
a clerk, and attached to the household of Saint Thomas of Canter- 
bury, the martyr, was made bishop of Chartres. In this year 
also, our lord the king of England, the father, gave Ireland to 
his son John. In the same year died Richard, earl of Striguil, 
whom our lord the king had made justiciary of Ireland ; upon 
which our lord the king appointed in his room William 
Fitz-Aldelm, who took possession for the king of all the for- 
tified places which the aforesaid earl had possessed in Ireland. 

In the same year, William, earl of Arundel, departed this 
life, and was succeeded by his son William. In this year also 
died William de Courcy, justiciary of Normandy, and was suc- 
ceeded by William Fitz-Ralph. In this year also, Frederic, 
emperor of the Romans, assembled a large army of Germans 
and Alemannians, and fought a battle near Securo, between 
Comae and Milan, with the Lombards, which lasting from 
morning until the evening, the emperor, having lost the greater 
part of his army, was put to flight ; and among the others 
whom he lost, his standard-bearer was taken prisoner, and, 
with many others, was placed by the Lombards in confinement. 

In this year also the king, the father, caused the castle and 

fortifications of Leicester to be destroyed, as also the castle of 

Groby, the castle of Tresk, 89 the castle of Malesart, the new 

88 The most learned scholar of his age, and author of the treatise " De 

nugis curialium, et de vestigiis Philosophorum," and other works. 

<* Thirsk. 



A.D. 1176. LETTER OP THE EMPEROR OF CONSTANTINOPLE. 419 

castle of Alverton, 90 the castle of Fremingham, the castle of 
Bungay, and nearly all the castles of England and Normandy 
which had taken part against him in the time of the war. But 
the castle of Pasci and the castle of Mountsorrel he retained in 
his own hands, the latter having been awarded to him on the 
oaths of a jury of lawful men of TTrsuet. In the same year died 
Ralph de Dotis, in Berry, whose daughter and heir our lord the 
king of England, the father, gave in marriage to Baldwin de 
Rivers, together with the honor of the castle of the said Ralph. 
In the same year, on the sixteenth day before the calends of 
November, being the Lord's day, the church of the canons 
regular at Cirencester, in honor of Mary, the blessed Mother 
of God, was dedicated by Bartholomew, bishop of Exeter, in 
presence of our lord the king of England, the father, who, 
at its dedication, bestowed large revenues on the said church. 
In the same year Manuel, emperor of Constantinople, having 
fought a pitched battle with the sultan of Iconium and de- 
feated him, wrote to the king of England to the following 
effect : 

The Letter of Manuel, emperor of Constantinople, to the king 
of England, the father. 

"Manuel Porphyrogenitus Comnenus, the emperor, ever 
faithful in Christ, crowned by the will of heaven, the sublime, 
potent, exalted, ever august, and ruler of the Romans, to Henry, 
the most noble king of England, his most dearly-beloved 
friend, health and every blessing. Inasmuch as our imperial 
office deems it necessary to notify to you, as being its beloved 
friend, all things which befall it, it has therefore considered it 
proper to inform you upon the events which have lately taken 
place. Now, from the very earliest period of our coronation, our 
imperial office nourished hatred in our heart against the Persians, 
the enemies of God, when it beheld them vaunting over the 
Christians, triumphing over the name of God, and holding 
sway over the lands of the Christians. Wherefore, on another 
occasion, without delay, it made an attack upon them, and, as 
God granted it to do, even so it did do. As to the exploits which 
were frequently performed by it, to their humiliation and loss, 
our imperial office entertains a belief that the same have not 
escaped the notice of your highness. However, we did more 
9J North Allerton. 

E E 2 



420 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEBT. A.D. 1176. 

recently determine also to lead a most numerous army against 
them, and to wage war against the whole of Persia, inasmuch 
as by circumstances we were compelled so to do. Still, much 
of our preparations were made not according as we should 
have wished, or as appeared best suited to our object. How- 
ever, in such way as occasion allowed us, and the state of 
events, means were taken to ensure a powerful attack upon 
them. Accordingly, for this purpose our imperial office col- 
lected around it all its resources : but, inasmuch as it had to take 
with it waggons carrying vast weights of arms and implements, 
both mangonels 91 and other engines applicable to the storming 
of cities, it was consequently far from able to proceed with 
expedition on the march. Still further, while the army was 
passing on through its own country, and before any of our 
barbarian foes had engaged us in war, a most intractable 
malady, namely, a flux of the bowels, attacked us ; which, 
spreading among the troops of our empire, made its way among 
them all, and, a more dangerous antagonist than any warriors 
could be, slew and destroyed vast numbers. This malady, 
waxing more and more formidable, greatly weakened our 
forces. As soon as we had entered the territories of the 
Turks, that instant was heard the din of numerous bat- 
tles, and the troops of the Turks engaged in combat with 
the armies of our empire on every side. However, through 
the grace of God, the barbarians were entirely put to flight by 
our men. But, after this, when we drew near to the narrow 
passes of an adjacent spot which the Persians call Cibrilcima, 
so many hordes of foot and horse, most of which had come 
from the interior of Persia, came up to the support of their 
fellow-countrymen, that, on meeting our army, they almost 
exceeded the numbers of our men. In consequence of the 
narrowness of the road and the difficulties of the passage, 
the army of our empire was extended in a line fully ten miles 
in length ; and, inasmuch as who went first were unable to 
support those who came last, and again, on the other hand, 
those who came last were unable to aid those who went before, 
it was no common misfortune that this distance lay between 
them. Indeed, the troops that formed the van were divided 
by a very considerable interval from the main body of our 

91 The various reading "manganorum " is certainly preferable to "paga- 
noruru " in the text. 



A.D. 1176. LETTER OF THE EKPEBOB OF CONST.tNTrNTOPLE. 421 

army, having at last forgotten it 92 altogether, and not waiting 
for its coming up. In consequence of this, as the troops of the 
Turks, from the battles that had already taken place, knew 
that it was not for their advantage to attack us in front, find- 
ing that the narrowness of the passage was likely to serve them 
in great stead, they determined upon attacking the rear, which 
they accordingly did. Now the passage all along consisting 
of a very narrow defile, the barbarians rushed upon us, attack- 
ing us on the right hand and on the left, and in all possible 
quarters, and their darts, falling upon us like a shower, slew 
a vast number of men and horses; Upon this, finding that disas- 
ters were there thickening apace, on taking due consideration, 
our imperial office thought proper to await those who were 
in the rear, for the purpose of supporting them, which it did 
accordingly, and, in so waiting, had to support itself against 
the infinite numbers of the Persians. What exploits it per- 
formed while thus hemmed in by them it is not necessary 
upon the present occasion to state ; perhaps your highness 
will learn more on that subject from those who were pre- 
sent on the occasion. "While our imperial office was doing 
its duty amid these dangers, and bearing the entire brunt of 
the conflict, the entire rear-guard, formed of Greeks, Latins, 
and all other varieties of nations, being wedged into a mass, and 
not being able to bear up against the darts thrown by the enemy, 
pushed onward 93 with the most vigorous efforts, and was 
borne along with the greatest violence while making all haste 
to gain an adjoining hill, that might serve as a sort of fortress ; 
those rushing on carrying on the others, whether they would or 
no. The consequence was, that, a vast cloud of dust being 
raised which quite overpowered the eyesight and allowed no 
one to see what lay at his feet, men and horses, thus rush- 
ing on without restraint, were borne over a precipice close at 
hand and overhanging a very deep valley. Thus, falling one 
upon another, they trod each other to death, and killed 
not only numbers of the common soldiers, but even some of 
the most illustrious and most nearly related of our kinsmen. 

93 Probably this is the meaning of the passage, which appears to be 
incorrectly printed, " illas " standing for " illam." Indeed the whole 
letter is a tissue of corruptions and omissions. 

9 * " Impactione " seems to be the reading, and not " in pactione," as in 
the text. 



422 AKNA1S OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1176. 

For, indeed, who could possibly make head against the insup- 
portable onset of so vast a multitude ? However, as to our 
imperial office, hedged in on every side by such vast bodies of 
the barbarians, inflicting wounds and receiving wounds in 
return, we still used efforts that excited in them no small 
alarm, in consequence of their surprise at our perseverance, 
and which we did not relax until by the benign aid of God 
we had reached the open country. Nor did it allow the enemy 
to scale the position which it took up, from which to cany 
on the battle with the barbarians, nor yet through fear of 
it did it spur on its horse, for the purpose of effecting a 
more speedy retreat. On the contrary, our imperial office, 
rallying all its body guard, and rescuing them from destruction, 
ranged them around itself; and thus it reached the vanguard, 
and then going on through the ranks in order, came to the main 
body of the army. Upon this, the sultan seeing that in spite 
of such great disasters as had befallen our army, our imperial 
office was, as became it, arranging matters for the purpose of 
again attacking him, sent word to us, and suppliantly begged our 
imperial office, and employed the language of entreaty, suing for 
peace, and promising to fulfil every wish of our imperial office, 
to give us his services against all men, to release all the 
prisoners who were detained in his kingdom, and in every way 
to conform to our desires. Wherefore, having then stayed there 
for two whole days with all our forces, we became sensible that 
nothing could be effected against the city of Iconium, having 
lost our besieging sheds 94 and engines of war, in consequence 
of the oxen which drew them being slain by the darts that 
had been hurled upon us like a shower. Another reason was, 
the fact that all our animals were afflicted by this most intract- 
able malady which had now attacked them. We therefore lis- 
tened to the supplications of the sultan, and a treaty, confirmed 
by oath, having been made beneath our standards, peace was 
granted to him. Upon this, departing thence, our imperial office 
returned to its own country, entertaining no small sorrow for 
those kinsmen whom it had lost, but still returning especial 
thanks to God, who has, in His kindness, and still does, honor 
it. We have also felt it a pleasure that it so happened 
that some of the chief men of your nobility were with us, 
who will, at your desire, inform you on all the circumstances 
94 "Testudinibus." 



A.D. 1176. 



THE AfilAJST HEBESY CONDEMNED. 



423 



in the order in which they happened. However, although we 
have been afflicted with deep regret for those who have fallen, 
we have still deemed it advisable to inform you upon all the 
events that have happened, as being our dearly-beloved friend, 
and as being closely united with our imperial office, by the 
ties of blood that exist between OUT children. Farewell. 
Given in the month of November, in the tenth year of the 
indiction." 

In the same year, Henry, king of England, son of the 
empress Matilda, gave Eleanor, his daughter, in marriage to 
Alphonso, king of Castille. In this year also, Gilbert, the son 
of Fergus, chief of the men of Galloway, who had caused his 
brother, TJcthred, a kinsman of Henry, king of England, to be 
slain, came into England, with the safe conduct of William, 
king of the Scots, and did homage to king Henry, the father, 
and swore fealty to him against all men : and, to obtain his favor, 
he gave him a thousand marks of silver and his son Dunecan 
as a hostage, by way of pledge that he would keep the peace. 
In the same year, Henry, king of England, the father, laid 
hands upon all the castles of England and Normandy, both of 
the bishops as well as of the earls and barons, and placed his 
custodians therein. In this year, also, Peter, the prior of 
Wenlock, was made bishop of Saint David's, in Wales. 

The Arian Heresy and its Condemnation?* 

In the same year the Arian heresy, which had corrupted 
nearly the whole of the province of Toulouse, was condemned 
in the presence of the archbishops, bishops, and other pious 
men, whose names are underwritten. 

For there were in the province of Toulouse, certain heretics, 
who would have themselves called good men, and were upheld 
by certain knights of the town of Lombez, who propounded 
things, and taught the people the same, contrary to the Christian 
faith ; they said also that they did not receive the law of Moses, 
nor the Prophets, nor the Psalms, neither the Old Testament, 
nor yet the doctors of the New Testament ; but only the 
Gospels, the Epistles of Saint Paul, the seven Canonical Epis- 
tles, the Acts of the Apostles, and the Book of Revelations. 5S 
On being interrogated as to their faith, and as to the baptism of 

95 These alleged heretics were the people of Alby, or, as they are gene- 
rally called, the Albigenses. x It is hard to see what part of the 
New Testament they did reject. Probably " Old" Testament is meant. 



424 jLNNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEff. A.D. 1176. 

infants, and whether they were saved by baptism, and as to the 
body and blood of our Lord, where they were consecrated, and 
by whom, and who partook thereof, and if the same was more 
efficaciously or better consecrated by a good man than by a 
bad one ; also as to marriage, whether they could possibly be 
saved, if a man and woman were carnally united : they made 
answer that as to their faith and as to the baptism of infants 
they would not say, nor were they obliged to say. As to the 
body and blood of the Lord, they said that he who partook 
thereof worthily was saved, and he who did so unworthily 
ensured his own damnation thereby. As to marriages, they 
said that man and woman were joined together for the avoiding 
of sensuality and fornication, as Saint 97 Paul says. They also 
said many things upon which they were not questioned, as, 
that they ought not to swear by any oath whatsoever, in con- 
formity with what Saint John says in his Gospel, and Saint 
James in his Epistle. 

They also said that Saint Paul preached that bishops and 
priests were to be ordained in the church, and that, if such 
were not ordained as he directed, they would not be bishops or 
priests, but ravening wolves, hypocrites and seducers, lovers 
of salutations in the market-place, and of the chief seats and 
higher places at feasts, and desirous to be called "Rabbi," 
contrary to the commands of Christ ; wearers of albs and white 
garments, and of rings of gold and gems on their fingers, 
which their master did not command them to do. That 
consequently, because the bishops and priests were just such 
men as the priests were who delivered up Jesus, it was their 
duty not to obey them, because they were evil. 

Accordingly, the allegations having been heard on both sides 
before Gerard, bishop of Alby, and judges having been chosen 
and appointed by either side, and the aforesaid Gerard, bishop 
of Alby, Roger, abbat of Castres, Peter, abbat of Aire, the 
abbat of Candiel, and Arnold of Narbonne, presiding and as- 
senting thereto, the said matters were discussed in the pre- 
sence of worthy men, both of the prelacy and clergy, as 
also of the laity, that is to say, of Peter, the lord archbishop 
of Narbonne, and other bishops, abbats, archdeacons, counts, 
and influential men of that province to the number of 
twenty, and of nearly the whole population of Alby and 

97 The word " Saint" is added to the name, as more in conformity 
with the present custom. 



A.D. 1176. JUDGMENT PRONOTTNCED UPON THE ALBIGEN8ES. 425 

Lombez. Against the things that had been propounded 
by the said heretics, many authorities were quoted from the 
New Testament by Peter, the lord archbishop of Narbonne, 
the bishop of Nismes, the abbat of Cahors, and the abbat of 
Font-froid ; for the said heretic refused to receive judgment, 
except on the New Testament. The following definite sentence, 
upon the authority of the New Testament, was accordingly pro- 
nounced by the bishop of Lyons, all observing strict silence in 
the presence of all the persons above-mentioned : 

" I Gilbert, bishop of Lyons, by command of the bishop of 
Alby and of his assessors, do adjudge these persons to be 
heretics, and do condemn the opinions of Oliverius and of his 
associates, wheresoever they may be ; and the following judg- 
ment, based on the New Testament, we do pronounce 

" On the first head we do pronounce and adjudge them to 
be heretics. For the law is to be received through the Gospel, 
and he who receives not the law believes not our Lord Jesus 
Christ ; for in the Gospel he says, ' For had ye believed Moses, 
ye would have believed me : for he wrote of me.' 97 And 
again, ' I am not come to destroy the law, but to fulfil it.' 98 
And again, 'All things must be fulfilled which were written 
in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the Psalms con- 
cerning me.' 99 Also, 'And beginning at Moses he ex- 
pounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning 
himself.' l But why did he expound the Scriptures, and why did 
he teach concerning the Law and the Prophets, except that he 
wished them to receive the Law and the Prophets, and that by 
the Law and the Prophets they might be confirmed in their 
belief ? Many things also did the Lord Jesus quote from the 
Law and the Prophets and the Psalms, which indeed a good 
teacher certainly would not have done if the Law and the 
Prophets and the Psalms were not to be received. In deed also 
he showed that the law was good, inasmuch as he was circum- 
cised, and presented in the Temple, and sacrifice was offered 
for him according to the law of Moses. Also, we find it written 
that he went up on the day of the feast. In the Transfigura- 
tion also, where Moses and the prophet Elias appeared unto 
him, they bore testimony unto him. By the Epistles also we 
do convict them ; for Saint Paul says, ' Whatsoever things were 

w St. John v. 46. M St. Matthew v. 17. 9 St. Luke xxiv. 44. 
1 St. Luke xxiv. 27. 



426 AWNAXS OF ROGER DE HOVEDE1T. A.D. 117fi. 

written aforetime were written for our learning ;' 2 and again, 
' All Scripture is given by the inspiration of God ;' 3 and ' I say 
none other things than those which the prophets have said 
should come.' 3 * And again, Saint Peter says ' We have a more 
sure word of prophecy.' 4 And that the doctors are to be re- 
ceived, Saint Paul bears witness, ' God hath set some in the 

Church as teachers.' 8 Saint Paul also quotes the example 

of the law, saying, ' Cursed is every one that continueth not 
in all things which are written in the book of the law to do 
them.' 6 And both he himself as well as the other Apostles 
give many testimonies in favour of the Law and the Prophets 
and the Psalms ; a thing which they would not have done if 
their words were not to be received. These heretics therefore 
are bound by their own admission to receive Moses and the 
Prophets and the Psalms, if only upon the testimonies which 
are borne by Jesus and the Apostles, and no others. For do we 
not say that if an instrument or written testimonial is believed 
in any part thereof, it ought to be entirely believed, or else to 
be received in no part thereof? 7 

" On the second head we do convict and adjudge them to be 
heretics, upon the authority of the New Testament. For we 
say that he holds not the Catholic faith, who does not confess 
it when he is asked thereon, or when his faith is made trial of. 
For this reason the Lord says, in the Acts of the Apostles, to 
Ananias, relative to Saint Paul, ' For he is a chosen vessel 
unto me to bear my name before the Gentiles and kings and 
the children of Israel.' 8 Also, the Lord says of the centurion ; 
' I have not found so great faith in Israel.' 9 When the 
Apostles were fordidden to speak in the name of Jesus Christ, 
Peter boldly said, 'We ought to obey God rather than men.' 10 A 
person on being asked as to his faith in Jesus Christ, ought to 
answer as Peter answered ; for on being asked by the Lord, whom 
do men say that the Son of Man is ? he made answer, ' Thou 
art Christ, the Son of the living God.' " The blind man also, 
on being asked, after receiving his sight from the Lord, if 
he believed in the Son of God, answered, 'I believe, Lord.' 12 
So Martha, on being asked by the Lord, ' Believest thou this?' 

2 Romans xv. 4. 3 2 Tim. iii. 16. 3 * Acts xxvi. 22. 

* 2 Pet. i. 19. 1 Cor. xii. 28. 6 Gal. iii. 10. 

7 The sense seems to require this passage to be put interrogatively. 

8 Acts ix. 15. s St. Matthew viii. 10 St. LukeVii. 9. 10 Actsv.29. 
11 St. Matthew xvi. 16. St. John vi. 69. * St. John ix. 38. 



A.D. 1J76. JUDGMENT PRONOUNCED UPON THE A1BIGENSES. 427 

made answer, ' Yea, Lord ; I believe that them art the Christ, 
the Son of the living God, which hast come into this world.' 13 
So also the Apostle says ; ' "With the heart man believeth unto 
righteousness ; and with the mouth confession is made unto 
salvation.' 14 Also, at the end of his Epistle 15 Saint Peter says 
(we are better able to commit to memory what we find said 
at the conclusion of a discourse) ; ' But sanctify the Lord God 
in your hearts; and be ready always to give an answer to every 
man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with 
meekness and fear.' And whereas these heretics boasted that 
they do not lie, we affirm that clearly they do lie. For there 
is falsehood in being silent as well as in speaking. It was for 
this that Saint Paul boldly withstood Saint Peter 16 to the face, 
because he practised circumcision. For it seemed to Saint Paul 
that he could not reveal the truths of the Gospel, because he 
preached one thing and believed another. For truth consists 
in three things, in the heart, in the words, and in the works. 
He speaks the truth who expresses in the articulation of his 
voice what are his feelings, and who holds the same in his 
heart, confesses it with his lips, and performs it in his works. 

" On the third head, we do also convict and adjudge them 
to be heretics, upon the authority of the New Testament. For 
we say, that it is the wish of God that every man should be 
saved. Nor, indeed, would Christ have been crucified for 
all, if only the older ones were to be saved, who to original 
sin have added actual sin, and if infants were not to be 
saved, whom God has created and formed in His own image and 
likeness, and who have probably never committed any sin, but 
have only contracted original sin. For baptism was generally 
given unto all, both old and young, as the Lord says to his dis- 
ciples, ' Go ye, teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of 
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.' 17 And 
' Except a man be born again of water and of the spirit, he 
cannot enter into the kingdom of God.' 18 And again, the 
Lord says, ' Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid 
them not.' 19 This indeed he said for two reasons. For one, 
because those who wish to be saved must become as little 

" St. John xi. 26, 27. H Romans x. 10. ls 1 Pet. iii. 15. The 
bishop is in error, it occurs in the middle of the Epistle, which contains 
five chapters. 16 Gal. ii. 11, et seg. / St. Matt, xxviii. 19. 

" St. John iii. 5. St. Matth. xix. 14. St. Mark, x. 14. St. 

Luke xviii. 1:6. 



428 A1TNALS OF KOGEE DE HOVEDEtf. A. n. 11 70. 

children, with reference to wickedness and guile, and simple 
like them, in such manner as He himself says : ' Unless ye 
become as this little child ye cannot enter the kingdom of 
heaven.' w He also says so, in order that the Apostles and 
their followers may never he in douht as to the baptism of little 
children, for baptism succeeded in the place of circumcision, 
which had been enjoined both for those grown up and for 
infants. Baptism too is a more general and extensive ordi- 
nance, inasmuch as both males and females are baptized, and 
grace is thereby secured . But, if through faith children are 
saved, as they themselves cannot have faith, without Vhich it 
is impossible to please God, we say that it is through the faith 
of the Church, or through the faith of the sponsors, just as the 
man sick of the palsy was cured through the faith of those 
who carried him and let him down through the tiles. The 
son also of the nobleman, and the daughter of the woman of 
Canaan, were healed at that same hour at which the noble- 
man and the woman of Canaan believed. We do also say, that 
baptism ought to be celebrated in the Church, and by the 
ministers of the Church, unless necessity compels otherwise. 
Wherefore Saint Paul uses these words, ' Who hath made us 
able ministers of the New Testament.' 21 

" On the fourth head, we do convict and adjudge them to be 
heretics, upon the authority of the New Testament. For the 
body of our Lord is consecrated by the priest only, whether 
he is good or whether bad. For by the holy words, which 
the Saviour pronounced at the supper, namely, ' This is my 
body, and this is my blood,' the body of our Lord is consecrated 
and made. For just as the messenger of the emperor, or of 
the king of France, or of any other powerful person, does not 
by his low estate or ragged condition, corrupt or render vile the 
words of his master, so in like manner, the words of our Lord 
are neither changed nor blemished. And, just as a ray of the 
sun, when it passes through the common sewer, contracts neither 
stain nor fetid smell, or as water passes clear and transparent 
into the cisterns through pipes that are dirty, foul, or muddy, 
so are the words of the Lord not polluted, nor are they uttered 
with better or more pure effect by a good man than by a bad 
one, ' For with God there is no variableness, neither shadow of 
turning.' 22 But, that the body of the Lord ought to be con- 

20 The sense of this passage is found in St. Mark x. 15, and St. Luke 
xviii. 17. Zl 2 Cor. iii. 0. a James i. 17 



A.D. 1176. JUDGMENT PKONOUNCED UPON THE A1BIGE1TSES. 429 

secrated nowhere but in the Church ; Saint Paul says, ' Des- 
pise ye the Church of God ? Have ye not houses to eat in ?' a 
So also Saint Paul says to Titus, 24 ' That thou mayst know how 
thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is 
the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth.' 
And it is the duty of all the faithful to receive their instruc- 
tion in the Church. Wherefore it is that Saint Paul says, ' Let 
your women keep silence in the churches, for it is not permit- 
ted unto them to speak.' 25 For this, which man eats, is the 
bread of angels, which has descended from heaven ; and as 
the manna which had been rained from heaven, and the rod of 
Aaron which had blossomed, were kept in the ark, as also the 
tables which had been written by the finger of God, so is 
the body of our Lord not consecrated, or kept except in the 
Church, as being the most pleasing sanctuary of the Lord. And 
in the same manner as the ark was carried on their shoulders 
by the Levites only, and was under their care, and as the Le- 
vites only ministered in the tabernacle of the Lord, so, to the 
priests alone, and to their servants, has been delivered and en- 
trusted the care of the Church. Of this ark the Lord speaks 
in the Revelation ; ' the heaven was opened, and there was 
seen in His temple the ark of His testament.' 26 Moreover, 
to the priests alone has been given the power of binding 
and loosing; wherefore the Lord says unto Peter, 'What- 
ever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven ; and 
whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.' 27 
Saint Paul says also to Timothy, M 'For this cause left I thee in 
Crete, that thou shouldst set in order the things that are want- 
ing, and ordain elders in every city.' Also, with regard to 
orders, the Apostle says, ' Let the elders that rule well be ac- 
counted worthy of double honor.' M Likewise : ' Against an 
elder receive not an accusation, but before two or three wit- 
nesses.' 30 Again: 'Deacons must be grave;' 31 and, 'To 
all at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons, grace be imto 
you, and peace.' 32 Behold then to whom it is that the Lord 
commits the words of warning and of correction ! Also, Saint 
Paul says, ' Reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering 

23 1 Cor. xi. 22. 24 He commits an error : it is from 1 Timothy, 

iii. 15. 2S ICor. xiv. 34, 35. * Rev . xi . 19- 27 St. Matt. xvi. 19. 

- This is an error : the words (with a slight variation) are in Titus i 5. 

2 1 Tim. v. 17. * 1 Tim. v. 19. 31 1 Tim. iii. 8. Phili. J. 



430 AITNAIS OF BOGER BE HOVEDEW. A.D. 1176. 

and doctrine.' 33 Also, the Lord says to his disciples, ' Teach 
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.' M 
These elders, therefore, hishops, and deacons, it is the duty of 
both clergy and laity to obey, for the sake of God, whether 
they are good or whether bad. For this reason it is that the 
Lord says, ' The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat; 
all, therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe 
and do ; but do not ye after their works ; for they say, and do 
not.' 3S And Saint Paul, 36 speaking of authorities, says, ' Be 
subject to your masters with all fear ; not only to the good 
and gentle, but also to the froward :' and, ' Let a bishop be 
able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gain- 
sayers.' 37 And again, ' Obey them that have the rule over you, 
and submit yourselves ; for they watch for your souls, as they 
that must give account ; that they may do it with joy and not 
with grief.' 38 Also, ' Remember them which have the rule 
over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God, whose 
faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.' 39 Also, 
' He that waiteth at the altar is a partaker with the altar.' 40 
And, ' If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great 
thing if we shall reap you carnal things ?' 41 Saint Paul says 
also to Timothy : ' But continue thou in the things which 
thou hast learned and hast been assured of for, from a child, 
thou hast known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make 
thee wise to salvation.' ** 

" On the fifth head, we do convict and adjudge them to be 
heretics, on the authority of the New Testament. For they 
refuse to admit that a man and woman can be saved if they are 
carnally united ; inasmuch as they are in the habit of openly 
preaching the doctrine that a man and woman cannot obtain 
salvation after carnal connexion. Consequently, they com- 
mend and approve of the multiplication of cattle, and yet disap- 
prove of the multiplication of mankind. They admire sterility 
in woman, according to the words of Scripture, ' Blessed are 
the barren, and the wombs that never bare.' 43 This doctrine 
they preach, in order that but few owners may be found for ob- 
jects innumerable, and that the creatures which have been made 
for the use and service of men may be without possessor, in- 

33 2 Tim. iv. 2. Also, Tit. ii. 15. 3i St. Matt, xxviii. 20. 

35 St. Matt, xxiii. 2.3. 36 He is in error : the words are found in 

1 Peter ii. ] 8. " Titus i. 7, 9. 3 " Heb- xiii. 17. 39 Heb. xiii. 7. 

*> 1 Cor. ix. 13, and x. 18. 41 I Cor. ix. 11. 2 Tim. iii. 14, 15. 

43 Luke xxiii. 29. 



A.D. 1176. JUDGMENT PBONOUNCED UPON THE ALBIGENSES. 431 

habitant, or ruler, wishing all to be like themselves, as 

Saint Paul says, ' I would that all were such as I am.' ** 

And then they would appear to preach up the merits of virginity, 
as being the state of Christ and of the Virgin Mary, although 
it was He who said : ' Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish 
the earth.' 45 Indeed, they seem thereby to detract from the 
character of- marriage, and to condemn it, while our Lord 
Jesus Christ graced a marriage with his own presence, and 
that of his mother Mary and of his disciples, and honored 
it with the miracle of turning water into wine. Besides, it 
is said in the Gospel, '"What "God hath joined together, let 
not man put asunder;' 46 and, ' Let it not be lawful for a man 
to put away his wife, except for fornication.' 47 Also, Saint 
Paul says: 'He who giveth his virgin in marriage, doeth 
well.' 48 And, again, ' The woman is bound by law to her 
husband so long as he liveth.' 49 'The wife hath not power 
of her own body, but her husband ;' 50 and similarly with re- 
gard to the husband. Likewise, he says : ' Defraud ye not 
one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may 
give yourselves to prayer ; and come together again that Satan 
tempt you not.' 5l And, ' I will that the younger women marry, 
bear children, keep house.' 52 And further, ' I say it not, but 
the Lord ; a woman shall be saved in childbearing.' a If it 
were a sin to beget children, why should the Lord say, why 
should the Apostle say, that it is good ? And why should he 
tell them to come together again, and use the expression, ' I 
will that' ? Does God will, does the Apostle will, that a sin 
should be committed ? We are of the belief, then, that a man 
and woman may be saved, even if they are carnally united. 

" On the sixth head we do convict and adjudge them to 
be heretics, and cut off from the unity of the Church, on the 
authority of the New Testament. For we say that the Lord 
delivered unto Saint Peter the ministry and the power of bind- 
ing and loosing, saying, 'Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth, 
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on 
earth, shall be loosed in heaven ;' M and, ' I send unto you pro- 
phets, and wise men and scribes.' 55 But, as the Lord says, 
' Not all men can receive this saying.' M And further, we say, 

" Acts xxvi. 29. 45 Gen. i. '28. Matt. xix. 6. " 7 Matt. xix. 9. 
48 1 Cor. vii. 37. " 9 Rom. vii. 2. 50 1 Cor. vii. 4. ' 1 Cor. Tii. 5. 
5 M Tim. v. 14. " Partly from 1 Tim. ii. 15. 6 ' St. Matt. xvi. 19. 
St. Matt, xxiii. 34. i6 St. Matt. xix. 11. 



432 A3TNALS OF HOGEE DE HOVEDEX. A . D . 1176. 

that they ought to make answer respecting the Gospel, and to 
dispute thereon, standing, inasmuch as all Christians stand when 
the Gospel is read ; and if they stand when it is read, much 
more ought they when it is hoth read and expounded : nor, 
indeed, ought they to adopt the mode of sitting after they have 
once made choice of standing. We have also many authorities, 
from which it is manifestly gathered that a person ought to 
stand when the Gospel is preached ; as, for instance : ' Jesus 
stood on the shore ;' " and, again, ' Jesus stood still and 
called them;' 58 and, again, 'He stood in the midst of you 
whom ye know not.' 59 And, again, after his resurrection, 
confirming the Apostles, and preaching, 'Jesus stood,' it is 
said, ' in the midst of the disciples, and said, peace be unto 
you.' 60 These people too hold not the position of one giving 
judgment, but of one making answer ; and it is the Lord that 
ought to sit, to whom all judgment has been given by the 
Father. As for these people, they do not judge, but are judged. 
Nor has there been granted to them the mystery of preaching in 
the churches. Indeed, these are heretics, such as Saint Paul 
foretells that there shall be, saying, 'Evil men and seducers 
shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived ;' 61 as 
also ' The time will come when they will not endure sound 

doctrine, but shall turn away their ears from the truth, 

and shall be turned unto fables ;' 62 and, ' From which some 
having swerved, have turned aside unto vain jangling; desiring to 
be teachers of the law ; understanding neither what they say, 
nor whereof they affirm.' ** Indeed, it is the duty of the pre- 
lates of the Church to punish the disobedience of these persons, 
and to correct it before all men. Wherefore, the Apostle says, 
' Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear.' 64 
Saint Paul says, also, to the prelates [of the Church] : ' Hav- 
ing in a readiness to revenge all disobedience.'" And, ' That 
ye may be able to convince the gainsayers.' M And, ' These 
things speak, and exhort and rebuke with all authority.' 67 
Also, I have ' delivered such an one unto Satan, for the de- 

57 St. John xxi. 4. This must be the passage alluded to, though the 
words in the text are " Stetit Jesus in loco campestri." 

58 St. Matt. xix. 32. S9 Probably in reference to St. John xx. 14, and 
xxi. 4. M St. John xx. 19, 26. 61 2 Tim. iii. 13. 6a 2 Tim. iv. 3. 

63 1 Tim. i. 6, 7. M 1 Tim. v. 20. 2 Cor. x. 6. 66 Tit. i. 9. 
w Tit. ii. 15. 



A.D. 1176. EXAMINATION OF THE A1BIGEXSES. 433 

struction of the flesh.' M And, ' Absent I have judged 
as though present, concerning him that hath so done this 
deed.' 69 And again, ' If any man preach any other Gospel 
unto you than that ye have received, let him he accursed.' " 70 
In the seventh place, the above-named bishop questioned 
them upon repentance, if it could take place at the last moment, 
unto salvation, or whether soldiers who had received a fatal 
wound could be saved if they repented at the last moment: or 
if each ought to confess his sins to the priests and ministers 
of the Church, or to any one of the laity, or to those of whom 
Saint James has said : " Confess" your faults one to another;" 71 
to which they made answer, and said, that it was sufficient for 
the sick if they confessed to whom they pleased ; but that, as 
to soldiers, they were unwilling to say, as Saint James 
speaks only of the sick. He also asked them if contrition of 
the heart and confession by the lips were alone sufficient, or if 
it was necessary to make atonement after repentance [by con- 
fession], by fasting, alms-giving, and mortification, thus be- 
wailing their sins, if they had the means of so doing. To 
this they made answer, saying that the words of Saint James 
were : " Confess your faults one to another, that ye may 
be healed :" by which they understood that the Apostle com- 
manded nothing else but that they should confess, and so 
should be healed ; and that they had no wish to be wiser 
than the Apostle, so as to add anything of their own, as 
the bishops did. To this the heretics added, that the bishop 
who had given judgment was the heretic and not they, 
that he was an enemy to them, a ravening wolf, a hypocrite, 
and an enemy to God, and that he had not given a righteous 
judgment ; that they were not willing to make answer on their 
faith, because they were on their guard against him, in obe- 
*dience to what our Lord had commanded in the Gospel, 
" Beware of false prophets which come to you in sheep's cloth- 
ing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves ; " 7i and that he 
was a fraudulent persecutor of them, and they were prepared 
to show by the Gospels and the Epistles, that he was not a 
good shepherd, neither he nor the other bishops and priests, 
but, on the contrary, were hirelings. 

To this the bishop made answer and said, that the judgment 

68 1 Cor. v. 5. 1 Cor. v. 3. w Gal. i. 9. 71 St. James v. 16. 

rs Matt. vii. 15. 
VOL. I. g t 



434 ANNALS 01' ROGER DE HOTKDEN. A.D. 11/0. 

had been pronounced upon them legally, and that he was 
prepared to prove in the court of our lord Alexander the Catholic 
pope, or in the court of Louis, king of France, or in the court 
of Raymond, count of Toulouse, or in that of his wife, who 
was then present, or in the court of Trenkevelle, the pre- 
sental, 73 that he had given a right judgment, and that they 
were manifestly heretics, and notorious for their heresies. He 
further declared that he would accuse them and publish them 
as heretics in every Catholic court, and would submit to all 
the risk thereof. 

The heretics, seeing that, they were convicted and put 
to confusion, turned towards the people, and said, " Listen, 
good people, to the faith which we confess ; for now, for our love 
of you and for your sakes, we do make confession of it;" on 
which the above-named bishop made answer, " Do you say 
that you pronounce it, not for the sake of God, but for the 
sake of the people?" The others then said, "We believe 
that there is one God, three and one, the Father, the Son, 
and the Holy Ghost, and that the Son of God took upon 
Him our flesh, was baptized in the river Jordan, fasted in the 
wilderness, preached our salvation, suffered, died, and was 
buried ; that He descended into hell, rose again on the third 
day and ascended into heaven ; that, on the day of Pen- 
tecost, He sent the Holy Ghost the Comforter; that He will 
come on the day of judgment to judge both the living and 
the dead ; and that all shall rise again. We know, also, that 
what we believe in the heart we ought to confess with the 
lips ; we believe that he is not saved who does not eat tbe 
body of Christ, and that the body of Christ is not consecrated 
except in the Church, and only by the priest, whether he is 
good or whether bad, and that it is no more efficiently done 
by one who is good than by one who is bad. We believe, also, 
that no person is saved unless he is baptized, and that infants are 
saved by baptism. We believe, also, that a man and woman 
can be saved even though they be carnally united ; and th;it 
each person ought to receive confession, both in the lips and in 

73 This was an officer in France, who had the command of the soldiers 
in a county or earldom, and acted as deputy of the " comes," " count," or 
" earl." The name does not seem to have any corresponding one in the 
English language. The same party is called " vicecomes," " viscount," or 
" sheriff," at the conclusion of the proceedings, p. 436. 



A.D. 1176. JT7DGMEXT PRONOUNCED AGAINST THE ALBIGEXSES. 435 

the heart, and from a priest; and that baptism ought to be per- 
formed by the priest, and in churches ;" and that, if anything 
more could be pointed out to them, as supported by the autho- 
rity of the Gospels or the Epistles, they would believe the 
same and would confess it. 

In consequence of this, fresh authorities of the New Testa- 
ment were quoted against them by the above-named Catholic 
persons. After the authorities had been so heard on both 
sides, the above-named bishop 74 arose and pronounced judg- 
ment to the following effect : 

" I, Jocelyn, bishop of Lodeve, by the command and man- 
date of bishop Alberic, and of his assessors, do pronounce 
judgment, and do here affirm, that these heretics are wrongly 
informed on the subject of an oath, and that, if they wish to 
do right, they ought to take the oath, and that an oath ought 
to be taken when a person's faith is in question. And, inasmuch 
as they are infamous and notorious for heresy, they are bound 
to prove their innocence ; and, returning to the unity of the 
Church, they are bound to uphold their faith upon oath in such 
way as the Catholic Church maintains and believes ; in order 
that the weak who are in the Church may not be corrupted, 
and that the diseased sheep may not contaminate the whole 
flock. And this is neither contrary to the Gospel nor to the 
Epistles of Saint Paul. For although it is said in the Gospel 
' Let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay;' 73 'neither shalt 
thou swear by the heaven, nor by the earth,' 76 still it is not for- 
bidden to swear by God, but by his creatures. For the Gen- 
tiles were in the habit of worshipping the creatures, and, if it 
had been allowed to swear by the creatures, the reverence and 
honor that are due to God alone would be paid to the creatures, 
and, in consequence, idols and creatures would be adored as God. 
R>r we read in the book of Revelation, that an angel 'Lifted up 
his hand to heaven and sware by him that liveth for ever and 
ever ; ' " and Saint Paul, in his Epistle to the Hebrews/ 8 says, 
' Because God could swear by no greater, he sware by Himself. 
For men verily swear by the greater, and an oath for confirmation 
is to them an end of all strife.' Where God has wished more 
abundantly to show to the heirs of His promise the immove- 

74 This is an error ; he has not been previously mentioned. 
5 St. Matt. v. 37 ; James v. 12. 76 St. Matt. v. 34, 35. 

''' Rev. x 5 G. > Heb. vi. 13, lii. 



436 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1176. 

ableness of His counsels, he has interposed an oath. For the 
Lord sware, saying, ' By myself have I sworn.' 79 And again, 
'The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent.' 80 The Apostle, 
also, frequently made oath ; thus, ' God is my witness,' 81 and 
' I call God to witness.' If, then, God has sworn, an Angel 
sworn, an Apostle sworn, how is it right not to swear, especi- 
ally where our faith is in question ? Therefore, that which is 
said in the Gospel 82 and in the Epistle of James is to be deemed 
a piece of advice and not a precept. But, if there were no 
swearing, there would be no forswearing, a thing which is still 
more nearly allied to 83 evil, that is to say, to sin or the devil, 
who would prompt us to swear by the creatures." 

Accordingly, seeing that they were also convicted on this 
point, they said that bishop Alberic had made an agreement 
with them that he would not compel them to take an oath ; 
which, however, the bishop of Alby denied. After this, the 
bishop of Alby arose, and said, "The judgment which Jocelyn, 
bishop of Lodeve, has pronounced I do confirm, and by my 
command the same has been pronounced. And I further warn the 
knights of Lombez not to give them any countenance, on pe- 
nalty of the fine which they have placed in my hands. I, the 
abbat of Candiel, chosen judge, do approve of this judgment, 
and with my assent it has been given. I, the abbat of Aire, 
chosen judge, do approve of this judgment, and with my assent 
it has been given. I, Arnold de Be, chosen judge, do ap- 
prove of this judgment, and with my assent it has been given. 
I, Peter, bishop of Narbonne, I, A., bishop of Nismes, I, 
Jocelyn, bishop of Toulouse, I, V., bishop of Agde, I, E,., 
abbat of Saint Pontius, I, K,., abbat of Saint William, I, N., 
abbat of Gaillac, I, , abbat of Font-froid, I, M., mayor 01 
Toulouse, I, G., mayor of Alby, I, N\, mayor of Narbonne, 
I, B,., archdeacon of Agde, I, G., prior of Saint Mary, I, P., 
abbat of Cahors, I, Master Blanc, I, Bego de Veireiras, I, 
Trenkevelle, viscount, I, Constance, sister of the king of 
France, and wife of Raymond, earl of Toulouse, and I, Sicard, 
viscount of Lautrec, do ratify this judgment, and do know them 

? 3 Gen. xxii. 16. Isa. xlv. 23. Jer. xlix. 13. li. 14. Amos vi. 8. 
90 Psalm ex. 4. 81 Rom. i. 9. ** Su Matt. v. 37. James v. 12. 
* The meaning of this passage cannot be understood : it is in a hope- 
lessly imperfect state. 



A.D. 1177. GENERAL COUNCIL HELD AT NORTHAMPTON. 4S7 

to be heretics, and do approve of the judgment pronounced upon 
them." 

In the year of grace 1177, being the twenty- third year of 
the reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said 
Henry, and Geoffrey, earl of Brittany, and John, his sons, were 
at Northampton, in England, during the festival of the Nativity 
of our Lord. On the same day, king Henry, the son, and his 
wife were at Argenton in Normandy, and Richard, the son of 
king Henry, earl of Poitou, was in Aquitaine, at the city of 
Bourdeaux. Immediately after, the Nativity of our Lord, 
he laid siege to the city of Aques, which Peter, viscount of 
Aques, and the count of Bigorre had fortified against him, 
and within teji days he took it. After this, he laid siege to 
the city of Bayonne, which Ernald Bertram, viscount of Bay- 
onne, had fortified against him, and within ten days he took it. 
Moving his army thence, he came to the gates of Sizarre, now 
called Port D'Espagne, and took and destroyed it, and, by 
force, compelled the Basques and Navarrese to make oath, 
that, from that time forward, they would always keep the 
peace towards strangers and among themselves, and he also put 
an end to all the evil customs that had been introduced at 
Sorges and Espure. 

In the meantime, the king of England, the father, holding 
a general council at Northampton, after the feast of Saint 
Hilary, restored to Robert, earl of Leicester, all his lands on 
both sides of the sea, as he held the same fifteen days before 
the war began, with the exception of the castles of Mount- 
sorrel and Pasci. In like manner he restored to Hugh, earl 
of Chester, all the lands of which he was in possession fifteen 
days before the war; and to William d'Aubigny, son of Wil- 
Jiiam, earl of Arundel, he gave the earldom of Sussex. At the 
same council, also, Guido, the dean, resigned into the hands of 
Richard, archbishop of Canterbury, his deanery of Waltham, and 
quitted claim, freely and absolutely, of all right which he had 
to the church of Waltham. In the same manner did the canons 
secular of Waltham as to their prebends, resigning them into 
the hands of the archbishop ; but our lord the king gave them 
full compensation for the same, according to the estimate of the 
lord archbishop of Canterbury. After this, our lord the king, 
by the authority of our lord the pope, placed in the same 
church of Waltham canons regular taken from various houses 



438 ANNALS OF ItOGEli DE HOYEDEff. A.D. 1177. 

in England, and appointed Walter de Ghent, a canon taken 
from the church of Oseney, the first abbat of that community, 
and enriched them with great revenues and very fine man- 
sions. 

In the same year, the same king, having expelled the nuns 
from the abbey of Ambrosebury, 84 for incontinence, and dis- 
tributed them in more strict charge in other religious houses, 
gave the abbey of Ambrosebury as a perpetual possession to the 
abbess and convent of Fontevraud ; and, a convent of nuns 
being sent over from Fontevraud, Richard, archbishop of Can- 
terbury, introduced them into the abbey of Ambrosebury, on 
the eleventh day before the calends of June, being the Lord's 
Day, in the presence of our lord the king, the father, Bar- 
tholomew, bishop of Exeter, John, bishop of Norwich, and 
many others of the clergy and the people. On the same 
day, and at the same place, the before-named archbishop of 
Canterbury consecrated Guido, bishop of Bangor. 

In this year, Philip, earl of Flanders, sent Robert, the advo- 
cate of Bethune, and Roger, castellan of Courtrai, to our 
lord Henry, the king of England, the father, to inform him 
that Louis, king of the Franks, had asked of him the eldest 
daughter of his brother, Matthew, earl of Boulogne, in mar- 
riage for his son Philip, and the other daughter of the 
earl of Boulogne for Louis, son of earl Theobald, but that 
he was determined to give them to no one without his sanc- 
tion. The said earl also asked the king of England for the 
money which he had promised to give for the soul of his 
brother, Matthew, earl of Boulogne, for the purpose of maintain- 
ing knights for the defence of the land of Jerusalem. On this, 
our lord the king made answer to them that the matter would 
go well, unless, indeed, it stopped short with the earl ; 85 and 
added, that if the earl of Flanders was willing to marry his 
nieces, the daughters of the earl of Boulogne, according to his 
wishes and advice, and would give him good assurance of the 
same, he would then fulfil all his promises, even to a fuller extent 
than he had made them. And, for the purpose of hearing the 
earl's answer on the subject, he sent Walter de Coutances, his 
vice-chancellor, and Ranulph de Glanville, in whose presence 
the said earl of Flanders made oath that he would marry his 
said nieces to no person, unless by the advice and consent 
81 Amesbury. M Perhaps in allusion to earl Theobald. 






A 1). 1177. AGREEMENT BETWEEN AXPHONSO AND SANCHO. 439 

of the king of England, the father. However, disregarding 
his oath, the said earl married them without the leave and 
consent of the king. 

In the same year, the before-named Vivianus, cardinal priest, 
titular of Saint Stephen de Monte Celi, and legate of the 
Apostolic See, was in the Isle of Man, with king Guthred, 
on the day of the Nativity of our Lord. After the Epi- 
phany, he passed over into Ireland, and, landing at Dun 86 in 
Ulster, while he was walking along the sea-shore towards 
Dublin, he met the troops of John de Courcy, who seized him 
and made him prisoner ; but John de Courcy set him at 
liberty and suffered him to depart. The before-named John 
de Courcy also, before the Purification of Saint Mary, laid 
siege to and took the city of Dun, which is the capital of Ulster, 
where also rest the bodies of Saint Patrick and Saint Columba, 
the confessors, and of Saint Bridget, the virgin. On hearing 
this, Koderic, king of Ulster, levied a large army of Irish, 
and fought a battle with the above-named John ; and John 
de Courcy, after losing a part of his army, gained a great 
victory, and having conquered king Eoderic, and put him to 
flight, remained in possession of the field, and distributed the 
spoils of the slain among his men. In this battle was taken 
prisoner the bishop of Dun, whom John de Courcy ordered, at 
the prayer of the cardinal, to be set at liberty. 

In the same year died the earl Hugh Bigot, whose treasures 
the king, the father, retained in his own hands. In this year, 
also, Alphonso, king of Castille, and Sancho, king of Navarre, 
his uncle, after many and great battles fought between them, 
came to a settlement before the king of England, the father, on 
the disputes and claims that existed between them. Accord- 
ingly, there came into England, on behalf of the king of Cas- 
tille and on behalf of the king of Navarre, four chosen men whom 
they knew to be trustworthy persons, being sent to England 
to hear the decision of the court of the king of England, and 
to report the same to the above-named kings of Spain, namely, 
John, bishop of Tarragona, Peter de Areis, Gunter, a brother 
of the Temple, and Peter de Rinoso. There came also on 
behalf of Alphonso, king of Castille, Matthew, bishop of Palencia, 
count Gomez, Lobdiez, Gomez, the son of Garsias, Garsias, the 
son of Garsias, Peter, the son of Peter, and Gotteri Fcrnanz ; 
86 Down. 



440 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1177. 

and, on behalf of Sancho, king of Navarre, the bishop of 
Pampeluna, Garsias Bermer, Sancho, the son of Kamiro, 
Espagnol de Taissonal, Peter, the son of Ramiro, and 
Ascenar de Chalez. All these were sent to assert their claims, 
and to answer on behalf of their masters. There came also 
two knights of wonderful prowess and valor, with horses and 
warlike arms, one on behalf of the king of Castille and the other 
on behalf of the king of Navarre, to appeal to wager of battle, 
at the court of the king of England, if it should be deemed 
necessary. 

Accordingly, on the first Lord's day in Lent, our lord, Henry, 
king of England, son of the empress Matilda, came to London, 
for the purpose of holding a general council. At it were 
present ; Richard, archbishop of Canterbury, Gilbert, bishop 
of London, Hugh, bishop of Durham, Geoffrey, bishop of Ely, 
Walter, bishop of Rochester, Reginald, bishop of Bath, Robert, 
bishop of Hereford, John, bishop of Norwich, Bartholomew, 
bishop of Exeter, Roger, bishop of Worcester, John, bishop 
of Chichester, Christian, bishop of Whitherne, the bishop of 
Saint David's, the bishop of Saint Asaph, the bishop of Ban- 
gor, and the abbats, priors, earls, and barons of England. 
These having met together at Westminster, the king ordered 
the aforesaid envoys from the kingdom of Spain to reduce into 
writing their claims and charges, and afterwards give them 
to him ; in order that, by means of a translation thereof, he 
himself and his barons might be able to understand their 
respective claims and charges ; for neither the king nor the 
barons of his court understood their language. Eor the pur- 
pose of reducing this to writing, there was a space of three 
days allowed. 

Accordingly, on the fourth day they produced a writing, in 
which was the following statement : " king Sancho the Fat had 
three sons, Ferdinand, king of Castille, Ramiro, king of Arra- 
gon, and Garcias, king of Navarre and Nagara. Ferdinand was 
the father of king Alphonso, who took Toledo, and was the 
father of queen Vracha, who was the mother of the emperor 
Alphonso, the father of king Sancho, whose son was king 
Alphonso, who married Eleanor, daughter of Henry, king 
of England. Ramiro, king of Arragon, was the father 
of king Sancho, who was father of king Peter and king Al- 
phonso. King Peter died without issue, and was succeeded 
by his brother, king Alphonso, who took Saragossa. Garcias, 



A.D. 1177- TREATY BETWEEN ALPHONSO AND SANCHO. 441 

king of Navarre and Nagara, was the father of king Sancho, 
who was afterwards slain at Penafiel : he was the father of 
Sancho, who died without issue when a child, and was suc- 
ceeded, in Navarre and Nagara, hy king Alphonso, his father's 
kinsman, who took Toledo, as far as the boundaries of Puente 
la Keyna and Sangosa : and the said child was succeeded by 
Sancho, king of Arragon, his father's kinsman, in the remain- 
ing portion of Navarre and Pampeluna. 

The Treaty and Covenants entered into between Alphonso, Icing 
of Castille, and Sancho, king of Navarre. 

" These are the treaty and covenants which were entered into 
between Alphonso, king of Castille, and Sancho, king of Navarre, 
his uncle, for submitting the points in dispute between them to 
the judgment of the king of England. For this purpose each of 
these kings gives three castles in pledge, that he will receive 
and fulfil the award of Henry, king of England, son of the 
empress Matilda, and father-in-law of king Alphonso ; and he 
who shall fail so to do, is to lose the castles underwritten. For 
this purpose king Alphonso gives in pledge Nagara, a castle of 
the Jews, Arnedo, a castle of the Christians and a castle of the 
Jews, and Celorigo. In like manner, Sancho, king of Navarre, 
gives in pledge the castle of Stella, which Peter, the son of 
Roderic, holds, being a castle of the Jews, as also Funes and 
Maranon. And for the above purpose envoys from both kings 
are to appear in the presence of the king of England on the first 
day of this present Lent, being the beginning of the fast, for 
the purpose of receiving his decision. And if by chance the 
envoys on either side shall be detained on the road in con- 
sequence of death, infirmity, or captivity, the envoys that 
precede them are to await them for a period of thirty days be- 
yond the day above-named at the court of the said king of 
England ; and then, those who are well and able are to come 
to the court and hear the decision. And if all shall be sick, or 
taken prisoners, or shall die, then the king who has no envoy 
present is to be the loser. And if all or any of the envoys 
shall not be detained by any of these causes, and shall not come 
before the king of England on the day appointed, then the 
king, whose envoys they are, is to lose the castles above- 
named, and this is to be done in good faith and without 
evil intent. And if by accident, which God forbid, the king 



442 ANNALS OP BOGKB DE HOVEDEIT. A.D. 1177. 

of England should die in the meantime, then in the same 
manner as above-mentioned they are to proceed to the king of 
France to receive his decision, and are to receive his decision 
as though that of the king of England, and to comply there- 
with. For this purpose, Sancho, the king of Navarre, through 
his knight and his deputy, 87 is to receive possession of these 
three castles, and is to give Nagara and Celorigo in charge 
to Peter, the son of count Roderic, and is to give Arnedo in 
charge to one of the counts of his dominions, and they are to 
do homage to him for the same. In like manner Alphonso, 
the king of Castille, through his knight and his deputy, is to 
receive possession of these three castles, and is to give Stella 
in charge to Peter, the son of Roderic of Arragon, Funes to 
S., the son of Ramiro, and Maranon to R., the son of Mar- 
tin, and they are to do homage to him for them. And if 
either of the kings shall wish to take the castles afore- 
said from the knights in possession of them and to give them 
to another, then Sancho, king of Navarre, is to give them to 
Peter, the son of Roderic, or to G., the son of Vermund, or to 
S., the son of Ramiro, or to I., the son of Felez, or to R., the 
son of Martin, or to E. or to S., the sons of Almoran, or to E., 
the son of Ortiz, or to P., the son of Ramiro, or to G. or to P., 
the sons of Ortiz. In like manner king Alphonso is to give 
the said castles to count N. or count P., or count G. or to count 
Gomez, or to R., the son of Gurtez, or to P., the son of Arazuri, 
or to D., the son of Senez, or to G. or to Ordonez, the sons of 
Garcias, or to G., the son of Roderico de Aragra, or to P., the 
son of Gunter, or to L., the son of Roderico de Agafra; but 
those who shall be holding them are not to give up the said castles 
until those who ought to receive them shall have done homage 
for them to the other king, in manner above-mentioned. And 
the whole that king Alphonso holds of the king of Navarre he 
is to improve with his own means as far as he shall be will- 
ing and able. In like manner, Sancho, king of Navarre, is to 
improve with his own means as far as he shall be willing 
and able, the whole that he holds of king Alphonso. And 
for the purpose of hearing this decision, the kings have chosen 
four trustworthy persons, namely, John, bishop of Tarragona, 

87 " Portarius." The officers who were so called, had probably some- 
what similar duties to those of our sheriffs ; in seeing that the royal com- 
mands were properly fulfilled. They were peculiar to Spain. 

9 



A. D. 1177. TREATY BETWEEN ALPHOXSO ATTD SA^CUO. 443 

Peter de Areis, AT de Torrela, and Gunter, 68 son of 

de Binoso ; and two or three or all of these are to proceed 
with the envoys to the court of the king of England, and are 
to explain before him the complaints of both kings, and when 
the claims have been heard, then those are to speak whom 
the king shall order first to plead their cause. And, upon the 
word of these same trustworthy persons, who shall have heard 
the judgment pronounced by the king of England, each of 
the kings are to comply with and perform the above-mentioned 
covenants in such manner as is contained in this instrument, 
and the knights who have done homage for the aforesaid cas- 
tles, according to the report of the said trustworthy persons, are 
to comply with and perform the treaty aforesaid in good faith 
and without evil intent. In addition whereto, both of the kings 
above-named, each upon his own plighted faith, have agreed 
upon and concluded a good and safe truce for liegemen, for 
castles, for lands, and for all other things, for a period of seven 
years ; and that the same shall be firmly kept, Sancho, king 
of Navarre, places Erga 89 in pledge, and king Alphonso pledges 
Calahorra ; and if the army of either of these kings, either 
with him or without him, shall enter the kingdom of the other, 
he whose army does so, is to lose the fortified place above- 
named. And if by chance any vassal of these kings shall 
break this truce in the kingdom of the other, or shall chance 
by force to take a fortified place, then the king of whom 
he shall be the vassal shall within forty days deliver up his 
castle to the other king. And if he shall not do so, the 
knight who holds the castle that has been so placed in pledge, is 
to give up the said castle to the king so complaining, and he is to 
hold the same in pledge until he recovers his own castle. And 
if any person in these kingdoms, who is not a vassal of those 
kings, shall by any chance take a castle in the kingdom of the 
other, then both the kings are to come against him with their 
people and besiege him, and are not to depart thence until it is 
taken. It has also been agreed that all the vassals of both 
kings who have lost their hereditaments since the time of the 

88 It will be seen, on comparison with the list of names previous, and 
in page 439, that Gunter is mentioned as one of the envoys and Peter de 
Rinoso as another, and no mention is made of de Torrela : here, however, 
Gunter is made the son of de Rinoso, and de Torrela is the fourth envoy. 

" Perhaps Ergavica, or Ergavia, towns of Spain in the middle ages. 



444 A1TNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEK. A.D. 1177. 

commencement of the war, shall recover the same, in such 
manner as they were holding them on the day on which they 
lost them, and for misdeeds on their part, or on accusations 
for what they have previously done, they are not to lose them, 
nor are they to make answer to any one on any complaint 
made against them within the last seven years. And if here- 
after any complaint on fresh grounds, or any litigation shall 
arise between them, they are to have recourse to arbitration, 
and whatever judgment shall be pronounced, they are to be 
satisfied with the same. Also, all men of both kingdoms shall 
go and return from kingdom to kingdom in security, with the 
exception of known murderers. And if either of the kings 
shall be unwilling to restore the hereditaments as above-men- 
tioned, then he is to give up the above-named castle to the 
other king, who is to hold the same in pledge, until he shall 
recover the hereditaments and the whole thereof that he shall 
have demanded. Also, all vassals of either king are to be 
included in this treaty of peace as to all men, castles, here- 
ditaments, and all other things that they may possess in what- 
ever land they may be ; and all the above is to be kept and 
observed in good faith and without evil intent. Also, Al- 
phonso, king of Arragon, is to be included in this truce, if 
it shall so please him, and if perchance it shall not please him 
to be included therein, nevertheless the said truce as above- 
mentioned is to be strictly observed between the kings above- 
named. This instrument was made between Navarre and 
Logrono, in the year 1214, 90 on the eighth day before the 
calends of September." 

An [earlier] Charter of Peace and Reconciliation between the Icing 
of Castille and the king of Navarre. 

" This is the charter of peace and reconciliation which was 
made between Alphonso, king of Castille, and Sancho, king of 
Navarre, at the abbey which is called Siterio. It has pleased 
both of the said kings that a peace and reconciliation should be 
made between them for ten years, which has been made accord- 
inglv ; and it has pleased them that they should ratify the 
same by oath, and that they and the barons of them both 
should make oath upon the altar and upon the four Evange- 

90 This date is according to the Spanish era, which began from the 
conquest of Spain by Augustus, in the year B.C. 38. 



A.I). 1177. THE CLAIM OF THE KING OF CASTHJ.E. 445 

lists, that they mil observe the aforesaid truce and reconcili- 
ation faithfully, and without fraud and evil intent, for ten 
years ; and this truce has been made as to persons, cattle, 
goods, and castles, in good faith and without fraud and evil 
intent ; and if either of the kings or any of the barons shall 
violate this truce, and shall not make amends on claim made, 
within forty days therefrom, then is he to be a perjurer and a 
traitor. This instrument was made in the year 1205, 91 in the 
month of October." 

When the above-stated charters of peace and reconciliation 
between the said kings of Castille and Navarre had been read 
before the king of England and his barons, the persons who 
pleaded for the king of Castille spoke to the following effect : 

The Claim of the king of Castille. 

" In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost, Amen. In the name of the Lord, Alphonso, king of 
Castille and Toledo, makes complaint against, and demands of, 
Sancho, king of Navarre, his uncle, that restitution shall be 
made to him of Logrono, Athleva, Vanaret, 92 in the vicinity of 
Ribaronia, Agosen, Abtol, Arresa, and Alava, with their mar- 
kets, namely, those of Estwalez and of Divina, and all his rights 
in the lands which are called Durango : all of which king Al- 
phonso, of happy memory, who liberated Toledo from the power 
of the Saracens, and after his death, his daughter Vracha pos- 
sessed by hereditary right : after whose death, her son, the 
emperor Alphonso, of happy memory, was similarly possessed 
by hereditary right, and after the death of the emperor, his 
son, Sancho, without question raised, held the same by 
hereditary right. After the death of king Sancho, his son, 
our lord the king, Alphonso, in like manner held all the 
places aforesaid by hereditary right, until such time as the 
king of Navarre already mentioned took away, and now by 
force withholds, from the aforesaid king of Castille, his orphan 
and innocent nephew and ward, and the son of his friend and 
lord, all the above places, no requisition being then made of the 
same. He likewise makes complaint and asks restitution to 
be made to him by the before- named king of Navarre, qf 
lloba, which he unjustly withholds. For the emperor ac- 

91 See the last note. This treaty was made nine years before the pre- 
ceding one. w This should be, Navarette. 



446 AITNALS OF ROGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1177. 

quired that place from a king of the Saracens, whose name was 
Zafadola, and left it to his son Sancho, who, after the death of 
the emperor, held it in peace during the whole period of 
his life : after whose death, my lord the king Alphonso, his 
son, hy hereditary right held it in peace, until such time 
as Sancho Kamirez de Perola parted with it, who held it ac- 
cording to the custom of Spain, at the hands of Peter Ortiz, 
which Peter Ortiz held it according to the same custom of our 
lord the king Alphonso. He also demands the revenues which 
the king of Navarre so often mentioned has received from 
Logrono, and from all the places above-named, from the time 
of his invasion, as also recompense for the losses which he in- 
flicted upon that land, by laying it waste and delivering it to 
the flames, the amount of all which is estimated at nearly one 
hundred thousand golden marks. He further demands Puente 
la Reyna, and Saragossa, and the whole of the land extend- 
ing from those two towns to the river Ebro ; which land king 
Alphonso, of blessed memory, grandfather of the emperor, 
held and enjoyed in peace ; and through him, according to 
the custom of Spain, his kinsman, Sancho, king of Arragon, 
and after his death, his son, king Peter, and after the death 
of king Peter, his brother, Alphonso, king of Arragon, in the 
same manner as his kinsmen and friends had held it. He 
also claims a moiety of Tudela, on the grounds of his mater- 
nal descent, which count Dalpreg gave to his cousin-german, 
queen Margaret, who was the wife of king Garsias, and grand- 
mother of the said king Alphonso, in consequence whereof 
the aforesaid Tudela does in no way belong to Navarre." 

After the bishop of Palencia, and count Gomez, and the 
other envoys of the king of Castille had set forth the above, 
and other matters to a similar effect, both by writing and 
word of mouth, they made an end of speaking. Upon this, 
the bishop of Pampeluna, and the other envoys of the king 
of Navarre, arose, and [orally] contradicting nothing that 
had been alleged against them by their opponents, produced 
a writing, in which were contained their petition, claims, 
and allegations, to the following effect : 

The Claim of the king of Navarre. 

" Sancho, king of Navarre, lays claim to the monastery of 
Cudejo, Monte d'Oca, the valley of Saint Vincent, the val- 



A.D. 1177. THE CLAIM Of THE KIXG OF NAVABRE. 447 

ley of Oliocastro, Cingovilas, Monte Negro, and Sierra Alba, 
as far as Agreda. To all the above he lays claim, and 
whatever places lie within these districts on the side of 
Navarre, and he lays claim to the entire revenues of this 
district, from the period of the death of king Sancho at Pe- 
nan 1 el. All the above, as belonging to his kingdom, Garsias, 
king of Navarre and Nagara, great-great grandfather of 
the said king Sancho, held and enjoyed in peace and quiet- 
ness ; and his great grandfather was expelled by violence from 
his kingdom, on account of his imbecility, by Alphonso, king 
of Castille, his kinsman. However, in process of time, king 
Garsias, of famous memory, his grandson, and father of the 
present king, by the Divine will, and with the aid of the 
fealty of those of whom he was the natural lord, recovered his 
kingdom, although not the entirety thereof, and the remaining 
portion is the same that is now claimed by his son Sancho, 
king of Navarre. In addition to this, he makes claim of 
the following places, which the emperor took from his father, 
king Garsias, by violence, namely ; Naga, a castle of the Chris- 
tians and Jews, Gramon, Pancorvo, Belforest, the monastery of 
Cereso, Celorigo, Bilboa, Medria, Yegueta, Claver, Verbea, and 
Lantaron. These same he makes claim of, and demands res- 
titution thereof, because his father, king Garsias, possessed 
them by hereditary right, and the emperor took them from 
him. Also, as to Belforest, he makes this complaint, that 
the empuror restored the same to king Garsias, his father, and 
after his death, the said emperor took it away from Sancho, 
the present king of Navarre, who then held and enjoyed 
it in peace, as being his own by hereditary right. He also 
demands restitution to him by Alphonso, king of Castille, 
of certain castles that have been veiy recently taken from him, 
together with all the revenues received therefrom, and whatever 
he would have enjoyed if he had not been expelled therefrom. 
The names of these castles are as follow : Kel, Ocon, Parnu- 
gos, Gramon, Cereso, Valorcanas, Trepcana, Milier, Amihugo, 
Haiaga, Miranda, Santa Agathea, Salinas, Portela, Malversin, 
Legiun, and the fortress held by Godin. And to these he lays 
claim on the grounds that he held and enjoyed the same 
as his own, and was, without any judicial formalities, ex- 
pelled therefrom, and his complaint ought therefore to have 
the precedence, inasmuch as the same was the last act of 



448 ANNALS OF EOGEK DE HOVEDEJT. A.D. 1177- 

violence committed, and consequently is the one for which 
amends should first be made. And further, as to the other side, 
he has ceased to have any right, if ever he did have any such 
right. And this we are prepared to show by the above- 
named instrument, in which is contained a truce for ten years; 
wherefore, king Sancho makes complaint, because it is true, 
that king Alphonso has violated his promise made in the 
treaty aforesaid. For he has received injury within those ten 
years, by being deprived of the following castles, Kel, 
Legiun, Malversin, and Portela. In addition to the above, 
the king of Navarre demands restitution by the king of 
Castille, of the sum of one hundred 92 marks of silver, king 
Sancho, who now reigns over the kingdom of Navarre, hereby 
offering satisfaction to the king Alphonso, upon all his com- 
plaints, according to the arbitration of the barons of them 
both, or of the most serene king of England. And we affirm 
with confidence, that these acts, and the like to them, perpe- 
trated in the face of such covenants and such truce, ought 
to be redressed before we come to any other article what- 
ever of these claims. For this the law demands, this usage 
demands, this the canonical ordinances demand, this all right 
and justice demand. The things that we have said are here 
set forth in written characters, but shall be more fully and 
more copiously explained by word of mouth." 

When the above-named envoys of the king of Navarre had 
set forth the above, and other matters of a similar nature, and 
the envoys of the king of Castille did not contradict any of 
the allegations made by them, Henry king of England, son of 
the empress Matilda, the Holy Evangelists being produced in 
presence of all the people, ordered the said envoys of the king 
of Castille and the king of Navarre make oath, before he 
pronounced judgment, that their masters, namely, the king of 
Castille and the king of Navarre, would receive and strictly 
observe his award, both as to restitution as well as to the 
truce, and that if they should fail so to do, then they them- 
selves would surrender their bodies into his hands and power. 
This being accordingly done, the earls and barons of the 
royal court of England adjudged that full restitution should 
be made to each of the parties above-named of what he had 
rightfully claimed. Accordingly, the king of England wrote 
to the above-named kings of Spain to the following effect : 
y - Probably, a mistake for a hundred thousand. 



A.O. 1177. A.WAKD OF THE KING OF ENGLAND. 449 

The Award of Henry, king of England, upon the judgment given in 
his court between the king of Castille and the king of Navarre. 

" Henry, by the grace of God, king of England, duke of 
Normandy and of Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, to his most 
dearly beloved friends Alphonso, king of Castille, and Sancho, 
king of Navarre, greeting. According as, from the tenor of 
your letters, and the relation of your trustworthy servants, 
John, bishop of Tarragona, Peter de Areis, Gunter, 93 and Peter 
de Binoso, and from the assertions of your envoys, the bishop 
of Palencia, count Gomez, Lobdioz, Gomez, the son of Garsias, 
Garsias, the son of Garsias; Peter, the son of Peter, Gotteri 
Fernanz, the bishop of Pampeluna, Garsias Bermer, Sancho 
the son of Ramiro, Espagnol de Taissonat, Peter the son of Ba- 
miro, and Ascenar de Chalez, we have been informed, it has 
pleased us by our judgment to bring to a termination the dis- 
putes that exist between you, with relation to certain castles 
and lands, together with the boundaries and appurtenances 
thereof. And for that purpose, we, receiving your trustworthy 
servants and your envoys with that respect which was their 
due, considering that peace being made between you would 
greatly conduce to the honor of God and the whole of Christen- 
dom, have both with reference to holy religion and our ordinary 
welfare, taken this upon us. Therefore, the trustworthy per- 
sons chosen by you in common, and your deputies, and the 
pleaders of your causes being summoned into our presence, and 
that of our bishops and earls and barons, we have carefully 
heard, and have come to a full understanding of, the petitions 
and allegations of both parties. Upon these points, those 
envoys to whom the cause of Alphonso, king of Castille, has 
been entrusted, have made allegation that Sancho, king of 
Navarre, did unjustly and by force take from the said king of 
Castille, while he was yet a ward and an orphan, certain cas- 
tles and lands, namely, Logrono, Navarette, Andeva, Abtol, 
and Agosen, 94 with all their boundaries and appurtenances, 
which his father, on the day of his decease, and which he him- 
self for some years after had quietly enjoyed ; in consequence 
whereof they claimed that restitution should be made to him 
of the same. But the envoys to whom the cause of Sancho 

93 As to this person, see the note in p. 443. M They are more fully 
mentioned in the claim of the king of Castille, p. 415. 

VOL. I. GO 



450 AKNTALS OF BOGES DE HOVEDEW. A.D. 1177. 

king of Navarre was entrusted, contradicting nothing of what 
had been alleged by the others, asserted that Alphonso the 
before-mentioned king of Castille, had, by arms, and unjustly, 
taken from Sancho, the before-named king of Navarre, certain 
castles, namely, Legiun, Portela, and the castle that Godin 
holds, and the said other party, making no contradiction what- 
ever thereto, demanded with like urgency that restitution should 
be made thereof to him. And further, it was stated in the 
letter written by you in common that you had, giving your 
word for the same, concluded a truce between you for a 
period of seven years, and the same was witnessed openly in 
court by your envoys. Having therefore held counsel with 
all due deliberation with our bishops, earls, and barons, and 
considering that peace between you is necessary, both for 
the propagation of the Christian faith and the confusion of the 
enemies of Christ, and receiving a full assurance, both from 
your own written declarations and the allegations of your en- 
voys, that you will pay obedience to our counsel and advice 
both in establishing and preserving peace, before proceeding to 
pronounce our award as to the above-written complaints and 
truces, we do command you by your envoys, and do counsel 
and enjoin you, and in addition thereto, do, by this present 
writing, command you, to establish peace between yourselves, 
and faithfully for the future to observe the same. Now, as to 
the complaints above-mentioned relative to the castles and lands, 
with all the boundaries and appurtenances thereof, that have on 
each side been by force and injustice taken from the other, in- 
asmuch as no answer was made by either side to the acts of 
violence alleged on the other side, and no reason was alleged 
why the restitution which they respectively demanded should 
not be made, we do decree that full restitution shall be made 
to each party of the places above-mentioned which have as of 
right been claimed. We do also by our award enjoin that the 
truces between you before-named, which, as already mentioned, 
have been ratified by you on your word, as appears from your 
written documents, as also from the public avowal made to us 
by your envoys upon trial, shall, until the time therein agreed 
upon, be inviolably observed between you. We do will also 
and command for the sake of peace, that king Alphonso, our 
dearly beloved son, shall pay to Sancho, king of Navarre, his 
uncle, every year for the space of ten years, three thousand 



A.D. 1177. BROTHER OF THE EAKI, OF FERRERS SLAIN. 451 

marabotins 94 such payments to be made at three periods in the 
year at the city of Burgos, namely ; the first payment of one 
thousand marabotins to be made at the end of the first four 
months after the above-mentioned restitution shall have been 
made, the second payment of one thousand marabotins to be 
made at the end of the next succeeding four months, and ano- 
ther payment of one thousand marabotins to be made at the 
end of the next four months ; the said payments so to be made 
that in each of the ten years next ensuing after the said restitu- 
tion, there shall be paid to Sancho, king of Navarre, at the same 
periods and at the above-named place, three thousand marabo- 
tins. Also, the envoys of each of you have, before pronouncing 
our judgment, solemnly sworn that you will strictly observe our 
judgment aforesaid, both as to the restitution as well as to the 
observance of the treaty of peace ; and that in case you shall 
not do so, they will surrender their persons into our hands and 
power. Witnesses hereto, Richard, archbishop of Canterbury, 
Hugh, bishop of Durham, Geoffrey, bishop of Ely, Roger, bishop 
of Worcester, Bartholomew, bishop of Exeter, Gilbert, bishop of 
London, Walter, bishop of Rochester, Reginald, bishop of 
Bath, John, bishop of Norwich, John, bishop of Chichester, 
Robert, bishop of Hereford, the bishop of Saint David's, Master 
Ada, the bishop of Saint Asaph, the bishop of Bangor, Chris- 
tian, bishop of Whitherne, Geoffrey, earl of Brittany, son of the 
king, William, earl of Aumarle, Robert, earl of Leicester, 
William de Mandeville, earl of Essex, William, earl of Glou- 
cester, William de Arundel, earl of Sussex, Hugh, earl of 
Chester, and of the barons of England, Richard de Lucy, Wil- 
liam de Vesci, Henry de Lacy, Odonel de TJmfraville, Robert de 
Vals, Roger de Mowbray, Robert de Stuteville, Philip de 
Kimbe, Roger Bigot, and many others, both clergy and laity." 
* During this council, the brother of the earl of Ferrers was 
slain by night at London, and thrown out from his inn into the 
mud of the streets, for which deed our lord the king took into 
custody many of the citizens of London ; among whom there 

* 4 This was a gold coin of Spain, the exact value of which is now un- 
known. The name has been suggested to have been derived from " Butin de 
Maranes," " The booty of the Moors," as forming a large proportion of 
the spoils of the Moors when repulsed in their invasion of Spain. It is 
said that it was while energetically discussing the origin of this word at 
Caen, the learned Bochart was attacked with a fit of apoplexy, of which 
he shortly after died. 

co 2 



452 ANNALS OP KOGEH DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1177. 

was arrested a certain aged man of high rank and great wealth 
whose name was John ; he being unable to prove his inno- 
cence by means of the judgment by water, offered our lord the 
king fifty pounds of silver for the preservation of his life. 
But inasmuch as he had been cast in the judgment by water, 
the king refused to receive the money, and ordered him to be 
hanged on a gibbet. 

In the same year Philip, earl of Flanders, in contravention 
of the oath which he had made to the king of England, gave 
the eldest daughter of his brother the earl of Boulogne in mar- 
riage to the duke de Saringes ; shortly afterwards, leaving the 
duke de Saringes, she married the count de Saint Paul, and then 
leaving the count de Saint Paul, married the count Reginald 
de Dammartin, who received with her the earldom of Boulogne. 
The other daughter of the earl of Boulogne he also gave in 
marriage to Henry, duke of Louvaine. 

In the same year the before-named earl of Flanders came 
over to England, to hold a conference with the king of Eng- 
land, and, receiving from him leave to go on the pilgrimage, 
he and "William de Mandeville, earl of Essex, and many barons 
and knights of various countries assumed the sign of the cross, 
and set out for Jerusalem; where joining the brethren of the 
Temple and the Hospitallers, and Raymond, prince of Antioch, 
and nearly all the knights of the land of Jerusalem, they laid 
siege to Harang, a fortified place of the pagans. Having stayed a 
month before it while laying siege thereto, and having almost 
undermined it, by the advice of the Templars they received a 
large sum of money from the pagans, and so departed without 
accomplishing their object. On the day after their departure, a 
great part of the castle which they had been besieging fell 
down, and on returning home they found the money which 
they had received from the pagans to be nothing but copper 
and brass. 

In the meantime, Saladin, king of Babylon, having united 
with him the kings and princes of the pagans, with more 
than five hundred thousand horse and foot entered the land 
of the Christians, and pitched his tents not far from the 
holy city of Jerusalem. On healing this, the Templars, and 
Hospitallers, and knights of the king of Jerusalem, who 
had remained for the protection of the city, went forth to meet 
the pagans, together with the people of the city, who had 
taken up arms, while the bishop of Bethlehem carried before 






A.O. 117". CASTLES GAKBISOXEB BY THE KING. 453 

them the wood of the cross of our Lord. Making a bold attack 
upon the pagans, they forced them to give way. and, Oh su- 
preme bounty of the Most High ! the Christians, who were not 
in number more than ten thousand fighting men, gained the 
victory over five hundred thousand pagans, and that by the aid 
of the Most High. For it appeared in a vision to the pagans as 
though the hosts of the armies of heaven were descending by 
a ladder under the form of armed knights, and aiding the 
Christians in the attack upon them. The pagans being unable 
to endure their onset, were put to. flight, on which, the Chris- 
tians, pursuing them, put them to the edge of the sword, and 
slew of them more than a hundred thousand, and took a great 
number of prisoners. But Saladin, by means of his coursers, 
made his escape ; however, in this battle he lost many of his 
nephews and kinsmen, and of the principal men of his army. 

In addition to this, to the utter confusion of the pagans, and 
for the establishment of the Christian faith, it appeared to 
the pagans that the extremity of the wood of the cross of 
our Lord, which the bishop of Bethlehem was carrying, reached 
up to heaven, and that its arms were embracing the whole 
world ; at which being greatly alarmed, they took to flight. 
The Christians, on gaining this glorious victory, returned with 
joyousness to Jerusalem, and filled the land with the spoils of 
the slain. This battle took place, to the praise and glory of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, upon the plain of Ramah, in the year of 
grace eleven hundred and seventy-seven, on the seventh day 
before the calends of December, being the feast of Saint Ca- 
therine the Virgin and Martyr. In the same year, the Chris- 
tians fortified a very strong castle in the kingdom of Saladin, 
at the Ford of Jacob, beyond the river Jordan ; but Saladin 
tok it by storm, and with it was taken the grand Master of the 
Hospital at Jerusalem, who, being carried into the territory of 
Saladin, died there of hunger. 

In the same year, our lord the king of England, the father, 
delivered to William de Stuteville the custody of the castle of 
Rakesburt, 95 to Roger de Stuteville the custody of the cas- 
tle of the Maidens, 95 * to William de Neville the custody of 
the castle of Norham, to Roger, archbishop of York, the 
custody of the castle of Scartheburg, 96 to Geoffrey de Ne- 
ville the custody of the castle of Berwick, and to Roger de 
95 Roxburgh. * Edinburgh. * Scarborough. 



454 AXTfALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEK. A.D. 1177. 

Conyers the -custody of the fortress of Durham, which the king 
had taken from Hugh, the bishop of Durham, because he had 
only made a feint of serving him in the civil wars. In conse- 
quence of this, the bishop gave him two thousand marks of 
silver to regain his favour, on condition that his castles should 
be left standing, and that the king should give to his son, 
Henry de Pudsey, his royal manor of Wighton, with its ap- 
purtenances. 

After this, the king went to Oxford, and, holding a general 
council there, created his son John king of Ireland, having a 
grant and confirmation thereof from Alexander, the Supreme 
Pontiff. To this council there also came, to meet the king, 
Rees, the son of Griffin, 97 prince of South "Wales, David, the 
son of Owen, prince of North Wales, who had married the 
sister of the said king of England, Cadewalan, prince of Del- 
nain, Owen de KevUian, Griffin de Brunfeld, and Madoc, 
the son of Gervetrog, together with many other of the noble- 
men of Wales, who all did homage to the king of England, 
the father, and swore fealty to him against all men, and that 
they would maintain peace with him and with his kingdom. 
At the same council, also, our lord the king of England gave 
to the above-named Ilees, the son of Griffin, the land of 
Merioneth, and to David, the son of Owen, the land of Elles- 
mere. 

The king also gave to Hugh de Lacy, as above-mentioned, 
the whole of Meath, in Ireland, with its appurtenances, for the 
services of one hundred knights, to hold the same of himself 
and his son John, and confirmed the same to him by charter. 
He also there gave to Robert Fitz- Stephen and Milo de Cogham 
the kingdom of Cork, for the services of sixty knights, to hold 
the same of himself and of his son John, with the exception of 
the city of Cork and one cantred, 98 which our lord the king 
reserved to himself and to his heirs. He also there gave to 
Hubert Fitz-Hubert, and to William, the brothers of earl Regi- 
nald, and to Jollan de la Primerai, their nephew, the kingdom of 
Limerick, for the services of sixty knights, to hold the same 
of himself and of his son John, with the exception of the city 
of Limerick and one cantred, which our lord the king reserved 
to himself and to his heirs. 

"" Rice ap Griffyd. w The British name for a hundred. 



A.D. 1177. DIVISION OF THE LANDS OF IHEiAND. 455 

Our lord the king also gave to William Fitz-Aldelm, his 
seneschal, the custody of the city of "Wexford, with all its appur- 
tenances, and enacted that the places under-written should 
thenceforth be appurtenant to the services of Wexford, namely, 
Arklow, with its appurtenances, Glascarric, with its appurte- 
nances, the lands of Gilbert de Boisrohard, Ferneg Winal, with 
their appurtenances, Femes, with its appurtenances, the whole 
of the lands of Hervey, between Wexford and the waters of 
Waterford, the service of Raymond de Drune, the service of 
Frodrevelan, the service of Utmorth de Leighlin, the tene- 
ment, also, of Machtaloe, with its appurtenances, Leis, the 
lands of Geoflrey de Constantin, with the whole of the appur- 
tenances, and the whole of the lands of Otveld. 

Our lord the king also there delivered into the custody of 
Robert le Poer, his marshal, the city of "Waterford, with all its 
appurtenances, and enacted that the places under-written 
should thenceforth be appurtenant to the services of Water- 
ford, namely, the whole of the land which lies between Wa- 
terford and the water beyond Lismore, and the whole of the 
lands of Oiseric, with their appurtenances. The king of Eng- 
land also there delivered the city of Dublin, with all its appur- 
tenances, into the charge of Hugh de Lacy, and enacted that 
all the places under- written should thenceforth be appurtenant 
to the service of Dublin : the whole of the lands of Ofellane, with 
their appurtenances, Kildare, with its appurtenances, the whole 
of the hinds of Offalaia, with their appurtenances, Wicklow, 
with its appurtenances, the service of Meath, and the service 
of four knights due from Robert le Poer, by tenure of his castle 
of Dunavet. 

After our lord the king had, at Oxford, in manner aforesaid, 
divided the lands of Ireland and their services, he made all the 
persons to whom he had entrusted the custody thereof do 
homage to himself and to his son John, and take the oaths of 
allegiance and fealty to them for their lands in Ireland. Also, 
at the same council, our lord the king gave to Richard, prior 
of Rikeby, 99 the abbey of Whitby, and to Benedict, prior of 
the church of the Holy Trinity at Canterbuiy, the abbey of 
Burgh ; on which Richard, the archbishop of Canterbury, con- 
secrated him abbat thereof. 

In the same year, the before-named Yivianus, cardinal priest 
99 Perhaps the abbey of Revesby, in Lincolnshire. 



456 AJJXALS OF KOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1 177. 

and legate of the Apostolic See, having completed the business 
of his legateship in Ireland, came back to England, and, with 
the safe conduct of our lord the king, returned to Scotland, 
and. holding a synod at the castle of Edinburgh, suspended 
from the pontifical office Christian, bishop of Whitherne, be- 
cause he had refused to come to the synod so held by him ; but 
the bishop of Whitherne did not take any notice of the sus- 
pension, being protected by Roger, archbishop of York, whose 
suffragan he was. 

After this, our lord the king came to Marlborough, where 
the king gave to Philip de Braose all the kingdom of Limerick, 
for the service of sixty knights, to hold of him and of his son. 
John ; for Hubert and William, the brothers of Reginald, earl 
of Cornwall, and Joslan de la Pumerai, 1 their nephew, de- 
clined to accept the gift of that kingdom, because it was not 
yet reduced into possession. For Monoderus, 2 who was the 
king of Limerick, and had done homage for it to the king of 
England, having been slain by some of his courtiers, one of 
his issue, a powerful and active man, invaded the kingdom of 
Limerick, gained possession of it, and ruled it with a strong 
hand, acknowledging no subjection to the king of England, 
and refusing to obey his officers, because of their faithless con- 
duct, and the evils they had inflicted on the people of Ireland 
without their deserving them. The king of Cork, also, and many- 
other wealthy persons in Ireland, rose in rebellion against the 
king of England and his officers ; and their last doings were 
still worse than their former ones, as they fell to slaughtering 
one another. 

In this year, the relics of Saint Amphibalus and his com- 
panions were discovered through a revelation from heaven, 
and were translated to St. Albans, on the seventh day be- 
fore the calends of July, being Saturday. In the same year, 
queen Margaret, the wife of the king, the son, being pregnant, 
went to her father, the king of France, and, on arriving at Paris, 
was delivered of a still-born son. The Franks, however, as- 
serted that this son of the king was born alive and was baptized, 
and named William. In the same year, on the thirteenth day 

1 He is called Jollan de la Primerai in p. 454. Holinshed calls him 
John de la Pumeray. 

2 He is called " Monocnlus" by Holinshed, who gives as the reason, 
" because he had but one eye. 



A.T). 11/7. BURIAL-GROUNDS GRANTED TO THE JEWS. 457 

before the calends of July, it rained a shower of blood for 
two whole hours, in the Isle of Wight, so much so that linen 
clothes which were hung out upon the hedges were stained 
with this bloody rain, just as though they had been dipped 
in blood. 

In this year, also, Martin, a canon-regular of the church of 
Bomigny, clandestinely carried away the body of Saint Petroc, 
and, taking to flight, carried it with him to the abbey of 
Saint Mevennes. On discovering this, Koger, the prior of the 
church of Bomigny, with the better-disposed portion of his 
chapter, went to the king of England, the father, and wrought 
so effectually against him that, by his precept, he commanded 
the abbey and community of Saint Mevennes, without delay, 
to restore the body of Saint Petroc to Roger, the prior of 
Bomigny ; and, in case they should not do so, the king ordered 
Roland de Dinant, the justiciary of Brittany, to take the Saint's 
body by force, and deliver it into the hands of the above- 
named prior of Bomigny. On hearing this, the abbat and 
community of Saint Mevennes, having care for the safety of 
their church, and not daring to oppose the king's wishes, 
restored the said body, without any diminution thereof, to 
Roger, the prior of Bomigny, making oath upon the Holy Evan- 
gelists, and upon the relics of the saints, that they had restored 
the identical body, unchanged, and in an entirely perfect state. 

In the same year, our lord the king of England, the father, 
restored to Bartholomew, the bishop of Exeter, the chapelry 
of Boseham, 3 and made him chaplain thereof, Arnulph, the 
Bishop of Lisieux, to whom the king had unjustly given the 
^fc'd chapelry, agreeing and consenting thereto. For the above- 
named bishop of Lisieux, being led to repentance, gave to the 
bffore-mentioned bishop of Exeter, and to his church, letters 
patent of his resignation of the said chapelry of Boseham, 
renouncing the same for himself and his successors for ever. 
Our lord the king, also, gave a charter of surrender and con- 
firmation of the chapelry of Boseham to the church of Exeter, 
in presence of Richard, archbishop of Canterbury, Geoffrey, 
bishop of Ely, John, bishop of Chichester, and numerous other 
witnesses. In this year also, our lord the king gave permission 
to the Jews in his dominions to have a burial-ground for each 
city of England, without the walls of the said cities, wherever 
3 In Sussex. 



458 ANNALS OF BOGEE. DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1177- 

they could, for a reasonable sum and in a convenient situation, 
purchase a place for the burial of their dead. For, before this, 
all Jews who died were carried to London to be buried. 

In the same year, by the Divine mercy, pope Alexander and 
Frederic, emperor of the Romans, were reconciled at Venice, 
at the Rialto there ; the schism being thereby put an end to, 
which had now continued in the Church of Rome for nearly 
eighteen years. At this reconcilement there were present 
of the party of our lord the pope, Hunbald, cardinal-bishop 
of Ostia, William de Pavia, cardinal-bishop of Porto, Walter, 
cardinal-bishop of Albano, Conrad, cardinal-bishop of Sabina, 
Manfred, cardinal-bishop of Palestrina. John of Naples, car- 
dinal-priest, Theodinus, cardinal-priest, Albert, cardinal- 
priest, Peter de Bona, cardinal-priest, Bosus, cardinal-priest, 
Vivianus, cardinal-priest, Herenbrand, cardinal-priest, Jacinto, 
cardinal- deacon, Herdizum, cardinal-deacon, Chinche Chapel, 
cardinal-deacon, Laborandus, cardinal-deacon, Hugezun, cardi- 
nal-deacon, Reiner, cardinal-deacon, the archbishop of Vienna, 
the archbishop of Bourges, the archbishop of Milan, the arch- 
bishop of Ravenna, the archbishop of Salerno, and count Roger 
de Andre, on behalf of the king of Sicily. 

On the side of Frederic, emperor of the Romans, there were 
present at the above-mentioned reconciliation the persons under- 
named : the archbishop of Magdeburg, Philip, archbishop of 
Cologne, Christian, archbishop of Mentz, the archbishop of 
Besancon, the archbishop of Treves, the elector of Worms, the 
prothonotary of the emperor, count Henry de Dice, the mar- 
quis Albert, and many others. These having all assembled 
in the city of Venice, on the ninth day before the calends of 
August, on the vigil of Saint James the Apostle, the above- 
named emperor, as had been previously arranged and agreed 
upon, came to the church of Saint Nicholas, which is one 
mile distant from Venice ; and there, both he and the arch- 
bishops, bishops, and other principal men of the kingdom of 
Germany, renouncing their schism, rendered themselves de- 
serving to receive the benefits of absolution from the bishops 
and cardinals whom our lord the pope had sent for the purpose 
of absolving them. 

After this, they came to Venice, where, before the church 
of Saint Mark, the before-named emperor humbly paid all 



A.D. 1177. THE AHTI-POPE CALIXTTJS DEGRADED. 459 

honor and reverence to our lord the pope as Supreme Pontiff, 
and, receiving from him the kiss of peace, devoutl} 7 placed him- 
self at his right-hand, and, with great dutifulness, led him 
into the church as far as the altar. On the succeeding day, it 
being the feast of Saint James and the second day of the "week, 
the before-named emperor came to meet our lord the pope 
outside of the church of Saint Mark, and, devoutly placing 
himself at his right hand, led him into the church, and, the 
service of the mass having been there celebrated, then con- 
ducted him to the door of the said church ; and, while our lord 
the pope was mounting his palfrey, the above-named emperor 
held for him the stirrup, 4 and showed him all the honor and 
reverence which his ancestors had been in the habit of show- 
ing to the pope's predecessors. 

At this council, also, John, abbat of Struma, who had been 
styled pope Calixtus, and was the third and last anti-pope of 
this schism, was degraded, and was rejected and renounced by 
the emperor himself and all his principal men, both eccle- 
siastics and seculars. In like manner, all the archbishops, 
bishops, and abbats of the kingdom of Germany who had been 
ordained either by him or by the other anti-popes, his prede- 
cessors, namely, by Octavianus, who had been styled pope Vic- 
tor, or by Guido de Crema, who had been styled pope Paschal, 
were degraded. The altars, also, which had been consecrated 
by them, or by those ordained by them, were destroyed. At this 
council, also, Conrad, the brother of the above-named emperor, 
received from the hands of pope Alexander the archbishopric 
of Sanceburg, 5 together with the legateship of the whole king- 
dom of Germany, to hold the same for life. Indeed, this Con- 
rad, when in the time of the schism he had been elected arch- 
Lishop of Mentz, refused to receive consecration from pope 
Octavianus, but, preferring to live among Catholics in a state 
of poverty for the name of Christ, rather than among schis- 
matics be loaded with riches and transitory blessings, came 
to pope Alexander at the city of Sens, by whom being kindly 
received, he was made cardinal-bishop of Sabina ; and Chris- 
tian, chancellor of the emperor, succeeding him as archbishop 
of Mentz, received the pall from Guido of Crema, which he 

4 " Stapha " here, or, as it should be written, " stapia," may possibly 
mean a kind of ladder which was used in mounting a horse. 

5 JSaltzburg is clearly meant. 



460 ANNALS OF KOGEH DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1177. 

afterwards burned with his own hands, because he had re- 
ceived it of him, and was absolved at Venice, at the llialto, 
in the palace of the Patriarch, before pope Alexander and the 
whole of the cardinals, and receiving the pall from Alexander, 
continued to be archbishop of Mentz. 

The Letter of pope Alexander to Richard, archbishop of Can- 
terbury, and his suffragans, on the restoration of peace to the 
Church. 

"Alexander, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, 
to his venerable brethren Eichard, archbishop of Canterbury, 
and his suffragans, and his beloved sons the abbats appointed 
in the archbishopric of Canterbury, and who especially belong 
to the Roman Church, health and the Apostolic benediction. 
We do give to Almighty God exceeding praise and thanks, 
who, though He has for so long permitted the ship of Peter to 
be tossed by the stormy tempests of the sea, has now at length 
given His orders to the winds and the waves, and a great calm 
has ensued, insomuch that, the waves of the raging sea being 
appeased, the said ship has been brought into the haven of rest 
and of safety. For our most dearly beloved son in Christ, Fred- 
eric, the illustrious emperor of the Romans, on a day recently 
past, being the Lord's day before the feast of Saint James, with 
great devoutness came into our presence at Venice, attended 
by the principal ecclesiastics and laymen of his realm, and 
there, before an innumerable concourse of men and women, 
who repeated his praises with the loudest acclamations, paid all 
reverence and honor to ourselves as Supreme Pontiff; and on 
the feast of Saint James, as we were going at his entreaty to the 
church of Saint Mark for the purpose of celebrating the so- 
lemnity of the mass, he came to meet us, and after the mass 
was finished, which, unworthy as we are, he reverently heard 
performed by us, he paid us all the honor which his ancestors 
had been accustomed to shew unto our predecessors. On the 
calends also of the present month of August, the before-named 
emperor, in presence of a numerous multitude of persons, 
caused oath to be made on his soul, 6 on which his chief men 
who were then present, both ecclesiastics as well as laymen, 
the said oath being administered, did confirm the same, to 
the effect that he would for ever keep intact and inviolate 

6 This peculiar kind of oath we learn was especially used by the early 
kings of France. 



A.D. 1177. LETTER OP POPE ALEXANDER. 461 

the peace towards the Church, and for fifteen years towards our 
most dearly beloved son in Christ, William, the illustrious king of 
Sicily, and the truce with the Lombards from the aforesaid 
calends of August for the space of six years in such manner 
as the said peace and truce had been agreed upon, and arranged 
and reduced to writing. Accordingly, in the same way that the 
said emperor has received us as the Catholic pope and his spi- 
ritual father, so do we acknowledge him as the Catholic emperor, 
and his wife as the Catholic empress, and their son as the Catholic 
king. Wherefore give thanks to our Creator who in His com- 
passion has looked upon His spouse the Holy Church, and has 
in the fulness of His grace, after the many persecutions by 
which she has been grievously oppressed and crushed, restored 
peace and quietness to her. Given at Yenice, at the Eialto, on 
the eighth day before the ides of August." 

Tl\e Letter of pope Alexander to Roger, archbishop of York, and 
Hugh, bishop of Durham, on the peace made between himself 
and the emperor. 

11 Alexander, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, 
to his venerable brethren, Roger, archbishop of York, and legate 
of the Apostolic See, and Hugh, bishop of Durham, health and 
the Apostolic benediction. The obedience you have manifested 
in your most pleasing devotedness, and which you are known 
to have displayed both duteously and laudably towards our- 
selves and the Church, require that to you, as especial and 
duteous spiritual sons of the Church, we should describe the 
successes of the Church, inasmuch as it is worthy and becoming 
and right that those whom we have found so firmly rooted 
and established in duty towards us, we should render joyous 
and pleased at our welfare and that of the Church. There- 
fore, together with ourselves, give thanks to Almighty God who 
dwells on high, and who from above looks down upon the lowly, 
by whose bounty it has come to pass that His spouse the holy 
Church, after being long and grievously tossed by stormy waves 
and most mighty tempests, has now at length reached the 
haven of safety ; and, the raging storms appeased, enjoys the 
tranquillity her due, and so much longed for by her. For, on 
the twelfth day before the calends of the present month 
of August, by command of our most dearly beloved son in 
Christ Frederic, the illustrious emperor of the Romans, the son 



462 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1177. 

of the marquis Albert, a man of noble rank, great and power- 
ful, and chamberlain of the emperor himself, in presence 
of the principal ecclesiastics and laymen of the kingdom of 
Germany, publicly made oath upon his soul, while touching 
the holy Evangelists, in our presence and before an innumerable 
concourse of persons, to the effect that after the said emperor 
had come to Venice, all questions and disputes being set at 
rest, he would make peace with the Church as the same had 
been arranged and agreed upon by our brethren and his princi- 
pal men, and peace with our most dearly beloved son in Christ 
"William, the illustrious king of Sicily, for fifteen years, and a 
truce with the Lombards for the space of six years, to be ratified 
by oath upon his soul, as also by his principal men, according 
to the contents of the charter containing the said treaties of 
peace and truce. Also, the chief men of the kingdom of Ger- 
many, namely, our venerable brethren the archbishops of Mag- 
deburg and Cologne, and Christian, the so-called archbishop of 
Mentz, and certain others, then made oath for themselves upon 
their souls to the same effect. On the ninth day before the 
calends of August the before-named emperor, as had been 
arranged and agreed upon, came to the church of Saint Nicho- 
las, which is one mile distant from Venice, where, both he, 
as also the archbishops, bishops, and other principal men of 
Germany, renouncing their schism, were thereby rendered de- 
serving of the benefit of absolution at the hands of our brethren 
the bishops and cardinals at our command, certain other persons 
being there present. After this, they came to Venice, and 
there before the church of Saint Mark the before-named em- 
peror, in the presence of an innumerable concourse of men and 
women, who returned thanks and rendered praises with the 
loudest acclamations, humbly and reverently paid obedience 
and respect to ourselves as Supreme Pontiff; and having re- 
ceived from us the kiss of peace dutifully took his place at our 
right hand, and with the respect and devotedness which was our 
due, led us into the church as far as the altar. On the following 
day, being the feast of Saint James, at the request of the said 
emperor, we came to the aforesaid church of Saint Mark to 
perform the solemnity of the mass, and on our arriving there 
the before-named emperor came forth from the church to meet 
us, and having dutifully taken his place at our right hand, led 
us into the church, and after the celebration of the mass, walked 



A.D. 1177. PROPOSED MARRIAGE OF THE EARL OF POITOU. 463 

at our right hand to the door of the said church, and when we 
mounted our palfrey which was there ready, held our stirrup 
and showed us all the honor and respect which his ancestors 
had been accustomed to show to our predecessors. It will, 
therefore, be your anxiety to congratulate ourselves and the 
Church upon our prosperity and success, and to impart the effects 
of peace to the other devoted sons of the Church, in order that 
those who are influenced by zeal for the house of the Lord may re- 
joice and exult in the Lord for the gift of peace sent unto them 
from above. Given at Venice, at the Rialto, on the seventh 
day before the calends of August." 

In the same year, Peter, cardinal priest, titular of Saint 
Chrysogonus, and legate from the Apostolic See, formerly bishop 
elect of the see of Meaux, came into France and received a 
mandate from pope Alexander, that the whole of Normandy 
and all the lands of the king of England on both sides of the 
sea should be placed under interdict, unless he should allow his 
son Richard, earl of Poitou, to marry Alice, the daughter of 
Louis, king of France, whom the king of England had for a 
long time, and beyond the period that had been agreed upon 
between them, kept in his charge. "When this was understood 
by the king of England, he appealed to the presence of our 
lord the pope, in his own behalf and that of his territories, and 
shortly after crossed over from England to Normandy, where 
a conference was held between him and the king of France at 
Ivery, on the eleventh day before the calends of October, in the 
presence of the before-named cardinal and the chief men of 
both kingdoms. 

Here the king of England the father, by his people, plighted 
his faith and caused oath to be made on his soul, 7 that his son 
Richard, earl of Poitou, should be married to the before-named 
Alice, if the king of France, the father of the young lady, 
would give to the before-named Richard, earl of Poitou, the city 
of Bourges with its appurtenances as his daughter's marriage 
portion, according to the terms of the covenant that had been 
made thereon between them, and would give to his son king 
Henry the whole of the French portion of Veuilgesin, 8 namely, 
the whole of the land that lies between Gisors and Pontoise, 
\\hieh he had promised that he would give him as a marriage 
portion with his daughter. But as the king of France declined 
7 See the last note. 8 Now the Vexin. 



464 ANNALS OF ROGEE DE HOVEDE1T. A.D. 1177. 

to give them up, the king of England would not allow his 
son Richard to marry the before-named Alice. Neverthe- 
less, at the said interview, by the advice of the cardinal and 
the chief men of both kingdoms, friendship and a final recon- 
ciliation were made between the king of France and the king 
of England upon the following terms : 

" Know all men, both present as well as to come, that I Louis, 
by the grace of God king of the Franks, and I Henry, by the 
like grace king of England, wish it to be understood by all 
men, both present and to come, that we, by the inspiration of 
God, have promised and made oath that we will go together, 
in the service of Christianity, and assuming the cross will de- 
part for Jerusalem, in manner contained in the instrument made 
between us as to assuming the cross. We do also will that all 
should know that we now are and henceforth wish to be friends, 
and that each of us will, to the best of his power, defend life 
and limb for the other, and his wordly honors against all men. 
And if any person shall presume to do injury to either of us, I 
Henry, to the best of my poAver, will aid Louis, king of France, 
my liege lord, against all men ; and I Louis will, to the best of 
my power, aid Henry, king of England, as my vassal and liege- 
man, against all men ; saving always that faith which we owe 
to our liegemen so long as they shall preserve their fealty to 
ourselves. And from henceforth neither of us will harbour any 
enemy of the other in his dominions, from the time that delivery 
of him shall have been demanded. And to the end that hence- 
forth all matter of discord between us may be removed, we do 
mutually agree that as to the lands and possessions and other 
things which each of us now possesses, the one shall from this 
time forward make no demand thereof against the other, (ex- 
cept Auvergne, as to which the dispute arose between us, 
and except the fee of Chateau Raoul, and except some small 
fees and allotments of lands belonging to us in Berry,) in 
case our vassals should take any portion thereof the one from 
the other or in opposition to either of us. And if, as to the 
places which are above excepted, we shall not be able of our- 
selves to come to an agreement, then I Louis, king of the Franks, 
have chosen three bishops, those of Claremont, Nivernois and 
Treguier, and three barons, count Theobald, count Robert, 
and Peter de Courteney, 9 my ^brethren, and I Henry, king of 
England, have chosen three bishops, William, "bishop of Le Mans, 
'' Iiiconect.lv written in the text ' de Turtenei." 



/.D. 1177- TKEATY BETWEEN KING LOUIS AND KING HENKY. 465 

Peter, bishop of Perigord, and Robert, bishop of Nantes, and 
three barons, Maurice de Croume, William Maingot, and Peter 
de Montrabell, on my side. And the bishops before-named, 
shall upon the word of truth assert, and the laymen shall 
make oath, that they will diligently make inquisition into the 
allegations made on either side, both through themselves and 
through the oaths of the men of those districts, and that 
whatever they shall learn as to the rights of each of us, the 
same they will pronounce between us, and we will in good 
faith strictly abide by their decision. But if all those bishops 
whom I Louis have chosen, shall not be able to be present, 
nevertheless we will abide by the decision of such two as 
shall be present. And if all the barons who hare been named 
on my side shall not be present, for all that we will not do 
otherwise than abide by the decision of the other two who 
shall be present. And in like manner it shall be as to those 
whom I king Henry have chosen, both bishops as well as barons. 
We have also made oath that we will do no injury to them be- 
cause they shall have said the truth as to the said matters. And 
if perchance, which God forbid, any dispute shall hereafter arise 
between TIS as to our dominions, the same shall without delay 
be settled by the same persons in good faith and without evil 
intent. But if any one of the aforesaid persons shall in the 
meantime chance to die, then another one shall be substituted in 
his place. And if either of us, before assuming the cross, 
shall wish to depart at an earlier period upon the journey, 
the other who shall remain, shall faithfully protect and defend 
the territories and subjects of him who shall have gone abroad, 
as though they were his own and part of his own dominions. 
And after we shall have, by the will of God, assumed the cross, 
*we will cause our men who shall be with us to make oath that, 
if either of us, which God forbid, shall die upon the road, then 
in such case they will faithfully serve him who shall be sur- 
viving, as they would have served their lord if he had been 
living, so long as they shall think proper to remain in the land 
of Jerusalem. The money of the deceased the survivor shall 
keep, to perform the due services to Christianity, with the ex- 
ception of that portion which, before setting out, the deceased 
shall have ordered to be given to certain places and certain 
persons. And if either of us shall depart this life, we will 
appoint, if God shall indulge us with time sufficient, certain of 

VOL. I. HE. 



466 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDKN. A.D. 1177. 

our trustworthy and faithful subjects, to whom shall be en- 
trusted the money of each of us for the performance of the due 
services to Christianity, and who shall lead and govern our men. 
Also, on assuming the cross, before we set out on the expedition, 
we will cause those whom we shall appoint as guardians and 
governors of our dominions, to make oath that they will, in 
good faith and to the best of their power, if need shall be, assist 
in defending the lands of each of us, whenever the same shall 
be demanded in behalf of the other ; that is to say, that they 
whom I Henry, king of England, shall appoint to govern my 
dominions, shall to the utmost of their power assist in defend- 
ing the lands of Louis, king of France, my liege lord, in 
the same manner in which they would defend my own lands, 
in case my city of Rouen were besieged ; and in like man- 
ner that those whom I Louis, king of France, shall appoint 
to govern my dominions, shall, to the utmost of their power, 
assist in defending the lands of Henry, king of England, just 
as they would defend my own lands if my city of Paris were 
besieged. I do also will that merchants and all other men of 
his dominions, both clergy as well as laity, shall, with all their 
property, be secure, and enjoy peace in all my territories. And 
I Henry, king of England, do in like manner will that mer- 
chants and all other men, both clergy as well as laity, of the 
dominions of the king of France, my liege lord, shall, with all 
their property, be secure and enjoy peace in all my territories. 
The above- written we have engaged strictly to observe, and 
have sworn the same in the presence of the venerable Peter, 
cardinal priest, titular of Saint Chrysogonus, legate of the 
Apostolic See, and in the presence of Richard, bishop of Win- 
chester, John, bishop of Chartres, Henry, bishop of Bayeux, 
Froger, bishop of Seez, Gilles, bishop of Evreux, Henry, 
king of Englacd, the son, earl Theobald, earl Robert, Peter de 
Courtrai, Simon, earl of Evreux, William de Humezt, and many 
others, both clergy and laity." 

After the conference was concluded, Henry, king of Eng- 
land, the father, came to Vernueil, and there, in order to gain 
the Divine favour, and moved by the entreaties of the good men 
of Grammont, 10 he enacted, in presence of Richard, bishop 
of Winchester, Henry, bishop of Bayeux, Gilles, bishop 
of Evreux, Froger, bishop of Seez, Simon, earl of Evreux, 
1C An abbey not far from Limoges, 



A. D. 1177. EARLDOM OF MARCH SOLD TO KING HENRY. 467 

Robert, earl of Leicester, and many other earls and barons 
of his realm, that no one should for the debt of the superior 
lord presume to take the property of the vassal, unless the 
vassal should owe to him the same debt, or be security for the 
same ; but that the rents which the vassals are bound to pay 
to their superior lords, are to be paid to the creditors of their 
lords, and not to the lords themselves. The rest, however, 
of the property of the vassals was to remain their own and in 
peace, and it should be lawful for no one to seize them 
for the debts of their superior lords. This statute and custom 
the king enacted, and ordered to be observed in all his vills and 
everywhere throughout his realm ; namely, in Normandy, Aqui- 
taine, Anjou, Maine, Touraine, and Brittany, as being universal 
and established. And in order that the said statute might be 
strictly observed and held as ratified, he ordered it to be 
committed to writing and confirmed by the authority of his 
own seal. 

In the same year, on the fifth day before the calends of 
October, being the third day of the week, Geoffrey, nephew of 
Roger, archbishop of York, prior of Beverley, and chancellor 
to the king of England, the son, master Robert le Grand, 
and many others, in number three hundred men and women, 
passing over in one and the same ship from England to Nor- 
mandy, perished at sea near Saint Valery, on the coast of 
Ponthieu. Shortly after, our lord, the king of England, the 
father, entering Berry with a large army, captured Chateaxi 
Raoul ; and when he was marching thence toward Castres, the 
lord of that town came and met him on the road, and delivered 
up to him the daughter of Raoul de Dol, whom the king gave 
to Baldwin de Rivers, together with the honor of Chateau 
Raoul. 

After this, our lord, the king of England, the father, pro- 
ceeded to Grammont, and Audebert, earl of March, came to 
meet him there, and in presence of the archbishop of Bour- 
deaux, John, bishop of Poitiers, and many other persons, both 
clergy and laity, sold to the before-named king of England 
the whole earldom of March for fifteen thousand pounds An- 
jouin, twenty mules, and twenty palfreys, and by his charter 
confirmed the same. 



H H 2 



468 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN". A.D. 1177- 



The Charter of Audebert, earl of March, made on the sale of his 
earldom to Henry, Icing of England, the father. 

"Be it known to all present, as well as to come, that I, 
Audebert, earl of March, having lost my son, who was my sole 
heir, and being thereby left to the inclination of my own will, 
have, inasmuch as I have made a vow to devote myself for 
ever hereafter to the service of God, made sale of the whole 
of my lands, and whatever belonged to me by hereditary right, 
to my lord Henry, the illustrious king of the English, no one 
making objection to the same, (indeed there being no one what- 
ever who could of right object thereto,) for fifteen thousand 
pounds of money, Anjouin, paid down to me in full at Gram- 
mont, twenty mules, and twenty palfreys. And further, I have 
by my corporal oath, administered by the hands of "William, 
archbishop of Bourdeaux, given security that I will guarantee to 
my lord the king, and to his heir, the earl of Poitou, or to 
whomsoever he shall give the same, the aforesaid lands, in 
good faith and without evil intent, against all men, and that, 
during the whole of my life, I will do nothing either by con- 
tracting marriage or in any other way, to prevent the afore- 
said sale from remaining inviolate. And to the end that this 
my sale so solemnly made, may not possibly, by any malignity 
hereafter, be rendered null and void, I have fortified the same 
with my seal. Done publicly in the year from the Incarnation 
of our Lord 1177, in the month of December, at Grammont, in 
presence of the archbishop of Bourdeaux, John, bishop of Poitou, 
and many others." 

After these matters were transacted at Grammont, our lord, 
the king of England, the father, received homage and the 
oaths of fealty and allegiance from the barons and knights of 
the earldom of March, and Audebert, the said earl of March, 
departed thence with the above-mentioned sum of money which 
had been paid him by the king of England. 

In the same year, a great flood took place in Holland, the 
embankments against the sea being burst asunder, and washed 
away nearly the whole of the property in that province, and 
drowned multitudes of people ; this took place on the seventh 
day before the ides of January. 

In the meantime, the abbat elect of the church of Saint 



A.D. 1177. LETTEE OP POPE ALEXANDEB. 469 

Augustin, at Canterbury, often and earnestly, both personally 
and by other worthy men, as his mediators, entreated Richard, 
archbishop of Canterbury, to come to the church of Saint 
Augustin, to consecrate him as abbat thereof, to which the 
archbishop made answer that it was not his duty to go thither 
to consecrate him, but rather that he ought to come to the me- 
tropolitan church of Canterbury, for the purpose of receiving 
his benediction. In consequence of this dispute, the before- 
named abbat elect appealed to the presence of our lord the 
pope, and setting out for Rome,- obtained letters from Alex- 
ander, the Supreme Pontiff, to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Alexander on lehalf of the abbat elect of the 
church of Saint Augustin, at Canterbury. 

"Alexander, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, 
to his venerable brother Roger, bishop of Worcester, health and 
the Apostolic benediction. Whereas we did some time since 
give our commands to our venerable brotherRichard, archbishop 
of Canterbury, legate of the Apostolic See, no longer to 
defer bestowing the gift of consecration upon our dearly be- 
loved son, the abbat elect of the church of Saint Augustin, in 
his monastery, which, without any intermediate person, belongs 
directly to the jurisdiction of the Church of Rome, and inas- 
much as the archbishop refused to perform our commands, we 
might of right have bestowed consecration upon the said abbat 
elect, either ourselves or through another, who would not prove 
so ready to oppose our wishes. Being desirous, however, more 
fully to make trial in him of the virtue of obedience, after a long 
discussion which the said archbishop has had in our presence, 
by means of his envoys with the abbat elect, on the disputed 
Joint as to the consecration, the same has, by the common con- 
sent of our brethren, by their definite judgment, been thus de- 
cided ; that the archbishop of Canterbury must, without exacting 
obedience from him, and all opposition laid aside, consecrate both 
him and his successors in the monastery of Saint Augustin. We 
have accordingly, in conformity with the customary and abun- 
dant considerateness of the Apostolic See, thought proper to send 
back the said abbat elect to the aforesaid archbishop, to receive 
from him the gift of consecration. Considering, therefore, the 
labours and expenses which the said monastery has now for a 
long time incurred upon this point, we do command your brother- 



470 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1178. 

hood, by our precept in this our Apostolic writing conveyed, 
and do by virtue of your obedience enjoin you, that, if the 
said archbishop shall delay to consecrate the said abbat elect, 
as directed by us, within the period by our letters appointed, 
then, relying on our authorization, all excuses, opposition, 
and appeal set aside, as soon as you shall be called upon 
so to do, no decree, either of ourselves or of another, by which 
it is ordered that the same shall be submitted to appeal, and no 
letters that have been, or shall be obtained from us withstand- 
ing, and no exception whatsoever thereto holding good, you shall, 
without curtailment or delay, fulfil our commands. Given at 
the Lateran, on the fifteenth day before the calends of May." 

When the before-named archbishop of Canterbury heard 
of this, he determined to go to the monastery of Saint Augustin 
for the purpose of consecrating the said abbat elect, accord- 
ing to the tenor of the mandate of the Apostolic See. Ac- 
cordingly, on a certain day on which the said abbat elect was 
travelling in another province upon the business of his house, 
the archbishop came with a considerable retinue of his clergy 
and laity to the monastery of Saint Augustin, asserting that 
he had come thither for the purpose of consecrating the said 
abbat elect, and on not finding him, appealed to our lord the 
pope on behalf of himself and the dignity of his church. In 
consequence of this, the abbat elect went to Rome, and re- 
ceived the gift of benediction from pope Alexander. 

In the year of grace 1178, which was the twenty-fourth 
year of the reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, 
the said Henry was at the city of Anjou, on the day of the 
Nativity of our Lord. In this year, the king of England, the 
father, desired exceedingly to return to England, and send- 
ing messengers to Louis, king of the Franks, obtained from 
him letters of protection to the following effect: 

" Louis, king of the Franks, to all to whom this present letter 
shall come, greeting. Know all of you that we have taken into 
our charge all the lands of Henry, king of England, our most 
dearly beloved brother, that lie on this side of the sea, in case he 
shall happen to cross over into England or go abroad, upon the 
understanding that when his deputies from the lands beyond 
sea shall call upon us so to do, we will with good faith and with- 
out evil intent give them counsel and help for the defence and 
protection of the said lands. Given at Vincennes." 



A. D. 1178. PEKSECTTTIOlf OF THE ALBTGENSE8. 471 

In the meantime the Arian heresy which, as previously men- 
tioned, had been condemned in the province of Toulouse, had 
revived ; and this coming to the ears of the king of France 
and the king of England, inflamed by zeal for the Christian 
faith, they determined personally to go thither, in order that 
they might entirely drive the before-named heretics from those 
parts. However, after a short time had intervened, it seemed 
to them that it might be more effectual if they sent thither 
wise men to convert the heretics to the Christian faith by their 
preaching and learning, than if .they themselves were to hasten 
thither in person. For they were reminded of the words, 
" "Tis enough to have commanded vengeance ; more will the 
dread of your name effect than your sword; your presence 
diminishes your fame." 11 

They therefore sent thither Peter, cardinal priest, titular 
of Saint Chrysogonus, and legate of the Apostolic See, the arch- 
bishops of Bourges and Narbonne, Reginald, bishop of Bath, 
John, bishop of Poitou, Henry, abbat of Clairval, and many 
other ecclesiastics, in order that by their preaching they might 
convert the said heretics to the Christian faith, or on reasonable 
grounds prove them to be heretics, and separate them from the 
threshold of holy mother Church and from communion with the 
faithful. In addition to this, the before-named kings chose 
Raymond, count of Toulouse, the viscount of Touraine, Ray- 
mond of Neufchatel, 12 and other influential men, and ordered 
them to act as assessors to the above-named cardinal and his 
associates in the faith of Christ, and to expel the said heretics 
from those parts by the power of their might. 

Accordingly, when the before-named cardinal and the other 
Catholic persons had entered Toulouse, they found there a certain 
wealthy man, who possessed two castles, one within the city 
and the other without the walls of the city, who, before their 
coming, had confessed himself to be a sectary of the heretical 
corruption ; but now, moved by terror, and desiring to screen 
this execrable sect, made pretence that he was a Christian. 
When the cardinal came to know this, he ordered the said 
wealthy person to be brought before him ; on whose coming 
for the purpose of making confession of his faith, he was found 
to be in every article an antagonist of the Christian religion. 

11 " Vindictam mandasse sat est, plus nominis horror 
Quam tuus ensis aget : minuit praesentia famam." 
12 In France. 



472 AlfSALS OF PvOGEil DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1178. 

Accordingly, he was pronounced by the aforesaid cardinal and 
the bishops who were with him a manifest heretic, and con- 
demned; and they gave orders that his property should be con- 
fiscated, and that the castles which he possessed, lofty and 
of great beauty, should be levelled with the ground. Upon 
seeing himself thus condemned, and his property confiscated, 
ho came to the cardinal and the bishops, his associates, and 
prostrating himself at their feet, asked pardon, and, penance 
being enjoined him, was led naked and scourged through the 
streets and lanes of the city. After this, he swore that he 
would go to Jerusalem, and remain there three years in the 
service of God, and if after the said three years he should 
return home, his possessions were to be restored to him, on 
condition, however, that his castles should be levelled, in 
testimony of his heretical depravity ; he was also to give to 
the count of Toulouse five hundred pounds of silver. 

On these things taking place, many of the heretics, fearing 
lest they might be dealt with in a similar manner, came to the 
cardinal and his associates, and secretly confessing their errors 
and asking pardon, obtained mercy. In the meanwhile, it 
came to their ears, that certain false brethren, namely, Ray- 
mond, Bernard, the son of Raymond, and certain other here- 
siarchs, transforming themselves into angels of light, while 
they were those of Satan, and preaching what was con- 
trary to the Christian faith, led astray the minds of many by 
their false preaching, and had dragged them with themselves to 
hell. These being summoned to come into the presence of 
the cardinal and his associates, for the purpose of making con- 
fession of their faith, made answer that they would come be- 
fore them if they should have a safe conduct in going and 
returning. 

A safe conduct, in going and returning, being accordingly 
given to them, they came before the above-named cardinal, 
and the bishops, barons, clergy and people who were pre- 
sent, and produced before them a certain paper in which 
they had written down the articles of their faith. On their 
reading this at length, there seemed to be in it certain ex- 
pressions of a suspicious nature, which, unless more fully 
expressed, might possibly conceal the heresy they had preach- 
ed. When one of them attempted to explain the articles 
so written, and to speak in Latin, he was barely able to 






A.D. 1178. THE HERETICS' DEFENCE. 473 

connect two words, being utterly ignorant of the Latin 
language. Upon this, it was necessary for the cardinal and 
the bishops to bring themselves more on a level with them, 
and, in consequence of their ignorance, to use the vulgar tongue. 
Accordingly, on being examined as to the articles of the Chris- 
tian faith, they made answer as to all the articles of the faith as 
soundly and as circumspectly as if they had been most sincere 
Christians. 

Upon the count of Toulouse and others, who had formerly 
heard them preach what was contrary to the Christian faith, 
hearing this statement from them, being struck with the great- 
est astonishment and inflamed with zeal for the Christian faith, 
they arose and most clearly convicted them to their faces of 
having lied ; saying that they had heard from some of them 
that there were two Gods, the one good, and the other bad, the 
good one having made only things invisible, and which cannot 
be changed or corrupted, the bad one the heavens, the earth, 
man and the other things visible. Others again affirmed that 
they had heard at their preaching, that the body of Christ was 
not made by the ministration of a priest who was unworthy, or 
who had been convicted of any crime. Others also stated that 
they had heard them say, in their preaching, that a man and 
his wife could not be saved if the conjugal debt was satisfied. 
Others again said that they had heard from them that baptism 
was of no use to infants, and the utterance of numerous 
other blasphemies against God and the holy Church and the 
Catholic faith, which, by reason of their abominable enormity, 
it is better to be silent upon than to disclose. 

The heretics, however, contradicted these matters, and said 
that they had given false testimony against them. For they 
>said publicly, in presence of the before-named cardinal 
and bishops, and all the people there present, and made con- 
fession, and stoutly asserted, that there is but one God most 
high, who has made all things visible and invisible, and en- 
tirely denied that there were two first principles of things. 
They also confessed that the priest, whether good or bad, 
whether just or unjust, and whether such a character that 
they knew him beyond doubt to be an adulterer or criminal 
in other respects, was able to make the body and blood of 
Christ, and that, through the ministration of a priest of this 
character, and by virtue of the Divine words which were pro- 



474 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1178. 

nounced by the Lord, the bread and wine were really changed 
in substance into the body and blood of Christ. They also 
asserted that infants or adults baptized with our baptism are 
saved, and that without the said baptism no one can be saved, 
together denying that they used any other kind of baptism or 
imposition of hands, as had been imputed to them. In ad- 
dition to this, they declared their belief, that a man and 
woman united in marriage, in case no other sin prevented it, 
would be saved, even though they should carnally satisfy the 
conjugal debt, being excused by virtue of their marriage, and 
that by reason thereof they are not damned. 

They affirmed also, that archbishops, bishops, priests, 
monks, canons, hermits, recluses, Templars, and Hospitallers, 
would be saved. They also said, that it was becoming and 
proper that those who entered churches founded in honor of 
God and of the Saints, should approach them with the great- 
est devoutness, and, showing to their priests and other minis- 
ters honor and respect, should as a matter of duty pay them their 
first fruits and^tithes, and make answer dutifully and faith- 
fully on all parochial matters. They also laudably asserted, 
among other things, that alms ought to be given both to 
churches and to the poor, and indeed to every one who sought 
them. 

Although they were said to have previously denied all 
these points, still they asserted that they did, according to a 
sound understanding, understand the same; on which the be- 
fore-named cardinal and bishops ordered that they should 
swear that they believed in their hearts as they had con- 
fessed with their lips. But they, like men of distorted minds 
and crooked intentions, were at length unwilling to abandon 
their heresy, where any semblance of authority seemed to aid 
their crass and drowsy intellects, using as an excuse the words 
which the Lord is mentioned in the Gospel as having used ; 
" Swear not at all, but let your words be yea, yea, nay, nay," 13 
and asserting that they ought not to swear ; whereas the Lord Him- 
self is often read of as having sworn, as it is written ; " The 
Lord hath sworn and will not repent ;" 14 and again, the Lord 
says, " I have sworn by myself." 15 The Apostle also says, " An. 
oath for confirmation is the end of all strife." 16 But they, 
like idiots, not understanding the Scriptures, fell into the snare 
13 Matt. v. 34. 14 Psalm ex. 4. Heb. vii. 10. 13 Isai. xlv. 23. 1S Heb. vi. 16. 



A. D. 1178. CONVICTION OF THE HERETICS. 475 

which they had concealed, for whereas they at first ahhorred 
an oath as being an execrable thing and forbidden by the 
Lord, they were, by the paper of their confession, convicted 
of having sworn as they had said, "We do believe in the 
truth, which is God, and do say that this is our belief;" 
not being aware that to adduce the truth and the word of God 
in testimony of the truth of their assertion, is beyond a 
doubt taking an oath ; as we read of the Apostle, when he 
says, " For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord," 17 
and again, " God is my witness ;" 18 and as other passages 
of a like nature prove, which can be easily found by those who 
understand, and have read, the Holy Scriptures. 

When, therefore, they had been convicted by many and 
competent witnesses, and many persons were still preparing 
to bear witness against them, because the Church is not wont 
to deny the bosom of mercy to those who return thereto, 
they carefully warned them, laying aside all heretical corrup- 
tions, to return to the unity of the faith. They also advised 
them, as they had been excommunicated by our lord the pope, 
and the before-named cardinal, and the archbishops of Bourges 
and Narbonne, and the bishop of Toulouse, on account of their 
perverse preaching and schism, to come to be reconciled to 
the Catholic faith, according to the forms prescribed by the 
Church. This, however, being warped into tortuous ways and 
hardened by abandoned habits, they refused to do, on which 
the said cardinal, and the above-mentioned bishops, to- 
gether with the before-named bishop of Poitiers, and the other 
religious men who had assisted them throughout, in the sight 
of the whole people, with lighted candles 19 again denounced 
them as excommunicated, and condemned them, together with 
their prompter, the devil, and gave orders to all the faithful in 
Christ, thenceforth cautiously to avoid the before-named Ray- 
mond and Bernard, and their accomplices, as persons excom- 
municated, and handed over to Satan ; and that if at any time 
in future they should preach to them any thing else than what 
they had confessed in their hearing, they should reject their 
preaching as false, and contrary to the Catholic and Apostolic 
faith, and drive them as heretics and forerunners of Anti- 

>7 1 Thess. iv. 15. 18 Rom. i. 9. 

19 A solemn mode of excommunication, in which, at the moment of 
sentence being pronounced, the candles were extinguished. 



476 AITNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1178. 

christ to a distance from their territories. Moreover, the count 
of Toulouse, and the other more influential men of the pro- 
vince, in presence of all the people, gave assurance on 
oath, that from that time forward they would neither, for 
entreaty nor for money, support the heretics. Accordingly, 
the before-named cardinal wrote to all the sons of holy mother 
Church, to the following effect : 

The Letter of Peter, titular of Saint Chrysogonus, cardinal 
priest, and legate of tJie Apostolic See, 

" Peter, by the grace of God, titular of Saint Chrysogonus, 
cardinal priest, and legate of the Apostolic See, to all the sons 
of holy mother Church, who preserve. the Catholic and Apos- 
tolic faith, health in the Lord. The Apostle bears witness 
that as there is but one God, so is there known to be but one 
faith, from the soundness whereof no one can possibly without 
peril wander astray. The foundations thereof, than which 
no one can possibly lay any other, the Apostles and the Apos- 
tolic men their successors, have, by the inspiration and teach- 
ing of the Holy Ghost, so firmly and so circumspectly laid with 
sound doctrines, as though with natural stones, that neither 
the blasts of the roaring north wind, nor the engines of the 
impious, even with repeated assaults, can overthrow them, 
or in any way move them from the firmness of their position. 
Consequently, although in these days certain false brethren, 
namely, Raymond de Baimiac, and Bernard, the son of Ray- 
mond, and certain other heresiarchs, transforming themselves 
into angels of lights, whereas they are those of Satan, for some 
time past preaching what is contrary to the Christian and 
Apostolic faith, have, by their poisonous doctrines, deceived the 
souls of many, and dragged them with themselves to perdi- 
tion ; more recently, however, He who unveils mysteries, and 
who gave His spirit to Daniel to confound the elders of Israel, 
having respect for the souls deceived by the guiles of the devil, 
has been unwilling that their perfidiousness should be any longer 
hidden, or that the purity of the Christian doctrines should by 
their preaching be corrupted ; and by His wonderful power, 
many hearing and seeing the same, has revealed the venom of 
their perfidiousness which had been previously concealed, to the 
increase and glory of the Christian faith. For lately, the afore- 
said Raymond and Bernard and others met our reverend brother 



A.D. 1178. THE LETTER OF THE LEGATE PETER. 477 

Reginald, bishop of Bath, and the noble men the viscount of 
Touraine, and Raymond of Neufchatel, who by our advice 
had come to the territory of Roger de Bediers, for the pur- 
pose of obtaining the liberation of our venerable brother the 
bishop of Alby, and asserted that they were unjustly treated 
by the noble man the count of Toulouse and other barons who 
had for ever abjured them ; on which occasion, on their pro- 
posing to come into our presence for the defence of their faith if 
they could have a safe conduct in coming and returning, the said 
bishop and viscount, fearing lest this stumbling-block might not 
be revealed to the hearts of the simple, who were imbued with 
their abominations, and lest they might ascribe it to our dis- 
trustfulness if a hearing were refused them, on our behalf and 
that of the before -named count, granted them the said indul- 
gence, in order that in full security they might present them- 
selves before us, that in the hearing of ourselves and our 
venerable brother the bishop of Poitiers, the legate of the Apos- 
tolic See, and of other discreet men, and of the whole people, they 
might be examined, and, if their belief were sound and proper, 
be approved of by us ; and in order that, after being examined 
by us, they might still return in security to their homes, that 
so they might not appear to have been induced by any fear or 
violence to make confession of the true faith; but however, upon 
the understanding that if within eight days from the time that 
our edict had gone forth, they should not have returned to the 
true faith, they were to be expelled from the territories of the 
noble men who had abjured them. We therefore thought 
proper to ratify the indulgence so granted them by the bishop 
and viscount ; although, as we have mentioned, an edict had 
already gone forth from the aforesaid count of Toulouse and 
other noble men, that they should be expelled from their ter- 
ritories ; and, the said bishop of Poitiers and the before-named 
count of Toulouse, and other clergy and laymen, about three 
hundred in number, being assembled with us in the church of 
Saint Stephen, we enjoined them to explain to us their belief, 
and, returning to the truth of the Catholic faith, by a healthful 
confession of the true faith, to remove the infamy which both 
the whole land and they themselves had by their damnable 
doctrines incurred. On this, during the conversation that 
ensued on both sides, they produced a certain paper in which 
they had written out the articles of their faith, and read it at 
length just as written. On our detecting in it some expres- 



478 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEH". A.D. 1178. 

sions which seemed to be of a suspicious nature, and which 
might, unless more fully explained, conceal the heresy which they 
had preached, we requested them to answer and defend their 
faith in the Latin tongue ; both because their language was 
not sufficiently understood by us, and because the Gospels and 
Epistles, on which alone they were willing to ground their 
belief, are known to be written 20 in the Latin tongue. When 
they found that they could not venture to do this, being en- 
tirely ignorant of the Latin language, as appeared by the words 
of one of them, who, when he attempted to speak in Latin, was 
hardly able to join two words, and entirely failed ; it became 
necessary for us to stoop to their level, and, absurd as it was, 
by reason of their ignorance to discourse in the vulgar tongue 
about the Sacraments of the Church. On this, making denial 
that there were two first principles of things, they publicly, in 
the presence of ourselves and the before-named persons, made 
confession and stoutly asserted that there is one God most high, 
who has made all things, visible and invisible, which they 
also proved to be true by the writings of the Evangelists and 
Apostles. They also confessed that our priest, whether good 
or bad, just or unjust, and whether even of such a charac- 
ter that they knew him, beyond doubt, to be an adulterer, 
or guilty of any other crime, was able to make the body and 
blood of Christ, and that through the ministration of such a 
priest, and by virtue of the Divine words, which were pro- 
nounced by the Lord, the bread and wine were truly changed 
in substance into the body and blood of Christ. They also as- 
serted that infants or adults when baptized with our baptism 
are saved, and that without the said baptism no one can be 
saved, utterly denying that they had any other baptism or 
imposition of hands, as was imputed to them. They further 
asserted their belief that a man and woman united in marriage, 
in case no other sin prevented it, would be saved although 
they should satisfy the conjugal debt, being excused by virtue 
of their marriage, and that by reason thereof they are 
not damned. They affirmed also that archbishops, bishops, 
priests, monks, canons, recluses, Templars, and Hospitallers 
would be saved. They also said that it was becoming and 
proper, that t'hose who entered churches founded in honor of 
God and of the Saints, should approach them with the greatest 
devoutness, and, showing to the priests and other ministers 
io He alludes to the Latin translation in the Vulgate. 



A.D. 1178. THE LETTER OF THE LEGATE PETEE. 479 

honor and respect, should dutifully pay them their first- 
fruits and tithes, and make answer dutifully and faithfully on 
all parochial matters. They also laudahly asserted, among 
other things, that alms ought to be given both to the churches 
and to the poor, and indeed to every one who sought them. 21 
Although they were said to have previously denied all these 
points, still they asserted that they did, according to our sound 
understanding, understand the same. After they had been 
thus examined by us, and had of their own accord made the 
confessions already mentioned, .we entered the church of Saint 
James ; where, together with ourselves, an innumerable con- 
course of people, which had flocked together, as though to 
witness a spectacle, heard the confession of their faith read in 
the vulgar tongue, the same having been written out in the 
said tongue. After this, when, with all patience and without 
any tumult, they had been listened to by us and all the people 
there assembled, and had of their own accord made an end of 
speaking, inasmuch as the exposition of their faith seemed quite 
praiseworthy and orthodox, we again asked them in the hear- 
ing of all the people, if they believed in their hearts what 
they had confessed with their lips, and if at any time they 
had preached the contrary thereof, as they had been often 
charged with doing. They making answer that they did so 
believe, and further denying that they had ever preached to 
any other effect, the noble man the count of Toulouse and many 
others, clergy as well as laymen, who had heard them preach 
what was contrary to the Christian faith, being struck with 
the greatest astonishment, and inflamed with zeal for the 
Christian faith, arose and most clearly convicted them to their 
faces of having lied. Some in fact steadily asserted that they 
had heard from some of them, that there were two Gods, the 
one good and the other bad ; the good one having only made 
things invisible, and which cannot be changed or corrupted ; 
the bad one, the heavens, the earth, man and the other things 
visible. Others again affirmed that they heard at their preach- 
ing, that the body of Christ was not made by the ministration 
of a priest who was unworthy, or who had been convicted of 
any crime. Many in like manner bore witness that they had 
heard them utterly deny that a man and his wife could be 
saved, if the conjugal debt were satisfied by them. Others 

21 " Omni petenti " here appears in the form of " omnipotente j" the 
former is clearly the right reading. 



480 AlTNAiS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1178. 

again stoutly maintained to their faces, that they had heard 
from them that baptism was of no use to infants, and the ut- 
terance of numerous other blasphemies against God and the 
Holy Church and the Catholic faith, which, by reason of their 
abominable enormity, we would rather be silent upon than 
disclose. But, 22 whatever they stated in their former confes- 
sion, which seemed to be sufficient unto salvation; if they did 
believe the same in heart, and did so affirm with all their 
heart, still, like men of distorted minds, and of crooked inten- 
tions, they were at length unwilling to abandon their heresy, 
when any seeming authority seemed to aid their crass and 
drowsy intellects, using as an excuse the words which our Lord 
is mentioned in the Gospel as having used ; 'Swear not at all, but 
let your words be yea, yea, nay, nay ;' and asserting that Jthey 
ought not to swear, whereas the Lord Himself is often read of as 
having sworn, as it is written, ' The Lord hath sworn and 
will not repent ;' and again the Lord says, ' I have sworn by 
myself.' The Apostle also says, ' An oath for confirmation is the 
end of all strife.' Many other passages also are found to pre- 
sent themselves to those who read the holy Scriptures, to the 
like effect ; in which, by reason of the infirmity of nature, we 
are allowed to make an use of oaths to those whom we would 
persuade to anything. However, like idiots, not understand- 
ing the Scriptures, they fell into the snare which they had con- 
cealed ; for whereas they at first abhorred an oath as being an 
execrable thing, and forbidden by the Lord, they were, by the 
very paper of their confession, convicted of having sworn, 
as they had said, ' We do believe in the truth, Avhich is God, 
and do say that this is our belief;' not being aware that to 
adduce the truth and the word of God in testimony of the truth 
of their assertion, is beyond a doubt taking an oath ; as we 
read of the Apostle, when ho says, ' For this we say unto 
you by the word of the Lord ;' and again, ' God is my wit- 
ness ;' and as other passages of a like nature prove, which 
can be easily found by those who understand, and have read, 
the holy Scriptures. When therefore they had been convicted 
by many and competent witnesses, and many persons were 
still preparing to bear witness against them ; because the 
Church was not wont to deny the bosom of mercy to those who 
return thereto, we carefully warned them, laying aside all 

22 This passage is corrupt, and it is pretty clear that some words are 
omitted. 



A.D. 1178. LETTER OF HENRY, ABBAT OF CLATRVAL. 481 

heretical corruptions, to return to the unity of the faith ; and 
advised them, as they had been excommunicated by our lord the 
pope, the archbishops of Bourges and Narbonne, and the bishop 
of Toulouse, by reason of their perverse preaching and schism, 
to come to us to be reconciled to the Catholic faith, according 
to the forms prescribed by the Church. This however, being 
warped into tortuous ways, and hardened by abandoned habits, 
they refused to do, on which, in the sight of the whole people, 
who with one voice shouted assent thereto and exclaimed 
against them with great fury, with lighted candles we again 
denounced them as excommunicated, being joined therein by 
the bishop of Poitou before-mentioned, and other religious 
men who had supported us throughout, and condemned them 
together with their prompter, the devil. Wherefore we do 
warn the whole of you, and do exhort you in the Lord, and 
do for the remission of your sins enjoin you henceforth carefully 
to avoid the before-named Raymond and Bernard and their ac- 
complices, as persons excommunicated and handed over to 
Satan ; and if, at any time in future, they shall presume to 
preach to you anything else than what they have expressed in 
our presence to the effect above- written, you are to reject 
their preaching as false and contrary to the Catholic and 
Apostolic faith, and to drive them as heretics and forerun- 
ners of Antichrist, from any intercourse with yourselves in 
your uprightness, and to a distance from your territories. 

The Letter of Henry, abbat of Clairval, on the same subject. 

" Give ear, ye heavens, to our lamentations, let the earth 
learn the grief of our heart. Let Catholic Christians bewail 
the lot of Christ, and let the faithful people weep for the sor- 
rows of their faith. Let all nations of the earth and sons of 
men deplore the injury done to the salvation of mankind, and 
let the universal sorrow of our lives be universally mourned 
by all living men. In our day a new Philistine is arrayed 
against the squadrons of Israel, a band of heretics, an army of 
perverts, who irreverently insult the troops of the living God, 
and with the highest presumption blaspheme the majesty of 
the Lord. Why dost thou hesitate, David ? Why dost thou 
tremble, thou faithful man ? Take up thy sling and thy stone ; 
instantly be the blasphemer smitten on the forehead, and let 
the wicked head which is shamelessly exalted be raised on the 

VOL. I. II 



482 ANNALS OF BOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1178. 

point of his own sword by thy hands. For if in this contest 
the portion of Christ is conquered, or if in the slightest degree 
or in the smallest point mother Church is trodden under foot, 
we know for certain that the cause is not wanting in goodness 
but in defenders ; we know also that the triumph will not be 
denied to our champion, if when fighting he wages the war- 
fare inspired by love of the faith. Bui inasmuch as, accord- 
ing to the word of truth, ' The harvest is plenteous and the la- 
bourers are few,' the ravagers, good Jesus, of Thy fields, being 
arrayed as deceitful labourers, think if they shall enter boldly, 
by their ravages, as it were, to forestall the day of gathering 
in thy harvest, and rather to root up what is unripe than to 
reap what has attained maturity : where, then, are Thy hus- 
bandmen appointed by Thee over Thy fertile and pleasant field, 
blossoming with Thy blood, and watered with the sprinkling 
thereof? Let them arise and assist us, and let them shield us 
in our necessity, and oppose themselves as a wall of defence 
for us against these blood-stained beasts. Arise, I say, arise, 
husbands, fathers, leaders of nations, princes of the people, 
drive away these vilest of savage brutes, which we have beheld, 
which we point out, or at least expel these cubs of foxes; and 
yet it is better to take them, but who is fitted so to do ? They 
have no certain paths, they walk along winding ways, and 
these most savage monsters are hidden in a kind of laby- 
rinth made by their own frauds. Like a fawn they make their 
escape from the hand, and are like unto writhing serpents ; 
the more tightly you grasp them, the more easily do they slip 
away. Thanks to God, however, that, although they cannot 
be taken, they may be driven away, that so when they have 
failed in the exertions they were making against us, they may 
be confounded and perish of themselves. And, that this can 
easily be effected, we will prove by things that we have beheld, 
and in which we have taken part ; so that if, from this time 
forward, it is not done, we shall have to deplore, not so much 
their wickedness as our own short-comings, and the negligence 
of our people. For it lately happened that, at the command 
of our lord the pope, and at the exhortation of the most pious 
princes, Louis, king of the Franks, and Henry, king of the 
English, the lord Peter, the legate of the Apostolic See, and 
the venerable men the bishops of Poitou and Bath, and our- 
selves, went to Toulouse, a city in their county, which, as it 
was stated to be a city containing a vast multitude, was also said 



A. D. 1178. LETTER 0V HEXBY, ABI5AT OF CLAIRVA1. 483 

to be the mother of heresy and the fountain-head of error. 
Accordingly, we went to her, that we might learn if her 
pangs justified the waitings that were raised. And, behold ! 
her wound was found to be exceeding great, BO much so, that 
from the sole of her foot to the crown of her head, there was 
hardly any soundness in her. For, in truth, not a third part 
had been told us of all her wicked abominations, which that 
noble city was cherishing in the bosom of her unbelief. The 
abomination of desolation had found a place in her, and the 
likeness of the reptiles described" by the prophets found a re- 
fuge in her lurking-places. Heretics were there acting the 
governor over the people, ruling over the clergy, to such a de- 
gree that it made true the saying, ' Like people like priest ; >22 
and the very life of the pastor was formed for the destruc- 
tion of the flock. The heretics spoke, and all were in admira- 
tion ; a Catholic spoke, and they would say, ' Who is this ?' 
making it a miracle and a matter for amazement if there was 
any one among them who should dare even to whisper any- 
thing about the Word of truth. So greatly did this pestilence 
prevail upon the earth, that they had made for themselves not 
only priests and bishops, but they had even evangelists, who, 
corrupting and cancelling evangelical truth, forged new gospels 
for them, and, seducing the people, preached unto them new 
dogmas from the wickedness of their hearts. I am guilty of 
falsehood if there was not among them a certain aged man, of 
considerable aifluence, blessed with brethren and friends, and 
withal among the greatest of the city a great man, whom the 
devil had so blinded with sin, urging him on, that he declared 
himself to be Saint John the Evangelist, and would separate 
the Word that in the beginning was with God, from the other 
Rrst principle of created things, as though from another God. 
He was the head of the doomed ones in this city, and the chief 
of the heretics ; and though, a layman and illiterate, he knew 
nothing at all, still, like a very fountain of diabolical wisdom, 
he showered forth among them the streams, bitter as gall, of per- 
dition and of death. Of a night there resorted to him the owls 
that love darkness, on which, he, clothed in a kind of garment 
made like a dalmatic, would take his seat among them, like a 
king with his army standing around him, and become a preacher 
to the senseless creatures. The whole city he had quite filled 
32 Alluding to Isaiah xxiv. 2. 

112 



484 AlfNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1178. 

with his disciples and his doctrines ; so much so that, through fear 
of him, no one in the city dared offer any resistance to him. 
Even upon our entry into the city, such great licence did the 
heretics everywhere enjoy, that even, going straight before us 
along the streets and lanes, they would laugh in their sleeves, 
and point us out with remarks and their fingers ; crying out 
that we were apostates, hypocrites, heretics. But in process 
of time, and on a respite being afforded us, in a few days one of 
us was enjoined to use the words of exhortation, and to discourse 
on the rule of faith before the infidel multitude. Wherefore, 
on using orthodox discourse in preaching to the people, the 
sinners were alarmed in Sion, and trembling came upon the 
hypocrites ; so much so, that they who before had closed the 
mouths of the speakers, now did not dare to appear before the 
speakers. One seeing or hearing might instantly have ob- 
served foxes transformed into moles, and whereas hitherto 
they had with impunity run to and fro before the public, now 
they dived down into their hiding-places in the ground, and 
into their subterranean cells, in order that, in the bowels of 
the earth, they might gnaw and destroy the sacred plants, 
which they now no longer dared openly to crop. But, lest 
this leopard of various colours might betray himself by the 
spots on his skin, by their crafty inventions they adopted a 
wicked mode of expression, in order that, on being brought to 
the test of discussion, for the purpose of aping our confirmed 
belief in the true faith, they might lyingly assert that they 
believe whatever we believe. From that day, therefore, our 
lord the legate and the rest of us who thought fit to meet these 
wild beasts openly, for the purpose of making examination of 
those whom fear and confusion had thrust down grovelling 
into the very centre of the earth, turned our whole attention, 
and used all our endeavours that, even by compulsion, they 
should come forth into public, and, in the light, reject the 
works of darkness. Accordingly, it came to pass that, by 
command of the legate, the bishop made oath, as also some 
of the clergy and the chief men of the city, and other 
men in the city who were attached to the true faith, and whom 
no manner of perfidy on their part had as yet aspersed, that they 
would give to us in writing the names of all whom they had 
hitherto known or might happen to know in future, who were 
accomplices in, or promoters of, this heresy, and would spare no 



A. D. 1178. LETTEB OF HENET, ABBAT OF CLAIRVAL. 485 

one whatever either for favour or reward, or on account of 
any tie of relationship. When therefore an innumerable 
multitude was duly entered upon this list so drawn up, among 
others there was named this great man, Peter Moran, whom, 
as we have previously mentioned, they called Saint John the 
Evangelist. Accordingly, taking counsel together with reference 
to him, we determined with him to commence our judgment, that 
the rest of the perfidious multitude might tremble, when the 
simplicity of the true Gospel had brought to condemnation the 
craftiness of the false evangelist. Sending therefore his 
apparitors, the earl of Saint Gilles, who faithfully gave us his 
assistance, ordered him to be summoned. He however, trusting 
in the multitude of his riches, and the numbers of his rela- 
tions, set at nought the words of the first citation, by making 
some trifling and arrogant excuse for creating delay. Conse- 
quently, on a second day the earl, relying more on blandishments 
than terror, in a quiet way invited the said Peter by means of 
his friends and acquaintances ; and, after he had made many 
difficulties as to coming, mingling threats with blandish- 
ments, at last brought him before us. Upon this, one of us 
who was the speaker, began to warn him in such terms as 
these : ' Well now, Peter, your fellow-citizens accuse you of 
having broken the rule of the true faith, and having entered 
upon the corruptions of the Arian heresy ; nay, more, you both 
lead others, and are being led yourself by others through the 
devious paths of multiplied errors.' Upon this, heaving a 
deep sigh, and inwardly touched with a pang at his heart, he 
lyingly asserted at the first blush that he was none of that 
sort. On being asked whether he would prove this on oath, he 
contended that credence ought be given to his simple assertion 
as that of a faithful and noble man. When, however, we all 
persisted in exacting the oath, he promised that he would swear 
forthwith, for fear lest he might by that very circumstance be 
detected to be a heretic, in case he should remain obstinate in 
declining the oath, which refusal was in conformity with the 
tenets of this heresy. Accordingly, shortly afterwards the relics 
of the saints were with due honor produced and received with 
such solemn reverence and devotion, so much so, that the faithful 
among the people were moved to tears, and their hiding-places 
had more charms for the heretics who had assembled than such 
a sight. During the chaunt, which we sang, shedding plenteous 



486 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOTEDEN. A.D. 1178. 

tears, to invoke the presence of the Holy Ghost, an evident 
tremor and paleness came over the said Peter ; insomuch, that 
both the colour of his countenance forsook him, and his strength 
of mind departed. For how, on the approach of the Holy Ghost, 
was any spirit to remain in its adversary ? You might have 
seen the man shaking as though with a paralytic attack, no 
longer retaining his power of language nor his senses, although 
he was said by all to be a person of such great eloquence that 
he had been accustomed to excel all others in speaking. Why 
say more ? All standing by, the unhappy man making oath 
that he would explain the truth as to his belief on all the 
articles of faith on which we should question him, a wondrous 
thing took place, and one in such a scene most agreable, by 
reason of the pious delight it afforded us. The book was 
open upon which he had sworn ; and one of the persons stand- 
ing by, as a sort of pious amusement desiring to obtain a 
presage of what was to come by means of the expression he 
should hit upon, the following text of Scripture met his 
view : ' What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of 
God ? Hast thou come to torment us before the time ?' ^ 
Truly, Lord Jesus, they had nothing to do with Thee, whom 
the heavenly Father had cut off from the true vine as un- 
fruitful branches, and had thrown abroad that they might 
wither away ! But with us, who were assembled in Thy 
name, the increase of our gladness was multiplied, and the 
glories of Thy might resounded in thanksgivings and in the voice 
of praise. At length, Peter was simply required on the strength 
of his oath to confess to us his belief as to the sacrament of the 
altar without any concealment thereon ; however, he did not 
with his lips confess to the court for the purpose of procuring 
safety that which he did not believe in his heart ; but on the 
contrary, whereas he had made a determination to lie on all 
points, he made a true disclosure of his own falseness ; and by 
a new doctrine of his, proceeded to assert that the holy bread 
of eternal life, when consecrated by the ministration of the 
priest with the word of God, does not become the body of the 
Lord. Upon this, all arose, overwhelming him in a manner with 
the tears, which his contempt for the sacraments of Christ pro- 
duced, and the Christian compassion that was felt for the 
wretched man, summoned forth. No more was needed. They 
23 Matt. viii. 29. 



A U. 1178. LKTTEB OF HENET, ABBAT OF CLAIKVAL. 487 

gave their answer to the earl ; he was adjudged to be guilty of 
heresy, and immediately, with the most positive promises on 
the part of his relations, was consigned to the public place 
of confinement. Rumours of what had happened flew through 
the streets and suburbs of this most extensive city. The 
mouths of the faithful were opened, and the lips of the Catholic 
people were unsealed, Christ, to thy praises ; then for the first 
time, as it were, did the brightness of faith burst forth in that 
city, and the state that had so shortly before been despaired of, 
breathed again to entertain hopes of everlasting salvation. 
From that moment the word of God waxed stronger, and was 
daily multiplied ; so that the whole face of the city seemed 
more joyous, in that it emerged from the darkness of error 
into the brilliancy of the light of truth. In the meantime, 
Peter, coming to himself, and being moved by the Lord who 
looked down upon him, on seeing that he was worthy of death 
in this as well as in a future world, having sent many media- 
tors, asked to be allowed the means of making satisfaction, and 
promised to show the fruits of conversion, if he should be libe- 
rated from the fear of impending death to the profitable enjoy- 
ment of a better mode of life. He came accordingly, was re- 
ceived by us, and was placed in sight of the contrite people 
with his body naked, thus putting off the corruption of his 
former infidelity. There, in the presence of all, he acknow- 
ledged himself a heretic, there, by his hands, he plighted his 
faith, there, he renounced his errors ; there, giving his right 
hand, he made oath in the presence of all, and gave sureties 
to the earl, as well as the knights and his principal fellow- 
citizens, that he would submit himself to eveiy mandate 
of my lord the legate, and would in all things obey his com- 
n mnds. Upon this, proclamation was made to the people that 
they were all to meet on the following day, at the church of 
Saint Saturninus, to hear and to see in solemn form what 
mode of penance the said Peter would have enjoined upon 
him to perform. Accordingly, on the following day, as they 
had been warned, all met together, and such a multitude, such 
dense crowds, that, without excessive squeezing, there hardly 
remained within the very horns of the altar a vacant place for 
my lord the legate when celebrating the solemn service of 
the mass. And, behold ! in the presence of this multitude so 
vast, Peter, who was now in our hands, was led through the 



488 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEIT. A.D. 1178. 

doors of the church naked and without shoes, the hishop of 
Toulouse and the abbat of Saint Saturninus scourging him on 
either side, until he was placed on the steps of the altar at the 
legate's feet. Here, in the face of the Church, he was recon- 
ciled to the sacraments thereof, abjuring all heresy, and all 
heretics being cursed by him. After this, his possessions being 
all forfeited and confiscated, the following penance was enjoined 
on him : That, within forty days, he should depart in exile 
from his country, for Jerusalem, there to remain three years 
in the service of the poor ; and, in the meantime, on each 
Lord's Day, he was ordered to go round the churches of the city 
of Toulouse, naked and without shoes, and attended by the rods 
of discipline ; to restore the property belonging to churches which 
he had taken away ; to give back all usurious interest he had 
received ; to repair the losses of the poor whom he had in- 
jured ; and to demolish from the very foundation a castle of 
his which he had profaned with the conventicles of the here- 
tics. Merciful God ! what tears did holy joyousness there 
pour forth, what thanksgivings and praises did the rejoicing 
and devout people add to the heavenly choirs, when such a 
man as this was drawn forth from the lurking-places of infi- 
delity, and this most ravening wolf was transformed into a 
sheep of Israel. After this, on his being dismissed, my lord 
the legate sent to others with the intention of excommunicating 
them, great numbers of whom either public suspicion or pri- 
vate accusation had pointed out. As for ourselves, joy having 
at length sprung up attended by tears, we asked for leave to 
return, on the ground that pressing business of our chapter 
now required our return ; which was accordingly granted to 
us, but upon condition, that we should proceed to the dio- 
cese of Alby, to warn Roger, the lord of the territory, 
namely, that of Bediers, both to release the bishop of Alby, whom 
he kept in prison and in the custody of the heretics, and to re- 
form the whole of his territories, in conformity with the man- 
date of my lord the legate, by expelling all heretics therefrom. 
Accordingly, upon our repairing thither, together with the 
above-mentioned bishop of Bath, we entered this most aban- 
doned district, which, like a sink of all wickedness, received 
whole sewers of heresy that flowed from all sides into it. 
On this, the before-named Eoger betook himself to the most 
distant and inaccessible part of his territories, both run- 



A.D. 1178. LETTER OF HENRY, ABBAT OF CLAIBVAL. 489 

ning away through a bad conscience and through despair of 
the goodness of his cause. For he, an author of wicked- 
ness, hated the light of truth, and could not endure our 
approach for the purposes of a conference, having totally 
devoted himself to works of darkness. However, we arrived 
at a certain fortress of his, extremely well fortified, which, 
appropriately and singularly, the inhabitants called by the 
name of the Castle. Here lived his wife, attended with 
a large retinue of knights and a very extensive household. 
Nearly all the inhabitants of this castle were either heretics 
or abettors of the heretics, although being held in check by 
the sole might of the Lord, they presumed not even to whisper 
anything against the faith which we preached. For, although 
we were placed in their hands, and were fettered as it were 
by being in their power, being surrounded by multitudes of 
heretics on every side, still, the word of the Lord was not 
checked, so as to prevent us from attacking them in repeated 
censures and reproaches. And when we saw that they did 
not dare to make any answer whatever, we adjudged the 
said Roger to be a traitor, a heretic, and a perjurer for having 
violated the safety of the bishop, and boldly, in the name 
of Christ, pronounced him to have departed from the faith, 
and to be condemned, as by a public excommunication, in 
behalf of our lord the pope and the before-named kings, in 
presence of his wife and his knights. Behold, how evident it 
is that from henceforth a wide door is thrown open to Christian 
princes for them to avenge the injuries of Christ, and to make 
the wilderness, as it were, the garden of the Lord, and the 
desert the delights of paradise. Moreover, that it may not 
be alleged that little or nothing could be done against them, 
Be it known to all, that it was the general opinion in the city 
of Toulouse that if this visitation had been delayed for the 
space of three years, there would have been hardly found one 
person in it who called upon the name of Christ. In addition 
to all this, the said earl of Saint Gilles has confirmed by oath, 
before the people of the city, that, from this time forward, he 
will neither, for gift or entreaty, show favour to the heretics." 
In the same year, the king of England, the father, crossed 
over from Normandy to England, and at Woodstock knighted 
his son Geoffrey, earl of Brittany ; who, immediately upon 
receiving the rank of a knight, passed over from England 



490 ANNALS OF KOGER DE EOVEDEN'. A.D. 1178. 

to Normandy, and on the confines of France and Normandy, 
giving his attention to military exercises, took pleasure in 
making himself a match for knights of reputation in arms ; and 
the more ardently did he seek for fame to attend his prowess, 
from knowing that his brothers, king Henry, and Richard, earl 
of Poitou, had gained great renown in arms. However, they 
had but one common feeling, and that was, to excel others in 
feats of arms ; being well aware that the science of war, if not 
practised beforehand, cannot be gained when it becomes neces- 
sary. Nor indeed can the athlete bring high spirit to the con- 
test, who has never been trained to practise it. It is the man 
who has seen his own blood, whose teeth have rattled beneath 
another's fist, who when tripped up has strove against his ad- 
versary with his entire body, and though thrown has not lost 
his mettle, and who, as oft as he fell, has risen more deter- 
mined, more bold, who goes forth with ardent hopes to the com- 
bat. For valour when aroused adds greatly to itself; transitory 
is the glory of the mind that is subjected to terror. Without 
any fault of his, he is overcome by the immensity of the weight, 
who comes to bear the burden and is unequal thereto, zealous 
though he may be. Well is the reward paid for toil, when is 
found the temple of victory. 

In the same year, William, archbishop of Rheims, came into 
England on a pilgrimage to the blessed Thomas the Martyr, at 
Canterbury, and was met, with congratulations, by the king of 
England, the father, who honored him with becoming presents. 
In the same year, pope Alexander sent his legates into all parts 
pf the world that were subject to him, for the purpose of in- 
viting the prelates of the Church to come to Rome at the be- 
ginning of Lent in the following year, to hold a solemn and 
general council there. For when the violence of maladies, 
with rapid steps, is hastening to the very vitals, no salutary 
counsel is able to extend a hand to check it, except through 
the conference of numbers. Accordingly, there came into 
England two legates, namely, Albert de Suma, who was com- 
missioned to summon the bishops and abbats of England and 
Normandy, and Peter de Santa Agatha, whose commission 
it was to summon the bishops and abbats of Scotland and Ire- 
land and the adjoining islands. Accordingly, the said Peter de 
Santa Agatha, for obtaining licence to pass through the territories 
of the king of England, made oath, touching the holy Evan- 



A. D. 1178. LETTER OF POPE ALEXANDER. 491 

gelists, that in his legateship he would attempt nothing to the 
detriment of the king or his kingdom, and that he would re- 
turn through his dominions, which he did accordingly. 

In the same year pope Alexander wrote to John king of 
the Indies to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Alexander, sent to John, king of the Indies. 

" Alexander the bishop, servant of the servants of God, 
to his most dearly beloved son in Christ, the illustrious and 
mighty king of the Indies, the most holy of priests, 24 * health, 
and the Apostolic benediction. The Apostolic See, over which, 
unworthy as we are, we preside, is the head and mistress of 
all who believe in Christ ; the same being attested by our Lord, 
who said unto Saint Peter, whose successor, unworthy though 
we may be, we are, ' Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will 
build my church.' 25 This rock, then, Christ has willed to be 
the foundation of His church, which He declares shall be shaken 
by no storms and tempests of the winds. Therefore, not 
without reason did Saint Peter, upon whom He founded this 
church, especially and in chief deserve to receive supremacy 
among the Apostles. To him it was said by the Lord ; ' I will 
give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the gates 
of hell shall not prevail against it ; and whatsoever thou shalt 
bind on earth shall be bound in heaven ; and whatsoever thou 
shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.' 26 We had 
heard long ago, from the accounts of many, and from common 
report, what unvarying diligence you have shown in pious works 
since you have embraced the Christian religion, and how you 
devote your attention to what is pleasing and acceptable to 
God. But our beloved son, master Philip, our physician, and a 
member of 'our household, who says that he has conversed in 
those parts with the great and honorable men of your kingdom, 
concerning your intentions and plans, like a cautious and discreet 
man, circumspect and prudent, has constantly and anxiously 
signified unto us, that he has heard for certain from them, 
that it is your wish and purpose to be instructed in the Catholic 
and Apostolic doctrines, and that it is your fervent desire that 

24 * This was Presbyter, or Prester John a supposed king of the interior 
of Asia. It is supposed that the person here meant was Oungh Khan, 
slain hy Gengis Khan, A.D. 1202. This letter is probably a fabrication of 
the Nestorian Missionaries, who spread reports of his conversion. 
'* Matt. xv. Id. * Matt. xvi. 19. 



492 AN"NALS OF ROGER ITE HOVEDEK. A.D. 11/8. 

you and the dominions entrusted unto your highness should 
never appear to hold anything in your belief which may in 
any degree differ from, or be at variance with the doctrines of 
the Apostolic See. TJpon which, we do indeed greatly congra- 
tulate you as a most dearly beloved son, and do give exceeding 
thanks to Him from whom every gift proceeds, adding wish 
upon wish and prayer upon prayer, that He who hath caused 
you to receive the name of Christian may of His ineffable 
goodness inspire your mind with a wish to obtain all know- I 
ledge, which ought to be imparted to the profession of Chris- 
tianity, as to all the articles of the faith. For in truth he 
cannot hope to obtain salvation from the profession of Chris- 
tianity, who does not in deed and in word act in accord- 
ance with that profession ; as it is not sufficient for a person 
to be called by the name of Catholic, who of himself thinks 
otherwise than the Catholic and Apostolic doctrines teach ; in 
accordance with what the Lord says in the Gospel : ' Not every 
one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the king- 
dom of heaven ; but he that doeth the will of my Father 
which is in heaven.' 27 This also is added to our commenda- 
tions of your merit, that, as the aforesaid prudent master 
Philip asserts he has heard from your people, you long with 
the most ardent desire to have a church in your city, and an 
altar at Jerusalem where virtuous men of your kingdom may 
abide, and be more fully instructed in Apostolic doctrines, 
through whom you and the people of your kingdom may here- 
after receive and hold the said doctrines. We, therefore, who, 
though of insufficient merits, are placed in the chair of Saint 
Peter, in obedience to what the Apostle says, acknowledging our- 
selves as ' debtors to the wise and the unwise, the rich and the 
poor,' 28 do feel every possible anxiety for the salvation of your- 
self and of your people, and do wish to reclaim you from those 
matters in which you deviate frem the Christian and Catholic 
faith, as indeed by the duties of the office which we have un- 
dertaken, we are most zealously bound to do ; for the Lord 
Himself said to Saint Peter, whom he appointed to be the chief 
of all the Apostles, 'When thou art converted, strengthen thy 
brethren.' 29 Therefore, although it seems to be a most difficult 

47 Matt. vii. 21. 2S Rom. i. 14. This quotation is not quite 

correct according to our version ; the words are, " I am debtor both to 
the Greeks and to the barbarians, both to the wise and to the unwise.* 

> St. Luke xxi. 32. 






A.D. 1178. LETTER OF POPE ALEXANDEB. 493 

and laborious matter to send any one from our side to your pre- 
sence, amid so many hardships and such varied dangers of the 
places on the road, and into countries far distant and unknown, 
yet, considering the duties of our office, and bearing in mind 
your purposes and intentions, we do send the aforesaid Philip 
our physician, and one of our household, a discreet, circumspect 
and cautious man unto your mightiness ; and we do trust in the 
mercy of Jesus Christ, that, if it is your wish to persevere in 
that purpose and intention, which we understand you, by the 
inspiration of the Lord, to have formed, being forthwith, by the 
mercy of God, instructed in the articles of the Christian faith 
in which you and your people seem to differ from us, you may 
henceforth have no cause to fear that anything will arise from 
your error to impede the salvation of you or your people, or in 
you cast a stigma upon the name of Christianity. We do, 
therefore, request your excellency, and do advise and exhort 
you in the Lord, that, for the respect you pay to Saint Peter 
and to ourselves, you will receive the said Philip, as an honest, 
discreet and cautious man, and as one sent from our side, with 
all due kindness, and will treat him courteously and respect- 
fully. And if it is your will and purpose, as indeed it fully 
ought to be, to be instructed in the Apostolic doctrine on those 
points which the said Philip will, on our behalf, explain to you, 
you will carefully listen to him, and hear him to the end, and 
will send back to us, together with him, respectable persons, 
and letters sealed with your seal, whereby we may be enabled 
fully to learn your purpose and intentions ; for the more exalted 
and mighty you appear, and the less you seem to be puffed up 
with your riches and power, so much the more willingly, both 
as to granting you a church in your own city, as well as 
greeting altars in the church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, 
and at Jerusalem in the church of the Sepulchre of our Lord, 
and other matters which in justice you shall request, will we 
take care to pay attention to your requests, and more effec- 
tually to listen to the same ; inasmuch as it is our wish, in 
every way that, with the help of God, we possibly can, to 
promote your desires hereon, which have been so worthy of ex- 
ceeding commendation, and is our ardent desire to save the 
souls of you and yours unto the Lord. Given at Venice, at 
the Kialto, on the fifth day before the calends of October." 

In the same year, Kichard, earl of Poitou, came with a 
considerable force to the city of Anse, and found there the count 



494 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEJT. A.D. 1179. 

of Bigorre, a prisoner in the city gaol ; whom the citizens de- 
livered into his hands : on which the count of Bigorre gave to 
the earl of Poitou, for his ransom, Claremont, and the castle 
of Montbrun. ^.er this, he took Gengay, Martillan, Grunville, 
Agenville, Tailleburg, and Pons, and levelled all these castles 
with the ground. Buger, count of Angouleme, also surrendered 
to him the city of Angouleme, and the castle of Montignuc, 
on which he destroyed their fortifications. 

In the year of grace 1179, being the twenty-fifth year 
of the reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the 
said Henry was in England, at Winchester, on the day of 
the Nativity of our Lord. During the period of this festival, 
at Oxenhale, in the lordship of Darlington, in England, the 
earth raised itself up on high, in appearance like a lofty tower, 
and so remained, without moving, from the ninth hour of the 
day until the evening, and then fell down with such a dreadful 
crash, that it alarmed all the neighbourhood, and the earth 
swallowed it up, and made there a very deep pit, which re- 
mains there as a testimony of the circumstance even to the 
present day. 

After the Nativity of our Lord, there came to England, from 
Ireland, Laurence, archbishop of Dublin, Catholicus, arch- 
bishop of Tuam, and five or six bishops, who were about to 
proceed to the council at Rome. In the same manner, there 
passed through England from the kingdom of Scotland a con- 
siderable number of bishops and abbats. All these, both those 
from Ireland as well as Scotland and the other islands, on 
passing through England, in order to obtain leave to pass, made 
oath that they would not seek any detriment to the king or to 
his kingdom. From England, however, there went but four 
bishops to Rome, namely, Hugh, bishop of Durham, John, 
bishop of Norwich, Robert, bishop of Hereford, and Reginald, 
bishop of Bath, with a considerable number of abbats : for tho 
bishops of England stoutly asserted that only four bishops of 
England ought to be sent to Rome to a general council of our 
lord the pope. 

All being accordingly assembled, at Rome, in the presence 
of our lord the pope Alexander, the pope taking his seat in the 
church of the Lateran, on an elevated place, together with his 
cardinals, chief men, and senators, and the magistrates of the 
city, commenced holding his council, which began on the second 



A.D. 1179. THE DECREES OF POPE ALEXANDER. 495 

day of the third week in Lent, being the third day before the 
nones of March. In the same manner he held the council a 
second day, on the fourth day of the following week, being the 
second day before the ides of March. At this council, William, 
archbishop of Rheims, was made a cardinal priest and titular 
of Santa Sabina, and Henry, abbat of Clairval, was made cardi- 
nal bishop of Albano. Our lord the pope held the council the 
third day on the second day of the week before Palm Sunday, 
being the fourteenth day before the calends of April. At this 
council, he enacted that the decrees underwritten should be 
universally observed. 

THE DECREES OF POPE ALEXANDER. 

Of the Election of the Roman Pontiff. 

" Although it is manifest that statutes sufficient have been 
promulgated by our predecessors for the purpose of avoiding 
discord in the election of the Roman Pontiff, still however, 
inasmuch as since then, by reason of the audacity of an un- 
becoming ambition, the Church has oftentimes endured grievous 
divisions, we also, for the purpose of avoiding the said evil, 
have, with the consent of our brethren and the approba- 
tion of this holy council, thought proper to add somewhat 
thereto. We do therefore enact, that, if by chance, through 
some enemy sowing tares among the cardinals, there shall 
not be an entire agreement as to the election of a new Pontiff, 
and two-thirds shall agree thereon while the remaining one- 
third shall refuse to agree thereto, or shall presume to nomi- 
nate or ordain any other, in such case he is to be held by the 
universal Church, without any exception, to be the Roman 
Pontiff who shall have been elected and acknowledged by the 
two- thirds. And if any person, trusting in the votes or no- 
mination of the remaining one-third, shall usurp that name, 
inasmuch as he cannot in reason so do, both he himself and 
those who shall acknowledge him shall be subject to the penal- 
ties of excommunication, and be visited with the deprivation 
of all sacred orders ; and even the communion of the holy 
viaticum shall be denied unto them, except when in their last 
moments ; and, unless they come to their senses, they are to re- 
ceive their portion with Dathan and Abiram, whom the earth 
swallowed up alive. And further, if any one shall be elected 



496 A1TNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1179. 

to the Apostolic office by fewer than two-thirds, then, unless 
there shall he a more full agreement, he is in nowise to he re- 
cognized as such, and he is to be subject to the penalty afore- 
said, unless with all humility he shall be ready to withdraw 
such claim. Still, however, let no prejudice be caused hereby 
to the canonical constitutions, upon which subjects the opinions 
of the larger and wiser part ought to have the preponderance, 
inasmuch as whatever comes to be a matter of doubt to them, 
can always be decided by the judgment of one superior. But, 
in the Roman Church, something of a spiritual nature is here 
being determined upon, where recourse cannot be had to a 
superior. 31 

How prelates are to pass sentence upon those subject to their 
authority. 

" A. very reprehensible custom has sprung up in some places, 
where both our brethren and fellow-bishops, as well as some 
archdeacons even, thinking that some will, in their causes tried 
before them, resort to appeal, having first issued no admonition 
whatever, proceed to pronounce against them sentence of sus- 
pension and excommunication. On the other hand, also, others, 
dreading the sentence and canonical discipline of their ecclesi- 
astical superior, do without any difficulty interpose their right 
of appeal, and usurp the same as a defence for their iniquity, 
whereas it is known to have been instituted as a safeguard for 
the innocent. Therefore, to the end that neither the sentence 
of the prelate may be used to oppress those subject to him, 
nor those subject may be enabled, at their sole option, under 
the pretext of appeal, to escape correction by their prelates, by 
this present decree we do enact, that neither shall prelates pass 
sentence of suspension or excommunication upon those sub- 
ject to them, without first issuing canonical admonition, (un- 
less it shall so happen that the fault is such as of its own nature 
to involve the penalty of suspension or excommunication), nor 
shall those who are subject, in contravention of ecclesiastical 
discipline, before the commencement of the trial, seek to 
take refuge in the words of appeal. But, if any person shall 
think himself absolutely necessitated to appeal, then a com- 
petent time is to be named for him, within which to prose- 
cute his appeal. And if he shall neglect to prosecute his 
31 This passage appears to be imperfect. It seems to allude to a case 
of interregnum in the Papacy. 



A.D. 1179. THE DECREES OF POPE ALEXAISTDEE. 497 

appeal within such limited time, then the bishop is to be at liberty 
to use his own authority. And if, in any matter, any person 
shall make an appeal, and on his making his appearance who was 
appealed against, he who has appealed shall neglect to appear, 
then, in case he shall have any property, he is to make a com- 
petent return for the costs of the other, that so, at least, 
being deterred, a person may not be too ready to appeal to 
the detriment of another. But in especial, in places of 
religious orders, we wish this to be observed, that neither 
monks, nor any religious whatsoever, when they are to re- 
ceive correction for any excesses, are to presume to appeal 
against the regular discipline of their prelate and chapter, but 
humbly and dutifully to receive what they know is enjoined 
them for the more effectually securing their salvation. 

Sow prelates are to be entertained by their subjects. 

" Whereas the Apostle 32 ordered that 'he and his followers 
should be sustained by the labours of their own hands, in 
order that he might leave no room for preaching to false 
apostles, and might not be burdensome to those to whom 
he preached, it is known to be a great grievance and one 
deserving of correction, that some of our brethren and fellow- 
bishops prove so expensive in their entertainment to those 
subject to them, that for reasons of this nature the subjects 
are compelled to expose for sale the very ornaments of their 
churches, and a short hour consumes the food earned in a long 
time ; we do, therefore, enact, that archbishops visiting their 
provinces shall, according to the different character of the pro- 
vinces and the means of the churches, under no circumstance 
exceed a retinue of forty or fifty horses, bishops twenty or thirty, 
rardinals twenty or five-and-twenty, while archdeacons are to 
be content with five or seven, and deans with two horses. And 
further, they are not to go about with hounds and hawks, or to 
require sumptuous entertainments, but to receive with thank- 
fulness that which shall properly and consistently with the 
entertainer's means, be provided for them. We do also forbid 
that bishops shall presume to oppress their subjects with tal- 
lages or exactions, and so' conduct themselves as to appear to 
seek not what is their own, but what belongs to Jesus Christ. 
For, as the Apostle says, ' The children ought not to lay up for 

32 Saint Paul. 
VOL. I. K K 



498 ANNALS OF ROGEK BE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1179. 

the parents, but the parents for the children,' 33 it seems to be 
greatly at variance with the affection of a father, if those who 
are the governors make them burdensome to their subjects, 
whom in all their necessities they ought to .cherish, like good 
shepherds. Also, archdeacons and deans are not to. presume to 
demand any exactions or tallages 34 from priests or clerks. 
And further, what we have said above relative to the num- 
ber of horses that are to be allowed, is to be observed in 
those places the revenues and ecclesiastical dues of which are 
ample. But in poor places, it is our wish that such limits 
should be observed, that the lesser ones shall not have to com- 
plain that a hardship is inflicted on them by the arrival of the 
greater, so that those who were in the habit of using a 
smaller number of horses may not suppose that they are in- 
dulged with leave to use more. Indeed, considering the many 
necessitous cases that occasionally arise, we could endure that, 
if a manifest and reasonable cause should be found to exist, 
they should be enabled to demand some slight assistance to- 
gether with our brotherly love. 

That new imposts are not to be made in churches. 

11 Inasmuch as in the body of the Church, all ought to be 
treated with loving-kindness, and that which has been received 
gratuitously ought gratuitously to be bestowed, it is a most 
shocking thing that in some churches venality is said to pre- 
vail to such a degree, that, for installing bishops or abbats, 
or any other ecclesiastical persons, or introducing priests 
into the church, as also for the burial and obsequies of 
the dead, and the benedictions of the newly -married, or 
other ecclesiastical sacraments, money is demanded : and that 
he who stands in need of these things, cannot obtain the same 
unless he takes care to fill the hand of the bestower thereof. 
Many imagine that it is lawful for them to act thus, on this 
ground, because they think that the custom as to the dead has 
been established by lengthened usage, not sufficiently con- 
sidering, inasmuch as they are blinded by avarice, that the 
longer offences have kept the mind fettered, so much the more 
grievous they are. In order, therefore, that this may not be 
done in future, we strictly forbid that money shall be demanded 
for installing ecclesiastical persons, instituting priests, burying 
2 Cor. xii. 14. Taxes. 



A.D. 1179. THE DECBEES OF POPE ALEXANDER. 499 

the dead, blessing the newly-married, or any other of the 
sacraments. And if any person shall presume in contraven- 
tion hereof to sell the same, then let him know that he will 
have his portion with Gehazi, whose deeds he has imitated in 
the exacting of a disgraceful gift. We do, moreover, forbid 
any new imposts to be exacted from churches, either by bishops 
or abbats, or any other prelate, or the old ones to be increased, 
or that such persons shall presume to appropriate any part of 
the revenues to their own use ; but the same liberty which 
the greater ones desire to be preserved for themselves, let them 
also, with good will, preserve for the lesser ones. And if any 
person shall do otherwise than this, what he so does is to be 
deemed null and void. 

Christians are forbidden to enter the service of the Saracens. 

" To such a degree has shocking cupidity taken possession of 
the minds of some, that, whereas they glory in the name of 
Christians, they carry arms to the Saracens, and by supplying 
them with arms and necessaries for the purpose of warring 
against the Christians, show themselves their equals or even 
their superiors in wickedness. There are some also, who, by 
reason of their cupidity, exercise the art and craft of pilots, in 
the galleys and piratical vessels of the Saracens. Such persons 
therefore we do order to be cut off from the communion of the 
Church, and for their iniquity to be subjected to excommunica- 
tion, and to be mulcted with confiscation of their property by 
the Catholic princes and rulers of states, and if they are taken, 
to become the slaves of those so taking them. We do also order 
that throughout the churches of the cities on the coast, a re- 
^teated and solemn sentence of excommunication shall be pro- 
nounced against them. Those also are to be subject to the pe- 
nalty of excommunication, who presume either to take captive 
or to despoil of their property llomans, or indeed any other 
Christians, when voyaging for purposes of merchandize or any 
other becoming reasons. Those also, who, with damnable 
avarice, dare to despoil Christians who have suffered shipwreck 
of their property, when according to the rules of religion they 
are bound to aid them, are to know that they are subjected to 
excommunication, unless they restore what they have so taken 
away. 

K K 2 



500 ANNALS OF KOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1179. 

That tournaments shall not le held. 

"Continuing in the footsteps of popes Innocent and Eugenius, 
of blessed memory, our predecessors, we do forbid those detesta- 
ble revels and shows, which are commonly called tournaments, 
at which, by proclamation, knights are wont to meet together, 
and rashly engage with each other, to show off their prowess 
and valour, and from which, deaths of men and perils to souls 
do so often ensue. And, if any one of such persons shall meet 
with his death on such an occasion, although absolution is not 
denied him, still he is to be deprived of Christian burial. 

On keeping the truces. 

" We do order truces to be inviolably observed by all persons 
from the fourth day of the week after sunset, until the seventh 
day of the week after sunrise, both from the Advent of our 
Lord until the octave of Epiphany, and from Septuagesima 
until the octave of Easter. And if any person shall attempt 
to break such truce, if after the third warning he shall not 
make reparation, then his bishop is to pronounce sentence of 
excommunication, and announce the same in writing to the 
neighbouring bishops. And no bishop is to receive him who 
is thus excommunicated to communion ; but, on the contrary, 
each is to confirm the sentence, the copy of which he has re- 
ceived. And if any one shall presume to violate this com- 
mand, then let him be subject to the peril of losing his orders. 
And, inasmuch as a threefold rope is broken with difficulty, we 
do order that bishops, having respect only to God and the 
salvation of the people, and all cupidity apart, shall use their 
advice and assistance for the purpose of the strict main- 
tenance of peace, and not neglect the same through love or 
hatred for any person whatsoever. And if any one shall be 
found to be lukewarm in this work of God, he is to submit to 
the loss of his own dignity. 

On annulling ordinations made by Anti-popes. 
" Re-enacting that which was done by our predecessor, pope 
Innocent, of blessed memory, we do pronounce the ordinations 
made by Octavianus and Guido, the heresiarchs, as also by 
John of Struma, their follower, to be null and void, as also 
ordinations made by the persons so ordained by them ; and 
we do further add, that those who have received ecclesiastical 
dignities or benefices, by means of the aforesaid schismatics, 



A.D. 1179. THE DECBEES OF POPE ALEXANDER. 501 

shall resign what they have so acquired. All alienations also 
or seizures of things ecclesiastical, which have been made by 
the said schismatics, or by laymen, are to be wanting in validity, 
and to return to the church without any incumbrance what- 
ever thereon. And if any one shall presume to contravene 
this command, he is to know that he is subjected to excommu- 
nication. As for those who, of their own accord, have taken 
oath to maintain the schism, we do decree that they shall re- 
main suspended from their holy orders and dignities. 

What sort of persons they ought to be, who are to be elected to 
govern the Church. 

"As in all holy orders and ecclesiastical offices, both maturity 
of age, gravity of manners, and skill in literature, are to be 
sought for, s6 ought the same much more rigidly to be exacted 
in the case of a bishop, who, being placed in charge of others, 
ought in himself to show how others are to preserve the same 
qualities in the house of the Lord ; to the end that what has 
been done by some persons, through the necessities of the 
times, may not be adopted as an example by posterity. We do, 
therefore, by the present decree enact that no one shall be elected 
to be a bishop, who has not passed the thirtieth year of his age, 
and is not born in lawful wedlock, and who cannot be shown to 
be of praiseworthy life and learning. And when he, who has 
been so elected, shall have received the confirmation of his 
election, and the administration of ecclesiastical effects, the 
time having expired that is pointed out by the canons for the 
consecration of bishops, he is to have free option to dis- 
pose of the benefices which belong to him, for the purpose of 
distribution. Also, the lower offices, such, for instance, as 
fteaneries or archdeaconries, and others which have the care 
of souls annexed, no person whatever is to receive, nor yet the 
government of parochial churches, unless he shall have attained 
the twenty-fifth year of his age, and is of praiseworthy know- 
ledge and manners. 35 And [in case of misbehaviour] they are 

35 Here follow these words. " Cum autem assumptus fuerit, si Archidia- 
conus in Diaconum ; Decanus et reliqui admoniti non fuerint, praefixo a 
canonibus tempore in presbyteros ordinati," They are evidently frag- 
mentary and incomplete, to such an extent that it seems impossible to 
guess the general meaning of the passage. It is clear that at least one 
important sentence is omitted, if not more. 



502 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 11T9. 

to be removed from those offices, and the same are to be bestowed 
on another, who is both willing and able becomingly to fill the 
same, and they are not to profit by the pretext of appealing, 
if they should chance to desire to defend themselves in the 
transgression of these ordinances, by means of appeal. This, 
indeed, we order to be observed, not only as to those in future 
to be promoted, but those also who have been already promoted, 
if the canons do not impede such a course. If the clergy 
shall elect any one in contravention of the form above stated 
they are to understand that they are deprived of the power of 
electing on that occasion, and from their ecclesiastical benefices 
suspended for a period of three years. For it is a becoming 
thing, that those whom the fear of God does not withhold from 
evil, the severity of ecclesiastical discipline should at least re- 
strain. And as for the bishop, if he shall act contrary to these 
mandates, or shall consent to such being done, he is to lose 
his power in the disposal of the offices above-named, and ordi- 
nation is to be made by the chapter, or by the metropolitan, 
if the chapter shall not agree thereon. 36 

Of Heretics. 

" As Saint Leo says, ' Although the discipline of the Church, 
being contented with the judgment of the priesthood, avoids 
a blood-thirsty vengeance,' still it is aided by the enact- 
ments of Catholic princes, that so men may often find a salutary 
remedy, while they dread that corporal punishment may 
befall them. Wherefore, inasmuch as, in Gascony, the Al- 
bigeois, and other places inhabited by the heretics whom 
some style ' Catarri,' others ' Publicani,' and others ' Paterini,' 
and others call by other names, their damnable perverseness has 
waxed so strong that they practise their wickedness no longer 
in secret as elsewhere, but publicly expose their errors, and 
draw the simple and weak to be their accomplices, we do de- 
cree them and their protectors and harborers to be excommu- 
nicated, and under pain of excommunication we do forbid any 
one to dare to receive or to encourage them in his house or on 
his lands, or to have any transactions with them. And if they 
shall depart this life in their sin, and not under the protection 

36 The meaning of the latter part of this enactment is involved in great 
obscurity ; probably in consequence of the evident omission in the middle 
of it. 



A. U. 1179. THE DECREES OF POPE ALEXANDER. 503 

of any privileges granted by our indulgence, then on no pretence 
whatever is any contribution to be made for their interment, 
nor are they to receive burial among Christians. And as regards 
the Brabanters, Arragonese, Navarrese, Biscayans, and Cote- 
rells, 37 who exercise such enormous cruelties against Christians, 
as not to pay any respect to either churches or monasteries, or 
to spare widows or orphans, young or old, or any age or sex, but 
who, after the manner of pagans, lay waste and ravage in every 
direction, we do similarly enact. "We do also enact that those who 
shall hire, or retain, or encourage them, shall, throughout the 
communities where such excesses are committed, on the Lord's 
day and other solemn days be publicly proclaimed as excom- 
municated in all the churches there, and shall be held to be 
condemned with the same sentence and punishment in all 
respects as the aforesaid heretics, and shall not be received into 
communion with the Church, unless they first abjure the said 
abominable societies and heresies respectively. Those also are 
to understand who are connected with them by any tie, that 
they are relieved from all duties of fealty, or homage, or any 
obedience to them whatsoever, so long as they shall persist in 
such great iniquity ; and we do further command them and 
all the faithful, for the remission of their sins, manfully to 
oppose such dreadful ravages, and in arms to defend the Chris- 
tian people against them. Their property also is to be confis- 
cated, and the superior lords are to be at liberty to subject men of 
this description to slavery. As for those, however, who shall so 
separate from them in true repentance, let them not doubt that 
they will obtain the indulgence granted to sinners, and the bless- 
ings of an eternal reward. And further, trusting in the mercy 
f God, and confiding in the authority of Saint Peter and Saint 
Paul the Apostles, we do remit two years of enjoined penance 
to those faithful Christians who shall take up arms, and, at the 
advice of their own or other prelates, fight against them ; and 
if they shall be detained a considerable time in so doing, then 
we do leave it to the discretion of the bishops to whose care 
37 These were lawless hireling soldiers, who were guilty of great out- 
rages ; they were said to have received their name of " Coterelli' ' from their 
use of a large knife called " coterel," the same being given them by the 
people of Toulouse ; while others derive it from " cotarius," a cottager, 

tit being their habit to levy heavy contributions on people of that class. 
They were also called " Ruptarii," " Routiers," or " Ryters," and were 
much employed by the early kings of England. 
' . 



504 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1179. 

these matters shall be entrusted, that so, at their option, in 
proportion to the amount of labor expended, a still greater 
indulgence may be granted them. But as for those who shall 
neglect to pay obedience to the admonition of the bishops 
hereon, we do order them to be debarred from receiving the 
body and blood of our Lord: while those in the meantime, who, 
in their zeal for the faith, shall undertake the laborious task of 
uprooting them, like those who repair to the sepulchre of our 
Lord, we do take under the protection of the Church, and do 
decree that they shall remain secure from all molestation, both 
in property and person. And if any person shall in the mean- 
time presume to molest them, then sentence of excommuni- 
cation is to be hurled against him by the bishop of the place, and 
let such sentence be observed by all, until such time as both 
what has been taken away is restored, and full satisfaction is 
made for losses caused by them. And further, bishops or 
priests who shall chance not to show a proper resistance to 
such persons, are to be visited with suspension from their offices 
until such time as they shall have obtained mercy from the 
Apostolic See. 

That leprous persons are to have a private church and burial- 
ground of their own. 

" Whereas it is said by the Apostle Saint Paul that more 
abundant honor is bestowed upon those members of the body 
which are less honorable: 38 so on the other hand, there are some 
who seek their own and not what is of Jesus Christ, and who 
will not allow leprous persons who cannot dwell with those 
in health, or to meet in churches with others, either to have 
churches and burial-grounds of their own, or to have the ser- 
vices of their own minister. Inasmuch as this is clearly 
at variance with Christian piety, we do, in our Apostolic bounty, 
enact that wherever enough shall have been assembled in one 
community to be enabled to found a church for themselves 
with a burial-ground, and to enjoy the services of their own 
priest, they shall, withou-t any opposition, be allowed to have 
the same. They are, however, to take due care that as to paro- 
chial rights they are not in any way detrimental to the interests 
of the old churches ; for we are unwilling that that which is 
conceded through feelings of piety, should redound to the injury 
of others. We do also enact that they shall not be compelled 
to pay tithes of vegetable produce and the young of animals. 
39 1 Cor. xii. 23. 



A. D. 1179. THE DECREES OF POPE ALEXANDER. 505 

That Christians shall not dwell with Jews or Saracens. 
" Neither Jews nor Saracens are to be allowed to have 
Christian slaves in their houses, either under pretext of rear- 
ing children, or for any services or cause whatsoever. And 
further, those shall be excommunicated who shall presume to 
dwell with them. We do also enact that the testimony of 
Christians shall be received against the Jews in all causes 
against Christians where they make use of their own witnesses ; 
and we do decree that those persons shall be excommunicated 
who shall attempt in this respect to prefer Jews to Christians, 
as it is right and proper that they should be beneath the 
Christians, and be by them, supported on grounds of humanity 
alone. Moreover, if any by the inspiration of God shall be 
converted to the Christian faith, they are on no account to 
suffer loss of their possessions, 39 as, after being converted to the 
faith they ought to be in a better condition than they were in 
before they conformed to the faith. And if anything shall be 
done in contravention hereof, we do, under penalty of excom- 
munication, enjoin the princes or authorities of those places, 
to cause full restitution to be made to them of that portion 
of their hereditary property and possessions. 

That no person shall for money receive the monastic or any 
religious habit. 

"Monks are not to be received in a monastery for money, nor 
are they to be allowed to hold property of their own. They are 
not to be distributed alone in vills and towns, or in any paro- 
chial churches : but are to remain in the general convent, or in 
apany with some other of the brethren, so as not alone to 
ait the conflict of spiritual with secular men ; for it is Solo- 
mon who says : ' Woe to him that is alone when he falleth ; for 
he hath not another to help him up.' 40 And if any person on 
demand shall give anything for his admission, then he is not 
to be admitted to holy orders, and he who has admitted him is 
to be punished by loss of his office. And if any one shall have 
private property, unless the same shall have been permitted by 
the abbat for the carrying out of some purpose that has been 
enjoined, he is to be removed from the communion of the altar ; 
and if any one shall be found when at the point of death to 
39 Probably meaning their Christian slaves. 40 Eccl. iv. 10. 



506 ANNALS OF ROGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1179. 

possess property, no offering is to be made for him, and he is 
not to have burial among the brethren. The same we do com- 
mand to be observed in the various religious orders ; and the 
abbat who shall not diligently observe the same, is to know that 
he thereby incurs the loss of his office. Also, no priorships or 
abbacies are to be given to any one for the receipt of money ; and 
in such cases both the giver and the receiver are to be removed 
from all ecclesiastical duties. Also, where priors have been ap- 
pointed over conventual churches, they are not, unless for a 
manifest and reasonable cause, to be removed ; unless, for in- 
stance, they have been guilty of dilapidation, or lived inconti- 
nently, or been guilty of any thing of a like nature, by reason 
of which they may appear to deserve to be removed : as also, 
in cases where by the consent of the brethren he shall have 
been transferred in consequence of the necessity of his filling 
some higher office. 

That tw person shall hold several churches. 

"Inasmuch as certain persons, placing no limits to their 
avarice, in contravention of the enactments of the sacred 
canons, both endeavour to obtain divers ecclesiastical dignities 
and several parish churches, so that, while they are hardly 
able to fulfil the duties of one office, they obtain the salary that 
is the due of many, we do strictly forbid that this shall in future 
be done. Therefore, when an ecclesiastical office ought to be 
filled up, let a person be found to fill it who is able to reside 
on the spot, and to perform its duties himself. And if any 
persons shall act in contravention hereof, both he who has 
received the office is to lose the money that, contrary to the 
sacred canons, he has received, and he who has given it is to be 
deprived of the power of giving it in future. And, inasmuch 
as the ambition of some has now reached to such a pitch that 
they are said to hold not two or three, but six offices or even 
more, while at the same time they are not able to perform the 
prescribed duties for even two, we do order this to be remedied 
by our brethren and fellow-bishops ; and that, from these plu- 
ralities so hateful to the canons, which afford a ground for the 
breaking up of societies, and for the wandering of their mem- 
bers to and fro, and produce certain peril to souls, the indi- 
gence of those may be relieved, who are able to give their 
services to churches. Moreover, because the audacity of some 



A.l). 1179. THE DECREES OF POPE ALEXANDER. 507 

laymen has increased to such a pitch that, neglecting the autho- 
rity of the bishops, they institute clerks in churches and remove 
them when they please, and distribute property and other pos- 
sessions of Ihe Church mostly at their own option, and dare to 
harass the churches themselves, as well as the people, with 
tallages and exactions, we do enact that, from henceforth, if 
they shall be guilty of the same, they shall be visited with 
excommunication. The priest also, or clerk, who shall receive 
a church from laymen, without the authority of his own bishop, 
shall be deprived from the communion ; and if he persists, then 
he shall be deposed from his ecclesiastical office and orders. And, 
further, inasmuch as some laymen compel ecclesiastical persons, 
and even bishops themselves, to abide by their judgments, those 
who shall do so in future we do order to be cut off from all 
intercourse with the faithful. "We do also forbid, on peril 
of their souls, laymen withholding tithes, under any circum- 
stances, making over the same to other laymen. And if any 
person receives the same, and does not restore them to the 
Church, he is to be deprived of Christian burial. 

That manifest usurers shall not be admitted to the communion 
at the altar. 

" Inasmuch as in almost every place the crime of usury has 
become prevalent, so much so, that many, neglecting their 
usual business, adopt usury as their lawful occupation, and 
do not consider how the same is condemned by the pages 
of both Testaments, we do therefore enact, that manifest 
usurers shall not be received to communion at the altar, nor 
shall any of them receive Christian burial, or even an oblation, 
if lu- shall die in this sin. And he who shall have received 
sufti offering, or have given Christian burial to such usurer, is 
both to be compelled to return what he has received, and is to 
remain suspended from the duties of his office until such time 
as, in the judgment of the bishop, he shall have given satis- 
faction. 

Of the mils of clerks. 

" "Whereas, in the duties of brotherly love, we seem in espe- 
cial bound to those from whom we know that we have received 
benefits, on the other hand, certain of the clergy, after having 
received considerable property from their churches, presume to 






508 ANNALS OF BOGKER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1179. 

leave property thus acquired through churches to other persons. 
Therefore, although it is well known that by the ancient canons 
this is prohibited, we do nevertheless, once more prohibit it. 
And it being our wish therefore, to provide an indemnity for the 
Church, whether these persons shall have died intestate, or whe- 
ther they shall have attempted to bestow the same property 
on others, we do order that the same shall remain in possession 
of the churches. Moreover, inasmuch as in some places per- 
sons are appointed for a sum of money, and are called deans, 
and thus for a fixed sum of money exercise episcopal juris- 
diction, we do, by the present decree, enact that whoever in 
future shall presume thus to act shall be deprived of his office, 
and the bishop shall lose the right of conferring the same. 

Of the regulation of ecclesiastical communities. 

"Whereas, in all churches that which seems fit to the 
greater part and the elder of the brethren, ought, without hesi- 
tation, to be observed, it seems most grievous and most worthy 
of censure that in some churches a few, not so much on reason- 
able grounds as by reason of their own wilfulness, throw ob- 
stacles in the way of the commands of the majority, and will 
not allow the ecclesiastical ordinances to be carried out : there- 
fore, by the present decree we do enact, that, unless any reason- 
able ground shall be shown by the fewer and younger, all power 
of appeal removed, that which is ordained, on due consideration 
by the greater and elder part, shall always prevail and be carried 
into effect. Nor is it to be any impediment to this our ordinance, 
if any person says that he is bound by oath to observe the 
customs of his church. For they are not to be called oaths, 
but perjuries rather, which are in opposition to the interests 
of the Church and the institutions of the holy fathers. And 
if any person has presumed to swear to maintain customs of 
this nature, which are neither supported by reason, nor agree 
with the holy institutions, he is to be debarred from receiving 
the body of our Lord until such time as he shall have per- 
formed due penance for the same. 

Of the presentation of clerks. 

"Whereas, in certain places, the founders of churches, or 
their heirs, abuse their power, in which the Church has 
hitherto borne with them; and whereas in the Church of 



A.D. 1179. THE DECREES OF POPE ALEXANDER. 509 

God there ought to be but one who is the chief, while many, 
without regard to those who are subject, strive to elect ; and 
whereas one church ought to have but one ruler, while they 
present, in defence of their own rights, a number of rulers ; we 
do by the present decree enact, that if several founders divide 
and give conflicting votes, that person shall be appointed over 
the church who is recommended by his manners and merits, 
and is chosen and approved of by the suffrages of the most 
persons. But, if this cannot be done without offence, the 
bishop is to regulate the church in- such way as he shall think 
is best suited to the honor of God, and he is to do the same, 
even though some question shall have arisen as to the right of 
patronage, and even if, within three months, it shall be ascer- 
tained to whom it belongs. 

On preserving peace. 

" We do also enjoin that priests, clerks, monks, lay monks, 
pilgrims, merchants, and serfs, when going to and fro, and 
engaged in agriculture, as well as the animals with which 
they plough, and the other things which they take into the 
fields, shall enjoy befitting security ; and no person in office 
whatever is anywhere to presume to make new exactions with- 
out the authority and consent of the kings and rulers, or to 
enact statutes on the moment, or in any way to impugn the 
old ones. And if any one shall act contrary to this, and, on 
being warned, shall not cease so doing, then, till such time as he 
shall have made due satisfaction, he is to be cut off from all 
Christian intercourse. 

That ecclesiastical benefices shall not be given to any one, before 
they are vacant. 

" No ecclesiastical benefices, or offices, or churches, shall be 
I given to any person, or be promised, before they are vacant, that 
so no one may seem to long for the death of his neighbour, 
to whose place and benefice he thinks he shall succeed. For 
< whereas this same thing is found prohibited even in the laws 
of the heathens, it is most disgraceful, and most deserving of the 
censures of the Divine judgment, if expectation of future suc- 
cession should hold a place in the Church of God, a thing 
which even the heathens themselves have taken care to con- 
demn. But when it happens that churches, to which presen- 






510 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1179. 

tation is to be made, or any offices in any church, are vacant, 
or if at piesent any are vacant, they are not to remain long 
unfilled, but within six months let persons be presented to 
them, who are able properly to perform the duties thereof. 
But if the bishop, when it is his duty to do so, delays to 
collate such person, he is to be appointed by the chapter. And 
if the election belongs to the chapter, and it shall not have 
so done by the time appointed, the bishop, using the advice 
of religious men, is to do the same according to the will of God : 
or if all shall chance to neglect it, then the metropolitan of 
the bishop, according to the will of God, and without any con- 
tradiction on their part, is to dispose thereof. 

That no one shall be ordained without a certain title. 
" If a bishop shall ordain any person as deacon or priest with- 
out a certain title by which he may earn the necessaries of 
life, then he is to provide him with necessaries, until such time 
as he shall assign him, in some church, a suitable salary for 
clerical duties, unless the person ordained shall happen to 
be able to subsist on property of his own, or inherited from 
his father. 

That clerks in holy orders shall not keep concubines. 
" Clerks in holy orders, who, bearing the character of incon- 
tinence, keep young women in their houses, are either to put 
them away and live chastely, or else to be deprived of their 
benefices and ecclesiastical duties. Whoever shall be found to 
labour under that kind of incontinence which is against nature, 
and on account of which the wrath of God came upon the sons 
of distrust, and He consumed five cities with fire, if they are 
clerks they shall be expelled from the clergy, or be set apart 
in a monastery to do penance there ; if they are laymen, they 
shall be excommunicated and utterly removed from the com- 
munity of the faithful. Moreover, if any clerk, without 
necessary and manifest cause, shall presume to frequent mo- 
nasteries of nuns, he is to be warned thence by the bishop, and 
if he shall not cease so to do, he is to be deprived of his 
ecclesiastical benefice. 

That laymen shall not impose burdens on churches. 

" It is known to be no less a sin in those who do so, than a 
detriment to those who submit to it, that rulers and the chief 



A. D. 1179. THE DECREES OF POPE ALEXAtfDEK. . 511 

men in cities throughout the different parts of the world, as 
well as others who seem to hold some power, frequently impose 
upon churches such numerous burdens, and oppress them with 
such heavy and repeated exactions, that the priesthood seems 
under them to be in a worse condition than it was under 
Pharaoh, who had no knowledge of the law of the Lord. For 
whereas he, when all others were reduced to slavery, left 
their priests and possessions in their former liberty, and gave 
them sustenance at the public expense, these others impose 
almost all their burdens on the churches, and afflict them 
with so many anxieties, that the lamentation of Jeremiah 
seems to apply thereto, 'She that was princess among the 
provinces, now is she become tributary ! ' 43 For, whether it is 
the expense of making fortifications, or whether of an expe- 
dition, or whether they think proper to do anything else, they 
generally attempt to provide for them all out of the property 
of the churches, of the clergy, and of the poor, the advantages 
of Christ being thereby curtailed. On these grounds we must 
feel grieved for the clrarches, and none the less for those who 
seem to have entirely lost all fear of God and respect for the 
ecclesiastical order. Wherefore, under the most severe penalty 
of excommunication, we do strictly forbid any one in future to 
presume to make such an attempt, unless a bishop or clerk shall 
evidently see such a case of necessity and utility as to be of 
opinion that, without compulsion, subsidies may be collected 
throughout the churches to relieve the common necessities, the 
means of the laity not sufficing thereto. And if rulers, or 
other persons, shall in future be guilty of this, and, on being 
warned, shall chance to be unwilling to desist, they are to know 
that both themselves, as well as their abettors, are subjected 
tcL excommunication, and are not to be restored to intercourse 
with the faithful until such time as they shall have made 
befitting satisfaction. 

That prelates are to provide necessaries for the masters of schools. 

"Inasmuch as the Church of God, both in those things 
which tend to the support of the body and in those which 
pertain to the profit of the soul, is bound, like an affectionate 
mother, to provide for the needy, in order that the opportunity 

Lam. i. 1. 



512 AUNALS OF EOGEB DE HOYEDEN. A.D. 1179. 

of reading and of improving may not be withheld from the 
poor who cannot he assisted by the means of their relations, 
in each cathedral church a certain competent provision is to be 
made for a master, who is to teach gratuitously the clerks of 
the said church and the poor scholars, in order that thereby 
the necessities of the teacher may be relieved, and a way may 
be opened to learning for those who are studying ; in other 
churches or monasteries, also, this is to be rectified, if in past 
times any curtailment shall chance to have been made therein. 
For a licence to teach no one is to demand any fee whatever, 
nor is he, under pretext of any custom, to make any demand 
of those who teach ; nor yet, when a licence has been given, 
is he to forbid any one to teach who is fitted for so doing. The 
person who shall presume to contravene this enactment, is to 
be deprived of all ecclesiastical benefices. For it seems only 
proper and becoming, that, in the Church of God, he should 
not gain the fruit of his labours who, in the cupidity of his 
mind, endeavours, while he is selling a licence to teach, to ob- 
struct the profit of the Church. 

That clerks shall not presume to undertake secular business. 

" Clerks in archdeacon's orders, and above, as well as those of 
a lower grade, if they are supported by ecclesiastical salaries, 
are not to presume to act as advocates before secular judges 
in forensic business, unless they are prosecuting their own 
cause or that of the Church, or chance to be acting on- behalf 
of distressed persons, who cannot manage their own causes. 
And neither is any clerk to presume to act the part of procurator 
of a town, or to exercise any secular jurisdiction under any 
princes or men of secular power, so as to act as their jus- 
ticiaries. And if any person shall presume to contravene this 
enactment, because he acts in a worldly manner, contrary to 
the doctrine of the Apostle, when he says that no one who 
fights for God busies himself with the affairs of this world, 
he is to be removed from the ecclesiastial ofiice, because, 
neglecting his clerical duties, he has plunged into the waves 
of the world in order to please the powerful. We do also 
decree that strict punishment is to ensue, if any person in 
religious orders shall presume to attempt to do any of the 
things aforesaid. 



A.D. 1179. DECREES OF POPE ALEXANDER. 513 

Of Churches that have been laid under an interdict, and t/te 
burial of those under interdict. 

11 Inasmuch as it is our bounden duty both to plant the sacred 
religion, and when planted in every way to cherish it, we can 
never attempt the same to better purpose, than if we consider 
that it has been entrusted to us by the authority of God, to foster 
that which is right, and to correct that which impedes the pro- 
gress of the truth. Wherefore, in consequence of the strong 
complaints of our brethren and our fellow-bishops, we have 
understood that the brethren of the Temple and of the Hos- 
pital, as well as others of the religious profession, exceeding 
the privileges with which they have been indulged by the 
Apostolic See, presume to do many things which both tend to 
scandal among the people of God, and produce grievous evil 
to souls. For they have purposed to receive churches from the 
hands of laymen; they admit persons excommunicated and 
under interdict to the Sacraments of the Church, and allow 
burial in their churches, contrary to good conscience, and 
institute and remove priests at their pleasure. And whereas 
the indulgence has been granted to their brethren when 
going to seek alms, that upon their arrival such churches 43 
may be opened once in a year, and Divine service performed 
therein, as we have heard, several of them have frequently 
come from one or more of their houses to a place under 
interdict, and have abused the indulgence of their privileges 
by performing service therein, and then presuming to bury 
the dead in the churches aforesaid. And further, by means 
of the fraternities which in many places they establish, they 
sap the strength of the episcopal authority, while, in contra- 
vention of the sentences of the bishops, under the pretext of 
some of their own privileges, they strive to screen all those 
who are ready to join their fraternity. And whereas we 
have thought proper to make these declarations not so much 
with reference to the conscience or design of the higher autho- 
rities among them, as to fLe fact that some of those of a lower 
grade have exceeded what in discretion they ought to observe, 
for the purpose of removing those matters in which they 
are guilty of excess, and which tend to cause doubts ; we do 
therefore forbid both them and all other religious whatsoever, 
43 Laid under interdict. 

VOL. I. L L 



514 ANNALS OF EOGER DK DOVEDEff. A.D. 1179. 

without the consent of their bishops, to receive churches and tithes 
from the hands of laymen, not taking regard of what up to the 
present time they have, contrary to the tenor hereof, received. 
Persons excommunicated and by name laid under interdict, we 
do pronounce to be avoided both by them and by all other per- 
sons whatsoever, in conformity with the sentences pronounced 
by the bishops. In those of their churches which do not belong 
to them fully of right, they are to present priests to the bishops 
for institution therein, who shall be answerable to them for their 
care of the people, and give to themselves a proper account as 
to the temporal things thereof. Also, they are not to presume to 
remove those once instituted without consulting the bishops 
thereon. And if Templars or Hospitallers come to a church laid 
under interdict, they are to be admitted only once in a year to 
perform service therein, and not even then are they to bury there 
the bodies of those under interdict. Also, as to these fraternities 
we do enact, that if they shall not entirely join the brethren 
aforesaid, but shall think proper to reside upon their own pro- 
perties, still they are in nowise on that account to be exempt 
from the sentence of the bishops, who are to exercise their 
authority over them just like the other persons of their dioceses,, 
where they require correction for their excesses. What has 
been said above as to the aforesaid brethren we do also com- 
mand to be observed as to other persons in religious orders who 
in their presumption intrude upon the path, and presume to 
enter on a course contrary to their own canonical professions 
and the tenor of our own privileges. If, however, they shall 
presume to contravene this enactment, both the churches in 
which they shall presume so to do shall be laid under interdict, 
and what they have done shall be deemed null and void." 

These decrees being promulgated and received by the whole 
of the clergy and people standing around, the bishops and 
other ecclesiastics who had met together, with the gift of the 
benediction, received leave to return home. 

In the same year, the king of England, the son, returned 
from Normandy to England at mid-Lent, and, during the follow- 
ing Easter, he and the king, his father, were at Winchester. 
After Easter, Richard de Lucy, justiciary of England, resigned 
the office of justiciary, and became a canon-regular in his abbey 
of Lewes," which he himself had founded on his property and 
44 In Kent. 



A.I). 1179. DIVISION OF ENGLAND INTO CIRCUITS. 



515 



had enriched with many possessions ; shortly after which he 
died. After his decease, the king, the father, held a great coun- 
cil at Windsor, and by the common consent of the archbishops, 
bishops, earls, and barons, in presence of the king, his son, 
divided England into four parts, and over each of them ap- 
pointed wise men to administer justice throughout the land, in 
the following manner : 



RICHARD, bishop of "Winchester 
RICHARD, the king's treasurer 
NICHOLAS FITZ-THOROLD 
THOMAS BASSET 
ROBERT DE WHITFIELD 



f SOTJTHAMPTONSHIRE 4 * 

WILTSHIRE 

GLOUCESTERSHIRE 

DORSETSHIRE 

SOMERSETSHIRE 

DEVONSHIRE 

CORNWALL 

BERKSHIRE 
. OXFORDSHIRE 



GEOFFREY, bishop of Ely 
NICHOLAS, chaplain to the king 
GILBERT PIPARD 
REGINALD DE WISEBEC, clerk to * 

the king 
GEOFFREY HOSES 



r CAMBRIDGESHIRE 

HUNTINGDONSHIRE 

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE 

LEICESTERSHIRE 

WARWICKSHIRE 

WORCESTERSHIRE 

HEREFORDSHIRE (in Wales) 

STAFFORDSHIRE 
. SALOPSHLUE 46 



JOHN, bishop of Norwich 
HUGH MURDAC, clerk to the 

king 

MICHAEL BELET 
RICHARD DE PEC 
RALPH BRITO 



NORFOLK 

SUFFOLK 

ESSEX 

HERTFORDSHIRE 

MIDDLESEX 

KENT 

SURREY 

SUSSEX 

BUCKINGHAMSHIRE 

BEDFORDSHIRE 



Hampshire. 



Shropshire. 



I, L 2 




516 ANNALS OP ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1179. 

NOTTINGHAMSHIRE 
DERBYSHIRE 
EUERWICSHIRE 47 
NORTHTTMBERLAND 
WESTMORELAND 
CTTMBERLAND (between the 
Ribble and the Mersey) 
LANCASTER. 

The last six to whom the above counties were assigned were ap- 
pointed justices in the king's court, to hear the public claims. 

In the same year, Geoffrey, earl of Brittany, by com- 
mand of the king, his father, passed over from England to 
Brittany, and, assembling an army, laid waste the lands of 
Guidomer de Leuns, and forced him to surrender. In the 
same year, Henry, king of England, the son, returned 
from England to Normandy. In the same year, Louis, king 
of the Franks sent to Constantinople his daughter Agnes, 
whom his wife Ala, queen of the Franks, and sister of 
William, archbishop of Rheims, and of the counts Henry, 
Theobald, and Stephen, had borne to him, to be married to 
Alexis, the son of Manuel, emperor of Constantinople. In 
the same year, Philip, the son of Louis, king of the Franks, 
and of the said queen, Ala, fell ill, and was in danger of his 
life ; at which his father was extremely grieved, and was ad- 
monished in his sleep by a Divine revelation to vow that he 
would go on a pilgrimage to the tomb of Saint Thomas the 
Martyr, at Canterbury, to prevail upon him to restore his son 
to health. 

In consequence of this, Louis, king of the Franks, sent 
ambassadors to Henry, king of England, the father, and asked 
for leave and a safe conduct upon coming into England, and 
also liberty to return without any impediment ; which was 
granted accordingly. Therefore, putting his trust in the Lord, 
contrary to the advice of many, he set out for England. 
Taking with him Philip, earl of Flanders, and Baldwin, earl 
of Guisnes, Henry, duke of Louvaine, count William de Man- 
deville, the advocate of Bethune, and other barons of the king- 
dom of France, he came to Witsand, and thence passed over to 
England, arriving at Dover on the eleventh day before the 
calends of September, being the fourth day of the week. The 
47 Yorkshire. 



A. D. 1179. COBONATION OF KING PHILIP. 517 

king of England, the father, came to meet him on the sea-shore, 
and received him with great honor and congratulations, as his 
most dearly-beloved liege lord and friend, and, with due re- 
spect, supplied all necessaries for him and his people. 

On the following day, that is to say, on the vigil of Saint 
Bartholomew the Apostle, he escorted him to the tomb of 
Saint Thomas the Martyr, at Canterbury. Upon arriving there, 
Louis, king of the Franks, offered upon the tomb of Saint 
Thomas the Martyr a cup of gold, very large and of great 
value, and gave, for the use of the monks there in the service 
of God, a hundred tuns of wine, to be received yearly for ever 
at Poissy, in France, entirely at the expense of the king of 
France. In addition to this, he granted them that whatever 
in future should be bought in the kingdom of France for their 
own use, should be free from toll and all other customs and 
excise. All this he caused to be confirmed by his charter, which 
they received at the hands of Hugh de Pudsey, chancellor of 
the king of France, and son of Hugh, bishop of Durham. 
On the third day after this, the king of France and his people 
who were with him returned to Dover, under the escort of the 
king of the English ; and on the following day, namely, the 
seventh day before the calends of September, being the Lord's 
Day, the king of France crossed over from England to Flan- 
ders, and landed at Witsand. 

In the meantime, his son Philip, through the merits and 
prayers of the blessed Thomas the Martyr, was restored to 
his former health : on hearing which, the king of France, 
elated, amid great public rejoicings, ordered by proclama- 
tion that all the chief men of his kingdom, both ecclesias- 
tical and secular, should assemble at Eheims, at the beginning 
8f the calends of November, in order to celebrate there the 
coronation of his son Philip. When they were assembled 
there, William, archbishop of Rheims, crowned the before- 
named Philip, the son of his sister Ala, who was now in the 
fifteenth year of his age, and anointed him king at Rheims, 
in the church there of the Pontifical See, on the day of the 
feast of All Saints, being assisted in the performance of that 
office by William, archbishop of Tours, and the archbishops 
of Bourges and Sens, and nearly all the bishops of the kingdom. 
Henry, the king of England, the son, in the procession from 
the chamber to the cathedral on the day of the coronation, 



518 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1179. 

preceded him, bearing the golden crown with which the said 
Philip was to be crowned, in right of the dukedom of Nor- 
mandy. Philip, earl of Flanders, also walked before, bearing 
before him the sword of the kingdom. Other dukes, counts, 
ami barons also preceded and followed him, each being appointed 
to perform some duty therein, according as the king had com- 
manded them. But king Louis, his father, labouring under 
old age and a paralytic malady, was unable to be present at 
his coronation ; for, as he was returning from England and 
staying at Saint Denis, being struck by a sudden chill, he 
had an attack of paralysis, and lost the use of the right side 
of his body. 

In the same year died Roger, bishop of "Worcester, at Tours, 
where he was buried. In this year, also, died William, earl 
of Aumarle, and was buried in his abbey at Tornetun. 48 

In this year, the people of Tuscany, Pisa, and Lucca, and 
the citizens of Pistoia and of Florence, with the people of the 
Val d'Arno, and Ugolino de Valle Spoleta, entered into a con- 
federacy to take, by stratagem, Christian, archbishop of Mentz, 
chancellor of Frederic, the emperor of the Eomans ; who, 
after peace was made between our lord the pope and the said 
emperor, at the Eialto, at Venice, had remained in Tuscany, 
and by grievous exactions had reduced the people to a distressed 
state. Having accordingly arranged their plans, they invited 
Conrad, the son of William, marquis of Montferrat, to meet them, 
in order that he might take the chancellor by stratagem, as he 
greatly hated him, though he had lately made peace with him. 
Accordingly, at the instigation of the rest, and at the request 
of the emperor Manuel, who promised him the possession 01 
abundant wealth if he should capture the before-named chan- 
cellor, Conrad came with a strong force to the city of Camerina, 
whither the chancellor had come with a few of his followers, 
and laying hands on him made him prisoner, and, putting him 
in irons, carried him away with him, and first incarcerated him 
in a castle which bears the name of Santo Flaviano, and next 
imprisoned him at Rocca Venaise, and a third time at Agua- 
pendente ; then, delivering him into the charge of his bro- 
ther, Boniface, Conrad himself set out for Constantinople to 
visit the emperor Manuel, at whose suggestion he had taken 
the before-mentioned chancellor. As he did not dare to return 
** Qy. if Taunton ? 



A.D. 1180. THE KING OF ENGLAND LEVIES AN ARMY. 519 

home, in consequence of the injury he had done to Frede- 
ric, the emperor of the Romans, in taking his chancellor 
prisoner, he remained with Manuel, the emperor of Constan- 
tinople, and married one of the nieces of that emperor; on 
hearing of which, his brother, Boniface, who had kept the 
above-named Christian, archbishop of Mentz and chancellor to 
the emperor, in prison, received from him twelve thousand 
perpera, 49 and set him at liberty. 

In the year of grace 1180, being the twenty-sixth year of 
the reign of king Henry, son of "the empress Matilda, the said 
king was in England, at Nottingham, on the day of the Na- 
tivity of our Lord ; at which festival, William, king of the 
Scots, was also present. In this year also, Philip, the king of 
the Franks, seeing that his father was severely afflicted with 
a paralytic disease, followed in every respect the advice of 
Philip, earl of Flanders. Listening to his counsels, he began to 
practise tp-anny over his people, and despised and hated all 
whom he knew to be the familiar friends of his father : his 
own mother too, he persecuted to such a degree, that he drove 
her out of his dominions ; his uncles also, William, archbishop 
of Eheims, count Theobald, and count Stephen, he subjected to 
great persecutions. 

At their entreaty, Henry, king of England, the son, crossed 
over to England, and told his father of the excesses and vex- 
atious conduct which Philip, king of France, was guilty of 
towards his mother and his uncles, by the advice of the earl of 
Flanders ; on hearing which, the king of England, the father,.- 
with the king of England, the son, before Easter, crossed over to 
Normandy. Accordingly, they were met in Normandy by the 
oueen of the Franks before-named, accompanied by count Theo- 
oald and count Stephen, her brothers, and many other noblemen 
of the kingdom of France : who, giving hostages to the king of 
England, the father, and making oath that they would not 
neglect to follow his advice, became his adherents. After this, 
the king of England, the father, levied a great army throughout 
lu's dominions on both sides of the sea, purposing, after Easter, 
to enter the territories of the king of France in a hostile man- 
ner, for the purpose of avenging the injuries which the new 

49 A golden coin of Constantinople, which were more generally called 
"hyperpera." They are said to have received this name from the 
superlative brightness of the highly refined gold ot which they were made. 



520 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEK. A.D. 1180. 

king of France had been guilty of towards Ms mother and his 
uncles. 

After Easter, Philip, king of France, took to wife the 
daughter of the earl of Hainault, and niece of Philip, earl of 
Flanders, being the daughter of his sister ; and as a marriage 
portion with his niece, the said earl of Flanders gave the 
whole territory of Vermandois as far as the river Lis. Upon 
this, Philip, king of France, determined to have himself and 
his wife crowned on the day of Pentecost at the city 01 
Sens ; but, by the advice of the earl of Flanders, he short- 
ened the intervening time, and caused himself and his wife 
to be crowned on Ascension day at Saint Denis, by the arch- 
bishop of Sens. "When William, archbishop of Bheims, came 
to know of this, he was greatly incensed, and made com- 
plaint to Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff, of the intrusion 01 
the archbishop of Sens, who, contrary to law and the dignity 
of the church of Bheims, had had the presumption to crown 
the king of France. 

After this, Philip, king of France, and Henry, king of 
England, the father, held a conference between Gisors and 
Trie ; at which, the king of England, partly by gentle words 
and partly by threats, prevailed upon the king of France, in 
spite of the advice of the earl of Flanders, to banish from his 
mind all the displeasure and indignation which he had felt to- 
wards his mother and his uncles, and to receive them again 
into their wonting favour, covenanting to allow his mother every 
day seven pounds of Paris money for her daily support, and 
after the decease of his father, to pay her dower entire and in 
full, retaining, however, in his own hands the castles and for- 
tified places. At the same conference, by way of making se- 
curity more sure, the king of England, the father, in presence 
of Philip, king of France, received homage from Philip, earl of 
Flanders, and for the said homage granted him one thousand 
marks of silver yearly, to be received out of the exchequer at 
London ; on condition, however, that in return for the said one 
thousand marks the earl of Flanders should find each year 
five hundred knights to serve the king of England for the 
space of forty days, whenever he should be called upon so to do. 

In the same year, Louis, king of the Franks, departed this 
life at Paris, in the month of September, it being the four- 
teenth day before the calends of October, and the fifth day of 



A.D. 1180. TREATY BETWEEN PHILIP AND HENRY. 521 

the week, and was buried at the abbey of Barbeaux ; after 
which, Philip, king of France, and Henry, king of England, 
the father, met and held a conference between Gisors and Trie, 
where they made a treaty of peace and reconciliation, which 
was established on both sides by word and oath, and was to 
the following effect : 

" I, Philip, by the grace of God, king of the Franks, and I, 
Henry, by the same grace, king of the English, do will that it 
shall come to the notice of all, both present as well as to 
come, that we have renewed the treaty and friendship, by word 
and oath, which my liege lord, Louis, king of the Franks, 
and I, Henry, concluded between ourselves before Ivery, in 
presence of Peter, titular of Saint Chrysogonus, cardinal priest 
and legate of the Apostolic See, and of Richard, bishop of Win- 
chester, and many other bishops, earls, and barons who were 
then present ; to the effect, that we now are, and wish henceforth 
to be, friends, and that each will protect the other in life and 
limb, and will defend his worldly possessions to the utmost of 
his ability against all men. And if any person whatsoever 
shall presume to do an injury to either of us, I, Henry, will 
aid Philip, king of France, my liege lord, against all men 
to the utmost of my ability. And I, Philip, will aid Henry, 
king of England, against all men to the utmost of my ability, 
as my liege and vassal, saving always the fidelity which we 
owe to our liegemen, so long as they shall preserve their fealty 
towards ourselves. And neither of us shall from henceforth 
harbour an enemy of the other in his dominions, from the 
time that demand shall be made of him. And to the end 
that from henceforth all matter of discord between us may be 
removed, we do mutually agree that of the lands and pos- 
sefsions, and all other things which we now hold, each shall 
henceforth make no claim whatever against the other (except 
the claim as to Auvergne, respecting which there is a dispute 
between us, and except the fee of Chateau-Raoul, and ex- 
cept some small fees and allotments of our lands in Berry), 
in case our liegemen shall take anything from each other 
or from either of us. And if we shall not be able to agree as 
to the matters which are above excepted, then in such case, I, 
Philip, king of the Franks, have chosen three bishops, those 
of Claremont, Nivernois, and Treves, and three barons, count 
Theobald, count Robert, and Peter de Touraine, my uncles ; 






522 ANNALS OF BOGEK DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1180. 

and I, Henry, king of England, have chosen three bishops, 
William, bishop of Le Mans, Peter, hishop of Perigord, and Eo- 
bert, bishop of JSTantes, and three barons, Maurice de Crony, 
William Maingot, and Peter de Mont Rabell, to act in my be- 
half; and, having examined into the truth on both sides, both 
themselves as well as by the oaths of the people of those 
lands, the bishops aforesaid shall assert upon their word of 
truth, and the laymen shall make oath, that whatsoever they 
shall find to belong to either as of right, that same they will 
declare, and in good faith will firmly abide by their decision. 
But if all those bishops whom I, Philip, have chosen, shall 
not be able to be present, we will nevertheless abide by the 
decision of such two as shall be present ; and if all the barons 
named on my side shall not be present, still we will not hesi- 
tate to abide by the decision of such two of them as shall be 
present; and similarly as to those, whom I, Henry, have 
chosen, both bishops as well as barons. We have also made 
oath, that we will do no injury to them by reason of their 
speaking the truth. And if by chance, which God forbid, 
any dispute shall arise between us as to our territories, the 
same is to be settled by the same persons in good faith and 
without evil intent or delay. And if any one of the persons 
before-mentioned shall in the meantime depart this life, then 
another one is to be substituted in. his stead. And if either of 
us shall think proper to go on a pilgrimage, the one who re- 
mains shall faithfully guard, and protect, and defend against 
all men, the lands and vassals of him who shall be abroad as 
though they were his own and part of his own dominions, 
just as though I, Philip, were defending my city of Paris as if it 
were besieged, and as though I, Henry, were defending my city 
of Rouen, if it were besieged. I, Philip, also do will that all 
merchants and other persons whatsoever, both clergy as well 
as laymen, coming from the dominions of Henry, king of 
England, shall, with all their property, be in security and enjoy 
peace throughout all my dominions. And I, Henry, do in. 
like manner, will that all merchants and other persons what- 
soever, both clergy as well as laymen, coming from the domi- 
nions of Philip, king of France, shall, with all their property, 
be in security and enjoy peace throughout all my dominions. 
All the above we have made promise both by word and by oath 
that we will observe. Also, in obedience to our commands, 



A.D. 1180. CTIABGES AGAINST THE DUKE OF SAXOKT. 523 

our vassals have made oath after us, that in good faith they 
will counsel us to observe what we have sworn, and not give 
us advice to disregard the same." 

In the same year, Frederic, emperor of the Eomans, expelled 
from his kingdom Henry, duke of Saxony ; the cause of whoso 
expulsion was as follows : It must first, however, be observed, 
that there were ten princes appointed to be custodians of the 
gates of the city of Cologne, whose names were as follows : 

The duke of Lemburg, 

The duke of Saxony, - 

The duke of Saringes, 

The duke of Saxland, 

The duke of Louvaine, 

The count de Wilch, 

The count de Loo, 

The count de Gerle, 

The count Palatine of the Rhone, 

The count de Larmval. 

Now, these ten are liegemen of the archbishop of Cologne, and 
receive yearly from the property of Saint Peter at Cologne two 
thousand marks of silver, as the pay for their custodianships. In 
addition to this, the archbishop of Cologne has large revenues, 
most of which are in the dukedom of Saxony, and which 
Henry, duke of Saxony, the son-in-law of Henry, king of Eng- 
land, unjustly seized, and withheld from the archbishop. In 
consequence of this, Reginald, archbishop of Cologne, made 
complaint to his lord, Frederic, emperor of the Romans: in 
addition to which, the before-named emperor charged the afore- 
said duke with perjury, with breach of faith, and with high 
treason towards himself; and caused him to be summoned to ap- 
peftr in his court to give satisfaction both to himself and to the 
archbishop of Cologne. Having received, therefore, a safe con- 
duct both in coming and returning, the duke made his appear- 
ance ; and, after many charges had been made against him, 
both as to his breach of faith, his perjury, his high treason to- 
wards the emperor, and the injuries he had committed to- 
wards the archbishop of Cologne, when it was his duty, after 
taking counsel with his own people, to make answer to the 
charges so made, he mounted his horse, and, without giving 
any answer, returned home ; on which the emperor demanded 
that judgment should be pronounced against him, and he was 



524 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN, A. D. 1180. 

accordingly pronounced to have forfeited his dukedom ; and 
leave was given to the archbishop of Cologne to enter the terri- 
tories of the duke of Saxony with an armed force, in order to 
take revenge for the injuries which the duke had done him. 
The emperor also, with a great army, entered the territories of 
the duke of Saxony, and laid them waste with fire, and sword, 
and famine, and reduced the duke to such extremities that he 
placed himself at the mercy of the emperor, abjured his ter- 
ritory, and placed the same for seven years at the mercy of 
the emperor, and then came in exile to the court of Henry, 
king of England, his wife's father. Shortly after this, how- 
ever, at the entreaty of Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff, Philip, 
king of France, Henry, king of England, and Philip, earl of 
Flanders, the emperor remitted four years from the period of 
banishment which he had prescribed to the duke. 

In the same year died Manuel, emperor of Constantinople ; 
and Alexis his son, who had married the daughter of Louis, 
king of France, ascended the throne, and reigned in peace two 
years. However, in the meantime, his mother, Mary, daughter 
of Raymond, prince of Antioch, had a certain person as her 
paramour, who, by virtue of his office, was in the Greek lan- 
guage called " Protosouastos," 50 and in Latin, " Comes Pala- 
tinus ;" 51 whom the before-named empress loved with such a 
disgraceful and ungovernable passion, that she was ready to put 
her son Alexis, the emperor, to death, and thereby promote 
her lover to the imperial throne. Accordingly, on a day that 
seemed suitable for the purpose, she gave a poisonous draught 
to her son the emperor ; after drinking which, the poison, 
spreading its influence throughout his tender limbs, almost 
suffocated him on the spot : but at length, by means of the 
antidotes of skilful physicians, with considerable difficulty he 
escaped with his life. Being determined to take due precau- 
tions for the future, he sent for Androneus, the brother's 
son of his father Manuel, and associated him with himself 
on the throne ; by whose advice he seized his mother, and 
threw her into prison, and after she had long pined in prison, 
caused her to be tied up in a sack, and, an anchor being 
fastened to her neck, to be drowned in that part of the sea which 

40 This was the title of an officer very high in rank in the emperor's 
palace at Constantinople. 51 " Attendant, in the palace." These 

words are however generally rendered " Count Palatine." 






A. D. 1180. JEALOUSY OP AmraON-ETJS TOWABDS ALEXIS. 525 

is called " The Greater Sea." He also put out the eyes of the 
Protosouastos, his mother's paramour, and caused him to be 
emasculated. 

A short time after this, Androneus, seeing that it would 
give great satisfaction to the people, by way of proof of his 
true fidelity and his extreme affection, on a certain day 
named for the celebration of the solemnity, carried Alexis, the 
emperor, on his shoulders from his palace to the church of 
Saint Sophia, and caused him to be crowned there by Basilius, 
the patriarch of the city, and, in the presence of all the 
people, took the oaths of fealty to him as his liege lord against 
all men whatsoever. After this was done, the emperor Alexis 
gave to the before-named Androneus the power of exercising 
his own will and dispensing justice among the people. How- 
ever, after a considerable time, Androneus came to the emperor 
Alexis and said that the people refused to pay obedience to his 
' commands, and requested him to appoint some one else over the 
I people whose commands they would obey. On this, Alexis said 
' to him : "I have made choice of yourself, and have appointed 
[ you over my people, and I know of no one else in whom I 
have greater confidence ;" upon which, Androneus said in reply : 
[ " If it is your wish that I should govern your people, cause 
i me to be crowned in their presence, so that all the people may 
I know that I am, under you, to reign over all the nations which 
iare subject to your sway." The emperor, not being aware that 
i all power is averse to a partner therein, acceded to his request. 
The clergy and people of the empire having been convened, 
tthe emperor caused himself and Androneus to be crowned to- 
(igether by the before-named patriarch, in the church of Saint 
^Sophia. However, after a short period of time had elapsed, 
thetme became jealous of the other, and the thing that pleased 
Itthe one displeased the other. " For no trust is there in asso- 
iciates in rule, and all power is averse to a partner therein." 52 
xAndroneus, however, still pretending the affection which he had 
hitherto shown, under the veil thereof plotted against his lord 
the emperor, who, suspecting nothing of the sort, forbore to 
take any precautions. " For no foe is there more pernicious 
than an enemy in the disguise of a friend." 53 Having, there- 

32 " Nulla [enim] fides [erit] regni sociis, omnisque potestas 

Impatiens consortis erit." 
53 " Nullus namque peruiciosior hostis est, quarn familiaris inimicus." 



526 AITN'ALS OF EOGEB DE HOYEDEN". A.D. 1180. 

fore, gained a favourable time and place, with the sanction of 
Basilius, the patriarch, he put to death his lord the emperor 
Alexis, and, marrying hrs wife Agnes, 53 * the daughter of the 
king of France, exercised great tyranny over the people ; and 
not only over the people, for all the nobles of the empire as 
well he either put to death, or, depriving them of their eyes and 
their virility, drove them out of the empire. 

There was in that neighbourhood a certain young man, Isaac 
by name, son of the sister of Manuel, the deceased emperor, 
who, seeing the tyrannical conduct Androneus was guilty of 
towards the principal men of the empire, was in great dread of 
him, and flying from before his face, assembled a large army, 
and fought a battle with the sultan of Iconium ; in which 
battle he was taken prisoner by Eupin de la Montaigne, who 
had come as an auxiliary to the sultan of Iconium. After 
taking him prisoner, he offered to deliver him to the sultan 
of Jconium, but the sultan, refusing to receive him, gave him 
up to Rupin. Upon returning home, the latter sent him to 
his superior lord, Raymond, prince of Antioch, who received 
him with great delight, and demanded of him sixty thousand 
besants 54 as his ransom, which he accordingly promised to give, 
and, sending his messengers to the wealthy men of Cyprus, re- 
quested their assistance in procuring his ransom. Complying 
with his wishes, they sent him thirty thousand besants, which 
he gave to the prince of Antioch, and, by way of security for 
payment of the rest of the debt, gave him his son and daughter 
as hostages ; whereupon, being liberated from the prison of 
the prince of Antioch, he came to the island of Cyprus, on which 
the chief men of the island received him, and made him their 
ruler. Elated by this, in his vanity he caused an imperial 
crown to be made for himself, and had himself crowned and 
called the " Holy Emperor." At the time, however, that had 
been arranged upon between them, the prince of Antioch sent 
to him for the remainder of the debt, that is to say, for the 
thirty thousand besants, but the emperor of Cyprus refused to 
deliver them to the envoys of the prince, but delivered them 
to the brethren of the Temple to be conveyed to the prince of 

M * Then but eleven years of age. He is known in history as Andronicus 
I. Comnenus. 

M A golden coin, which took its name from Byzantium, the place of its 
circulation. 



A.D. 1180. CRTJEL1T OF THE EMPEROR ANDRONEUS. 527 

Antioch. On their departure, they were met hy pirates, who 
took from them the said sum of money. When this became 
known to the emperor of Cyprus, he asserted that this had 
been done hy the contrivance of the prince of Antioch, and 
swore that he would not again pay him that sum of money. 
In consequence of this, his son and daughter remained two 
years as hostages in the hands of the prince of Antioch ; 
but he, at length finding that the emperor of Cyprus would 
not redeem his hostages, and being moved with compassion, 
gave them their liberty, and allowed them to depart. 

In the mean time, by the advice and assistance of Basi- 
lius, the patriarch, Androneus, the emperor of Constantinople, 
usurped the monarchy of the whole empire, and placed the 
imperial diadem on the heads of himself and of his wife, and 
persevering in his tyrannical course, having put out the eyes 
of some of the nobles of the empire and cut off the limbs ol 
others, sent them into banishment. Among these there was a 
certain nobleman, by name Androneus Angelus, who had been 
chancellor to the emperor Manuel, which office was by the 
Greeks called "Laucete." 55 Him and his two sons, the em- 
peror Androneus caused to be deprived of their sight and virility, 
and then banished them from their country. 

In addition to these two, the before-named Androneus An- 
gelus had a third son, a learned clerk, whom the Greeks called 
" Sacwice," 56 while in Latin he was named Tursakius An- 
gelus. At the time of the persecution he had set out for France 
and resided in Paris, where he frequented the schools,, that in 
the learning of the Latins, he might learn their language and 
manners. Upon hearing the lamentable misfortunes of his 
father and brothers, he set out with all speed to administer 
comsolation to them, and as he was passing through a certain 
island of Greece he found there a certain religious man, who 
had devoted himself to a life of solitude, and had a spirit of 
prophecy, and who, having formerly been archbishop of the 
city of Tyre, preferring to serve God rather than the world, 
had resigned his archbishopric, and had taken up his residence 
by himself in that island, his delicacies being the roots of wild 
herbs, and draughts of water his drink. On coming to the 
holy man, he disclosed to him his name and his family, and the 

** Probably a misprint for some other word. M Probably he meau 
" Sacuios." 






528 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1180. 

cause of his journey. When the holy man had heard it all he 
burst into tears, knowing that it was a holy thing to weep with 
those who weep, and to lament with those who lament. After he 
had given loose to his tears, the young man tried, by all means 
in his power, to assuage his sorrow ; on which the aged man 
said to him, " Return to the city of Constantinople, and prove 
yourself a man, for the Lord will deliver it into your hands, 
and you shall rule over it, and shall be emperor, and from you 
shall emperors proceed, who shall reign after you ; and behold ! 
Basilius, the patriarch, and the chief men of the empire are 
seeking you that they may become your subjects, and may 
have you for their lord and emperor; therefore attempt not 
to fly from that which God has prepared and predestined for 
you." 

Upon this, Tursakius, believing what he said, departed for 
the city of Constantinople, in the disguise of a poor man and 
a beggar. Not daring to discover himself to the people because 
his hour was not yet come, he remained in the suburbs alone, 
attended by a single servant, and having but one gelding, and 
that weak and lame, and there with patience awaited the 
fulfilment of the promise of the holy man beforementioned. 
There he was frequently visited by the chief men of the land 
and the patriarch, not openly, however, but in secret, by reason 
of the fears of the emperor ; who was by this time the object 
of universal hatred, and was himself the hater of all men. 
Even the patriarch, who had aided in his elevation, he per- 
secuted to such a degree, as, against his wish, to build a certain 
noble church in the city, and place therein Latin canons, 
in consequence of which, to the present day, that church 
is called the " Latin Church." 

After a considerable time, the aforesaid Androneus, the 
emperor, goaded by a bad conscience, was desirous, through his 
magicians, to learn if there was still any person whom there was 
reason for him to stand in fear of: on which they made answer 
to him, " Give us a boy without guilt to slay, and a period of 
three days, and we will give you information on what you ask." 
Accordingly, a boy without guilt was immediately delivered to 
them, whom they offered in sacrifice to the demons, and after 
making lengthened investigation in his blood and entrails by 
means of their magical arts, discovered by the signs that the 
close of his rule was nigh at hand, and his death at the gate 



A.D. 1185. BASPLITTS PRESENTS TTJESAKIUS TO THE PEOPLE. 529 

and that he who was to put him to death was in the neigh- 
bourhood, and his name was Tursakius Angelus. 

Accordingly, on the next day, the above-mentioned magicians 
came to the emperor Androneus, and said to him, " Now at 
length have your sins overtaken you of which you were guilty 
when you sat on your tribunal, oppressing the innocent and 
condemning the just blood without a cause. For the day of 
your downfall is hastening on ; and lo ! he is close at hand 
who shall destroy you and take your empire, and the name of 
that person is Tursakius Angelus. After unheard-of torments 
as your punishment, he will condemn you to a most cruel 
death, and his deeds will be applauded by the lips of the 
people, and he himself will become as the very food of those 
who tell of his exploits, and will reign over us, and his posterity 
will succeed to the sceptre. It is to your own sorrow that you 
have deprived his father and brothers of eyesight and other 
blessings. At this moment he is in the suburbs of this city ; 
therefore expel him, if expel him you can." 

Androneus, however, on learning that he was at hand who 
was to put him to death, sent his chancellor with some 
knights and men-at-arms, for the purpose of seizing him. 
On arriving at the place where he lodged, they found the 
gates closed ; on which those who went first cried with a 
loud voice, " Open the gates for us, open them ; behold ! 
it is the emperor's chancellor come ;" and then said, "Tur- 
Bakius, come forth." Tursakius, seeing that they would 
break open the gates if he did not come forth with all speed, 
quickly saddled his horse, and, mounting it, girded on his 
sword ; and then, opening the gates, he darted forth with the 
greatest rapidity, and, brandishing his sword, made his way 
amfng those who resisted, and, rushing upon the chancellor, cut 
off his head. The rest, however, stood quite astounded, and 
mot one laid hands on him ; on which, passing through the 
midst of them, he entered the city, and going through it came 
'to the church of Saint Sophia, where, finding the patriarch 
Basilius, he cast himself at his feet, and told him of all that 
had happened to him. 

On this, the patriarch raising him from the ground, ex- 
claimed to the whole of the people there assembled, " Come 
hither and behold the man whom the Lord hath chosen to reign 
over us ; say, then, what you think thereof." To this they 

YOL. I. MM 



530 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1185. 

all made answer, " It pleases us that lie should be our lord, 
and that he should reign over us, and that we should ex- 
pel this perfidious Androneus, who is destroying us and our 
nation." Upon this, the patriarch consented to the wishes 
of the people, for he too had the same desire, and forthwith 
consecrated him emperor : after which, having celebrated 
mass and performed all things with due solemnity, the pa- 
triarch took him to his own house, and made a great enter- 
tainment for the chief men and tribunes of the city (for it was a 
festival), to which a multitude of the people and of the elders 
resorted. 

In the meantime, the emperor Androneus had come forth 
from his palace that he might see the end of Isaac Angelus, 
for the purpose of arresting whom he had sent his chancellor ; 
but, on hearing that the chancellor was slain and that Isaac 
Angelus had been proclaimed emperor, he returned to his 
palace, and the gate was shut. On this, the new emperor 
came with a great multitude of armed people and laid siege to 
the palace of Androneus. Suddenly, there came a great black 
raven, of sinister appearance, Avhich, sitting upon a wall of the 
palace, right opposite to the emperor Androneus, sent forth at him 
an unceasing and ill-boding cawing; upon which, conjecturing 
that this was an omen of his downfall and ruin, he seized his 
bow and drew it, but when he attempted to aim an arrow at 
it, the bow broke : on which, being greatly enraged, he threw 
it at his feet, saying, " Now I know of a truth that the day of 
my ruin is hastening on, and that the anger of God has fallen 
upon me." 

While he was still speaking, the followers of the new em- 
peror scaled the walls of the palace and took the emperor 
Androneus prisoner, and after binding him, delivered him up, 
to the new emperor ; who said to him, " Now, through the 
righteous judgment of God, have your sins overtaken you, by 
which you have deserved His anger, in oppressing the inno- 
cent, and slaying your lord, the emperor Alexis, and blinding 
my father and my brothers, and other nobles of the king- 
dom ; therefore you shall die by the most shocking of deaths;" 
after which he delivered him to the torturers, saying, " Take 
and scourge him through the streets and lanes of the city, 
and you are at liberty to put out one of his eyes, and to 
cut off one ear, one hand, and one foot. You must, however, 
preserve his life and his other limbs for greater torments." 



A.D. 1180. DISPUTE AB TO THE BISHOPRIC OF ST. ANDREW'S. 531 

After this command had been fully complied with, the new 
emperor delivered him to other tormentors, who, scattering 
straw over him, set fire to his sides and burned him till the 
whole of his skin was contracted into wrinkles : after which 
they fastened him to the tails of horses, and then, dragging 
him through the midst of the city, when he was dead, cast his 
body outside thereof. 

After this, the religious men who lived in that church in 
the city, which is called the Latin church, came to the emperor 
Tursakius and asked for his body ; on which he gave it to 
them, and they buried it in their church, which he had built. 
But his hand that had been cut off was suspended by chains 
of iron from a gibbet. In the next place, by command of the 
emperor Tursakius and the whole clergy and people, it was, 
ordered, after due consideration, that whatever Androneus had 
commanded to be done should be declared null and void : in 
consequence of which, all who by command of Androneus had 
gone into exile, returned home. In addition to this, the em- 
peror Tursakius slew the two sons of Androneus, and taking 
due precaution for the future, deposed the above-named patri- 
arch Basilius, and shut him up in a monastery. 

He also sent for the person who had foretold to him what 
should come to pass, and, contrary to the wishes of the canons 
of the church of Saint Sophia, appointed him patriarch : in 
consequence of which there arose a division among them, so 
that no one would pay obedience to him. As he was a man 
of peace and was unwilling to have any contention with 
them, he abdicated the patriarchate, on which the emperor 
appointed him supreme judge in ecclesiastical matters over 
all the churches of his empire. After this, the emperor Tur- 
saMus, by the advice of his family, married the daughter of 
Bela, king of Hungary, by whom he had sons and daughters, 
to one of whom Iloger, king of Sicily, son of Tancred, king of 
Sicily, was married. 

In the same year, Henry, king of England, the father, 
made a new coinage in England, and fined the moneyers 
for the baseness of the old coinage. In this year also, 
Hichard, bishop of Saint Andrew's, in Scotland, departed 
this life, after whose decease there immediately arose a 
division as to the election of a bishop. For the canons of 
the church of Saint Andrew's elected as their bishop master 

M M 2 









532 ANNA.LS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEff. A.D. 1180. 

John, surnamed Scot, while "William, king of the Scots, elected 
his chaplain Hugh, and ordered him to be consecrated by the 
bishops of his kingdom, in spite of the appeal made to our 
lord the pope by the before-named John, the bishop elect. 
In consequence of this, Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff, sent 
Alexis, subdeacon of the Church at Rome, into Scotland, to 
learn the merits of the controversy that existed between John, 
the bishop elect, and Hugh, who had been consecrated, and to 
put an end to the same. 

Upon his arrival in Scotland, after having made lengthened 
enquiries in presence of the clergy and the people of the 
kingdom, respecting the election of John and of Hugh, and the 
consecration of the said Hugh, and having learned that the 
before-named John had been canonically elected, and that Hugh, 
after appeal had been made to the Roman Pontiff, had been, 
violently thrust by the king into the bishopric of Saint Andrew's, 
he without any hesitation deposed him from the bishopric of 
Saint Andrew's, and by virtue of the authority entrusted to 
him, condemned him to perpetual silence. The election also of 
John he confirmed, and caused him to be consecrated by the 
bishops of Scotland, the king neither forbidding nor opposing 
the same, indeed, rather, in conformity with the advice of the 
bishops of the kingdom, sanctioning it. But immediately after 
his consecration had taken place, the king forbade him to stay 
in his kingdom. On the other hand, Hugh conducted himself 
as a bishop none the less than before, and, taking with him the 
sacramental vessels that belonged to the see, and the crozier and 
ring, together with other things which he unlawfully withheld, 
departed for Rome ; on which, because he was unwilling t 
restore what he had carried away, Alexis excommunicated him, 
and the Supreme Pontiff confirmed the sentence ; whereupon 
the pope wrote to the following effect to the bishops and other 
ecclesiastical men of the kingdom of Scotland : 

The letter of pope Alexander relative to John and Hugh, the 
bishops of Saint Andrew's. 

" Alexander, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, 
to his venerable brethren, the whole of the bishops, and his 
dearly beloved sons the abbats and other prelates of churches 
throughout Scotland appointed, to the prior, canons, clergy, 
and people of Saint Andrew's, health and the Apostolic bene- 



A.D. 1180. LETTER OF POPE ALEXANDER. 533 

diction. Inasmuch as we understood that our venerable 
brother John, now bishop of Saint Andrew's, was canoni- 
cally elected, and that after his election, an appeal then pending, 
Hugh, with rash presumption, being thrust into the said church 
by lay power, had dared to be consecrated thereto ; therefore, 
by our Apostolic authority making null and void his election, 
we directed our dear son, Alexis, our subdeacon, as legate of 
the Apostolic See, to repair to your parts to take cognizance of 
the election of the before-named John ; who, having, as we are 
informed by the testimony of many, acted therein with mature 
deliberation and in a canonical manner, found his election to 
be canonical, and, after many delays, in which he acted in 
deference to his royal highness, confirmed the same with the 
Apostolic authority, enjoining all on our behalf who belonged 
to the church of Saint Andrew's to show due reverence and 
obedience to the said John as being duly elected. Whereupon, 
inasmuch as no one, by reason of their dread of the king, dared 
openly to obey this command, the said legate laid under an 
interdict, not the kingdom, as he lawfully might have done, 
but the see. Inasmuch therefore as the chief men, both eccle- 
siastical as well as secular, having been solemnly bound upon 
1 oath by our most dearly beloved son in Christ, William, the 
illustrious king of the Scots, to give good counsel thereon, 
i while the king himself had strictly promised that he would 
abide by their advice, all made answer as one man that he 
ought not any further to molest the consecration of the afore- 
said John made in presence of our legate and four bishops (the 
fifth being sick, but by writing consenting thereto) but allow 
him peacefully to be consecrated to his see. Wherefore we 
do by this Apostolic writing command the whole of you, and 
do, >mder peril of your orders and benefices, enjoin you, that 
putting on a spirit of forbearance, you will, within eight days 
after the receipt hereof, all appeal set aside, with due honor 
reinstate him in his see, and labor prudently and manfully 
for the upholding of the rights of the Church, and use all 
diligence in appeasing the irritation of the king, and shew all 
the respect and honor to the aforesaid bishop which you were 
wont to shew to his predecessors. And if the king shall will 
any otherwise, or even be warped by the counsels of wicked 
men, it is your duty to pay obedience rather to God and to 
the holy Church of Rome than to men ; otherwise the sen- 






534 ANJfALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEK. A.D. 1180. 

tence which our venerable brother Hugh, bishop of Durham, 
has pronounced upon the rebellious and contumacious, 57 we shall, 
with God's assistance, confirm and order to be strictly observed." 

Another Letter of pope Alexander on the same subject. 

" Alexander, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his venerable brethren, and his dearly beloved sons the prelates 
of churches appointed throughout Scotland, health and the Apos- 
tolic benediction. Whereas it has been notified unto us, that 
Hugh, who had been intruded upon the church of Saint An- 
drew's in Scotland, having unlawfully withheld the episcopal 
vessels, 58 the crozier and ring, and other things which he had 
without good reason taken away, and, having been frequently 
warned thereon to return to a sense of his duty, despised the 
said warnings ; on which our dearly beloved son Alexis, the sub- 
deacon and legate of the Apostolic See, in presence of yourselves 
and many of the clergy and people, relying upon the Apostolic 
authority, called upon him, under pain of excommunication, 
within fifteen days either to restore what he had taken away or 
carried off, or else to make becoming satisfaction for the same. 
And whereas, he, persisting in the sin of his arrogance, has in 
no way listened to the warnings of our legate aforesaid. We 
therefore of our authority, confirming the sentence pronounced 
by him, do by these Apostolic writings order and enjoin the 
whole of you, that you do forthwith, relying on the grace of 
God, and all fear laid aside, and no appeal whatever with- 
standing, denounce him as under the ban of excommunica- 
tion, and carefully avoid him as excommunicated, until such 
time as he shall restore to our brother, John, bishop of Saint 
Andrew's, and his church, such of the things above mentioned 
as he has taken away, or an equivalent for the same, and make 
proper satisfaction for such other things as he has made away 
with." 

In addition to this, our lord, the pope, gave to Roger, the 
archbishop of York, the legateship in Scotland, and ordered 
him, together with Hugh, bishop of Durham, to pronounce 
sentence of excommunication upon the king of the Scots, and 
place his kingdom under an interdict, unless he should allow 
the aforesaid John to hold his bishopric in peace, and give him 

57 " Praecipiemus" seems to be the proper reading, and not " praecipimus." 
48 " Capellam." The " capella " of a bishop was the materiel which 
were employed by him in the performance of bis sacred offices. 






A.D. 1180. LETTEB OP POPE ALEXANDEB. 535 

security that he would keep the same. The said pope also, 
strictly, and in virtue of the obedience he owed, forbade John, 
bishop of Saint Andrew's, either moved by love or fear of 
any person, or by any one's suggestion or command, to presume 
and dare with rashness to desert the church of Saint Andrew's, 
to which he had been consecrated and confirmed with the Apos- 
tolic authority, or to receive another ; adding, that if he should 
attempt so to do, he would deprive him of both. 59 And with 
reference thereto, the Supreme Pontiff wrote to the following 
effect 

The Letter of pope Alexander to William, Icing of the Scots, 
on the same matter. 

"Alexander, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, 
to William, the illustrious king of the Scots, health and the 
Apostolic benediction. We bear it in mind that we have 
anxiously laboured for your peace and liberty, hoping that 
thereby you would be more strongly confirmed, and increase 
apace in dutifulness to the Apostolic See, and would more wil- 
lingly preserve the liberties of the Church ; but when we give 
our attention to what you have done relative to our venerable 
brother John, bishop of Saint Andrew's, in Scotland, and what 
disposition you have hitherto shewn with regard to him, we 
find ourselves compelled to entertain apprehensions at variance 
with the hopes which we did entertain, as to the warmth of 
your royal dutifulness. Wishing, nevertheless, to make trial 
if our forbearance can bring your royal feelings to true re- 
pentance, we do by these Apostolic writings strenuously ad- 
monish and enjoin your mightiness, that, within twenty days 
after the receipt hereof, you make peace with the said bishop, 
ani give security for the same, so that he may have no room 
to fear your royal indignation. Otherwise, you are to know 
that we have given orders to our venerable brother Roger, 
the archbishop of York and legate of the Apostolic See, in 
Scotland, to lay your kingdom under an interdict, no appeal 
whatever withstanding, and to pronounce sentence of excom- 
munication against your person, if you shall be unwilling to 
desist from tliis course. And further, be assured of this for 
certain, that if you shall think fit to persist in your violent 
measures, in the same way, that we have laboured that your 
69 His present see and the one he should accept. 



536 A1TNALS OF KOGEE DE HOVEEE*. A.D. 1180- 

kingdom might gain its liberty, so shall we use our best en- 
deavours that it may return to its former state of subjection." 

The king of Scotland, however, being in nowise willing 
to obey the Apostolic mandates, expelled the said John, 
bishop of Saint Andrew's, and Matthew, bishop of Aberdeen, 
his uncle, from his kingdom. Accordingly, Roger, archbishop 
of York, and Hugh, bishop of Durham, and Alexis, the legate 
of the Apostolic See, in obedience to the mandate of the Su- 
preme Pontiff, pronounced sentence of excommunication against 
the person of the king of Scotland, and laid his kingdom under 
interdict. 

In the same year, a certain priest, Swerre Birkebain by 
name, commenced a war with Magnus, king of Norway. 
Now the following were the grounds of the claims which the 
before-named Swerre made against the said Magnus, rela- 
tive to the kingdom of Norway. Siward and Magnus were 
brothers. Siward was king of Norway ; and Magnus, hia 
brother, crossed over to Ireland and gained the greater part of 
it by arms ; he was the father of Harold, and was shortly 
after, slain by the Irish. The said Harold, after the death of 
his father, passed over into Norway, to his uncle, king Siward, 
and demanded of him a part of that kingdom, on which he 
gave him that part of the kingdom which belonged to big 
father of right. 

Now king Siward had a son, whom he named Magnus, 
and a daughter called Christiana, and whom he gave in 
marriage to earl Herling, who by her became the father of a 
son, whom he named Magnus. On the death of earl Herling, 
his son Magnus succeeded him in the earldom ; and shortly 
after, a serious disagreement arising between him 60 and Harold, 
the said Harold took him prisoner in battle, and blinded him 
and deprived him of his virility, and hanged Reginald of 
Bergen. Magnus, after losing his sight, became a monk, and 
Harold, having obtained the whole kingdom of Norway, be- 
came the father of four sons, namely, Ingo, who was legiti- 
mate, and Siward, Augustin, and Magnus, who were ille- 
gitimate and by different mothers. A certain clerk, Siward 
by name, insidiously slew the before-named king Harold by 
night, and after his death, taking the before-named Magnus, 

60 it will appear in the sequel that this is a mistake ; it was probably 
Masnus, the son of Siward, and uncle of this Magnus, who was slain by 
Harold. 



A.D. 1180. SWERRE SECRETLY ENTERS DRONTHEIM. 537 

who was his kinsman, from the abbey, attempted to restore 
him to the throne, on which a war ensuing with the sons of 
Harold, he was slain, and Magnus, who had been a monk, 
shared the same fate. 

After their death, Ingo, Si ward, and Augustin, obtained 
the kingdom. Siward became the father of Haco, Siward, and 
Suer, who were all illegitimate, and born of different mothers. 
Augustin had a son who was also named Augustin, and was 
of legitimate birth ; while Ingo was the father of Siward and 
Augustin. They being slain, th.B before-named Haco slew 
Ingo, and obtained the throne. The chief men of the king- 
dom being indignant at this, raised Magnus, the son of Herling 
and the before-named Christiana, to the throne. Being, how- 
ever, unable to make head in war against Haco, they retired 
to Denmark, where in a short time having recruited their forces, 
they returned to Norway. A battle being fought between 
them and Haco at Funenburgh, they gained possession of his 
ships and arms, and put him to flight. 

In the following summer, Haco was pursued by Magnus, 
the son of Herling and Christiana, and a naval engagement 
taking place between them at a spot called Vee, Haco was slain, 
on which Magnus, the son of Herling and Christiana, gained 
the throne. In consequence of this, Siward, the brother of 
Haco, rose in rebellion against him, and a battle being fought 
between them, Siward was slain ; on which Magnus was made 
king ; and was crowned in the fifteenth year of his age and 
the second of his reign, being the fourth year of the papacy of 
the pope Alexander the Third, who sent to him master Stephen 
of Orvieto as legate. 

!S T ow, while the before-named king Magnus was celebrating 
the festival of the Nativity of our Lord, at Funenburgh, Augus- 
tin, the son of the before-named Augustin, surprised him with 
a body of horse, and attempted to slay the king while among 
his guests ; but the king, being forewarned thereof, went out 
against him, and, an engagement taking place, slew him, together 
with four hundred of his men. Those, however, who escaped 
from the battle, to the amount of eleven hundred warriors, ad- 
hered to the before-named Swerre, the priest, the son of Siward. 
This Swerre, having levied a large force, on the night after 
the feast of Saint Botolph, secretly entered the city of Dron- 
theim, where king Magnus, with his father, earl Herling, and 



538 AOTTALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEIf. A. D. 1180. 

others of his friends were staying, and surprised them, and 
slew a great number. On this occasion there fell earl Herling, 
the king's father, John de Randeburgh, who was married to 
the king's sister, and Siward, the son of Nicholas, with many 
others : the king, however, leaving the city, with some few 
of his followers, made his escape. But in the following year, ' 
king Magnus, levying a considerable army, attacked the before- 
named Swerre near the city of Drontheim, and, at the first 
onset, slew many of his foes : but at length, by the secret dis- 
pensation of God, after many of the best men of his house- 
hold had been slain, he took to flight, together with a few of 
his followers, and effected his escape. 

On this, the priest Swerre pursued him as far as Bergen, 
on which the king, flying thence, left him in possession of that 
city; and Augustin, the archbishop of Drontheim, being unwil- 
ling to make any submission to the priest Swerre, left his arch- 
bishopric, and coming to England, excommunicated Swerre. 
It deserves to be recorded, that this king Magnus was the first 
king of Norway that was crowned. 

In the same year, Henry, king of England, the father, ap- 
pointed Eanulph de Glanville chief justiciary of all England : 
by whose wisdom were enacted the laws underwritten, which 
we call the " Anglican Laws." 

Of the Laws and Statutes of England, after the Conquest by 
William the Elder. 

* " Here are set forth the enactments made by William, king 
of the English, and his principal men, after the Conquest of Eng- 
land. In the first place, before every thing, he desired that 
one God should be worshipped throughout his kingdom, that 
the one faith of Christ should always be kept inviolate, and 
that peace, security and good will should be preserved between 
the English and the Normans. ' We do also enact, that every 
free man shall on his word and oath affirm, that, whether in 
England or out of it, he is willing to be faithful to his 
lord, king William, to preserve his territories and honors to 
him with all due fidelity, and to defend the same against his 
enemies. We do will also, that all men whom we have brought 

60 The numerous defects in the text of Hoveden have here been corrected 
by a reference to the more full copy of these laws in Wilkins's " Leges 
Anglo-Saxonicac." London, 1721, p. 228; et seq. 



A.D. 1180. THE ANGLICAN LAWS AND STATUTES. 539 

with us, or who shall have come after us, shall be under our 
protection. And if any one of them shall be slain, his supe- 
rior lord, if he can, is, within fifteen days, to arrest his mur- 
derer ; but if not then, he is to begin to pay to us forty-six marks 
of silver, so far as the property of the said lord shall last. But 
where the property of the lord shall not suffice, then the 
whole hundred, in which the murder took place, shall pay in 
common what remains unpaid. Also, every person who is a 
Frank by birth, and was in the time of Edward, our kinsman, 
residing in England, and subject to 'the customs of the English, 
which they call ' Anlote' or ' Anscote,' 61 is to pay the same 
according to the laws of the English.' This claim was made 
and confirmed in the city of Gloucester. 62 ' We do also forbid 
that any live stock shall be sold or bought except within cities, 
and then in the presence of three faithful witnesses, and that 
anything second-hand 62 * shall be sold without a security and 
warranty for the same. And if any person shall do otherwise, 
he is to pay back the money, and then a penalty [to the 
king].' It was also there enacted, that if a Frank by birth 
should accuse an Englishman of perjury, murder, theft, ho- 
micide, or ' ran,' 63 whereby is meant open robbery, which can- 
not be denied, the Englishman was to defend himself in such 
manner as he should think best, either by judgment by 
iron, 64 or by wager of battle. But if the Englishman should 
happen to be infirm, then he was to find some one to do so in 
his stead. If either of them should be conquered, he was to 
pay to the king a penalty of forty shillings. ' But if any En- 
glishman shall charge a Frank by birth [therewith], and shall 
be ready to prove the same by the judgment or by duel, then 
our will is, that the Frank shall clear himself by oath, not 
[by the judgment] by iron. This also we do command, that 
all shall observe the laws of king Edward in all respects, with 
the addition of what we have for the benefit of the English 
enacted. Every man who shall assert himself to be free, shall 
be on suretyship, 63 in order that his surety may produce him 

61 This was a tax which was to be paid in equal shares, one scot and 
one lot. 62 In civitate Claudia. 82 * Lambarde suggests 

" necessaria," " necessaries ; " Wilkins has " vendita," " things already 
sold." " Vetusta." as in the text, is most probably correct. 

63 This Saxon word is still perpetuated in our saying, " to take all one 
can wrap and rend." w Holding red hot iron in the hand unharmed. 

** Alluding to the institution of Frank-pledge. 



540 AJOTAXS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.n. 1.180. 

for trial, if guilty of any offence ; and if any such person shall 
run away and escape, then the sureties are to see that they 
pay the amount claimed, and make proof that they have been 
privy to no fraud in the person who has escaped. The same 
summons shall be made of hundreds and counties, as our prede- 
cessors have enacted : and those who ought in justice to appear, 
-and shall be unwilling so to do, shall be once summoned. And if 
on a second summons they shall not appear, then one ox shall 
be taken, and on a third summons, another ox, and on the fourth 
S occasion, the amount claimed shall be paid out of the property of 
the said person, by way of what is called ' scapgeld,' besides a 
penalty to the king. We do also forbid any person to sell a 
man out of the country. We do also forbid that any person 
' shall be put to death or hanged for any crime : but his eyes 
- may be put out, and he may be deprived of his virility. 65 And 
this command is not to be violated, on pain of plenary penalty 
to ourselves.' 

" King William, in the fourth year of his reign, by the 
advice of his barons, caused the nobles and wise men among 
the English, and those who were learned in their laws, to be 
summoned throughout all the earldoms of England, in order 
that he might hear from them their laws, ordinances, and 
customs. Accordingly, twelve men, elected from each county 
throughout the whole kingdom, first gave assurance by oath, 
that, so long as they could, proceeding in the right path and 
swerving neither to the right nor to the left, they would dis- 
close the enactments of their laws and customs, neither omitting 
nor adding, nor by prevarication changing anything. There- 
fore, making a commencement with the laws of Holy Mother 
Church, inasmuch as through her alone both king and kingdom 
have a firm and lasting foundation, they set forth her laws, 
liberties, and rights of protection, to this effect : <** 



Of Clerks and their Possessions. 

" Every clerk, and all scholars 66 as well, and all their pro- 
perty and possessions, are everywhere to enjoy the protection 
of God and of the Holy Church. 

65 Wilkins adds, " or feet or hands, that in his maimed state he may 
remain a living sign of his treachery and wickedness." 

5 * The following translation is from the text of these laws found in Wil- 
kins, p. 197, et seq., which is far more correct than that found in Hoveden. 

68 Probably novices in the schools of monasteries. 



A.D. 1180. THE LAWS OF HEJfRT THE SECOND. 541 



Of the Times and Days of the King's Protection. 

"From the Ad vent of our Lord until the octave of Epiphany 
there is to be the peace of God and of the Church throughout 
all the kingdom : and, in like manner, from Septuagesima 
until the octave of Easter. Likewise, from the Ascension of our 
Lord until the octave of Pentecost. Likewise, on all the days 
of the Four Seasons, 67 and on all Saturdays, from the ninth hour 
until Monday. Likewise, on the vigils of Saint Mary, Saint 
Michael, Saint John the Baptist, of all the Apostles, and of those 
Saints whose days are announced by the priests on the Lord's 
Day, and of All Saints on the calends of November, always 
from the ninth hour of the vigil and during the subsequent 
festival. Likewise, in parishes in which the day of dedication 
is kept. Likewise, in parishes, when the festival of the Saint 
of the church is celebrated. And if any person comes de- 
voutly to the festival of the Saint, he is to have protection 68 
in going, staying, and returning. Likewise, for all Christians, 
when going to Church for the purpose of prayer, there is to 
be protection both in going and returning. In like manner, 
those who are coming to dedications, synods, and chapters, 
whether they have been summoned, or whether they have them- 

i selves to perform any part therein, are to enjoy full protection. 
Also, if any person who has been excommunicated shall resort 
to the bishop for the purpose of absolution, in going and return- 

i ing he is to have the protection of God and of the Holy Church : 
and if any person shall do him any injury, the bishop is to do 
justice upon him. And if any arrogant person shall refuse to 
make amends on judgment given by the bishop, then the bishop 
is ^o make the same known to the king : and in such case the 
king will compel the offender to make amends to the person 
to whom he has done such injury, that is to say, in the first 
place to the bishop, and then to the king ; and thus, in such 
case, there will be two swords, and the one sword shall aid the 
other. 

c ' These were the four seasons for fasting prescribed by the early Ro- 
man church, styled the Vernal, ^Estival, Autumnal and Iliemal fasts, or 
the fasts of the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth month ; March being 
reckoned as the first month. 

68 In these latter cases, " pax," " peace," or " protection," means merely 
protection from legal process. 



542 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1180. 

Of the jurisdiction of the Holy Church. 

" Wherever the king's justice shall hold his sittings, or who- 
ever the person whose cause he shall be occupied with, if a 
person sent by a bishop shall come there and open a cause of 
the Holy Church, the same is to be first brought to a con- 
clusion ; for it is just that God should be everywhere held in 
honor before man. 

Of all who hold of the Church. 

" "Whoever shall hold anything of the Church, or shall have a 
tenement upon the lands of the Church, he shall not, though he 
may have committed an offence, be forced to plead out of the 
ecclesiastical court, unless, which God forbid, there shall have 
been a miscarriage of justice in such ecclesiastical court. 

Of the accused who take refuge with the Church. 

" Whatever accused or guilty person shall flee to a church 
for the sake of protection, from the time that he shall have 
reached the porch of such church, he shall on no account be 
seized by any one pursuing him, except only by the bishop or 
by his servant. And if, on his flight, he shall enter the house 
of a priest or his court-yard, he is to have the same security 
and protection as he would have had in the church, suppos- 
ing always, that the priest's house and court-yard are standing 
upon the land of the Church. If the person is a thief or burglar, 
that which he has wrongfully taken, if he has it in his posses- 
sion, he is to restore, and if he has entirely made away with 
it, and has anything of his own by which to make restitution, 
he is to make restitution in full to him whom he has injured. 
And if the thief has thus acted according to his usual prac- 
tice, and shall happen to have frequently made his escape to 
churches and priests' houses, then, after making restitution of 
what he has taken away, he is to abjure that county, and not 
to return thereto ; and if he does not 67 make restitution, no one 
is to presume to harbour him, unless with leave granted by the 
king. 

Of breach of the Protection of the Church. 

" If any person shall by force violate the protection of the 
Holy Church, the same belongs to the jurisdiction of the bishops. 
( And if the guilty person shall, by taking to flight or by arro- 
gantly slighting it, despise their sentence, then complaint is to 

67 The " nisi" in the text of Hoveden is preferable here to " si forte" 
in that of Wilkius. 



, A.D. 1180. THE LAWS OF HENEY THE SECOND. 543 

be made against him before the king after the expiration of 
forty days, and the king's justice shall exact of him surety and 
jjpledges, if he can give the same, until he shall have made satis- 
} faction, first to God, and then to the king. And if for one-and- 
thirty days he shall not be able to be found, either by his friends 
and acquaintances, or by the king's justice, then the king shall 
outlaw him by the word of his mouth. And if he shall after- 
wards be found, and can be taken, he is to be delivered alive to 
the king, and if he defends himself, then his head. For from 
the day of his outlawry he has the head of a wolf; which 
in the English language is called ' Wulvesheofod.' M And this 
is the common and universal law as to all outlaws. 

Of the Tithes of the Church. 

" Of all yearly produce of the earth the tenth sheaf is due to 
God, and ought therefore to be paid to Him. If any person has 
a stud of mares, he is to give the tenth foal : he who has only one 
or two, is for each foal to pay one penny. In the same manner, 
Jxe who has a number of cows is to give the tenth calf ; if only 
lone or two, he is to pay for each calf one penny. He also who 
makes cheese is to give the tenth thereof to God, and if he 
does not make it, then he is to give the milk every tenth day. 
iln like manner, the tenth lamb, the tenth fleece, the tenth of 
the butter, and the tenth sucking-pig is to be given. 

Of small Tillies* 

" In like manner, as to the tenths of the profits of bees. 
jlMoreover, out of forests, meadows, waters, mills, parks, pre- 
serves, fisheries, shrubberies, gardens, merchandize, and all 
fother things which the Lord has given, the tenth part is to be 
restored to Him who has bestowed the other nine parts to- 
gether with the tenth. The person who withholds the same 
fmust be compelled to make payment thereof by judgment of 
i<the bishop, and of the king, if necessary. For thus did Saint 
Augustin teach, and these things were conceded by the king, 
ithe barons, and the people. But since then, by the instigation 
)f the devil, many have withheld the same, and rich priests, 
'Decoming negligent, have not taken care to undergo the trouble 
)f seeking them, because they had sufficient necessaries for the 

88 Also called " Wolfeshead," or " Wolferheued." This state of out- 
awry was so called, from its resemblance to that of the wolves which iu- 
'ested England, for whose heads a reward was offered. 



544 ANK&.LS OP EOGEK DE HOVEDEX. A.: 

support of life. But in many places there are now three or 
four churches where there was then hut one, and thereby their 
means have become diminished. 

Of those who have been adjudged by the Icing's justice to undergo 
the judgment of iron or of water. 

" On the day on which the judgment is to be held, the bishop 
is to come thither with his clergy, and in like manner the king's 
justice with lawful men of that county, who are to see and hear 
that all things are done with equity. Those whom the Lord 
in His mercy, and not through their own merits, shall think fit 
to save, are to be unmolested and to depart at liberty, and 
the king's justice is to pronounce judgment on those whom 
the iniquities of their crimes and not the Lord has con- 
demned. As to those barons who have jurisdiction over their 
homagers in their own courts, they are to see that they so act 
towards them, that they neither incur guilt before God, nor 
offend the king. And if a trial takes place in any of their 
courts of those who are homagers of other barons, then the 
king's justice must be present at such trial, inasmuch as, with- 
out his presence, the said trial may not be brought to a con- 
clusion. But if any baron shall happen not to have jurisdic- 
tion in the hundred where the trial takes place, then the mat- 
ter is to be brought for judgment to the nearest church where 
the king's court is held, saving always the right of such barons. 

Of Saint Peter's Penny, which in England is called Romescot. 

" Every person who shall have live stock to the value ot 
thirty pence on his property belonging to himself, shall, ac- 
cording to the law of the English, give one penny to Saint Peter, 
and according to the law of the Danes, half a mark. The 
said penny is to be mentioned on the feast of Saint Peter and 
Saint Paul, and to be collected on the feast which is called that 
of ' Saint Peter ad Vincula,' 93 so as not to be withheld beyond 
that day. If any person shall withhold the same, then the 
claim is to be brought before the king's justice, inasmuch as thif 
penny is the king's alms ; and the justice is to cause the penny 
to be paid, as also a fine to the bishop and to the king. And il 
any person shall chance to have more houses than one, then a* 
to that one in which he shall be residing at the feast of the 
apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul he is to pay the penny. 
69 Saint Peter in prison. 



A.D. 1180. THE LAWS OF HEJfEY THE SECOND. 545 

What 'Danegeld' is, and under what emergency it was first levied. 
-"The payment of Danegeld was first exacted by reason of 
the pirates. For, harassing this country, they used their 
utmost endeavours to lay it waste. In order to check 
their ravages, it was enacted, that Danegeld should be paid 
yearly ; namely, twelve pence for each hide of land through- 
out the whole country, for the purpose of hiring persons to 
resist the incursions of the pirates. From this Danegeld all 
the Church was free and exempt, and all the land which be- 
longed to the Church as of its own demesne, wherever situate ; 
it paying nothing whatever towards such a tax, because more 
trust was put in the prayers of the Church than in its defence by 
arms. [And the English 69 church enjoyed this exemption down 
to the times of William the Younger, who was surnamed Rufus, 
when he required aid from the barons of England in order 
to regain Normandy and retain possession of it against his 
brother Robert, surnamed Curthose, who was setting out for 
Jerusalem. It was conceded to him, though not sanctioned 
or confirmed by law ; but by reason of the necessity of the 
case, he caused four shillings to be paid to him for every hide 
of land, that of the Church not even excepted. While the 
collection of the tax was being made, the Holy Church pro- 
tested against it, demanding her exemption, but she availed 
nothing thereby.] 

Of the various kinds of the Sing's Protection, along the Four 

Streets or Royal Roads, and along rivers, by the navigation of 

which provisions are carried. 

" The king's protection is of various kinds. One kind is 
given under his own hand, which is called by the English 
4 Cyninges hande sealde grith.' One kind is that which lasts 

r\ period of eight days from the time of his coronation. 
There are also eight days at the Nativity of our Lord, eight 
jdays at Easter, and eight at Pentecost. Another protection 
is that given by his letters. Another, that which the Four 
public Roads possess, Watlingstrete, 70 Fosse/ 1 Ikenildestrete, 72 

69 This must be an interpolation, if these laws belong to the time of 
Edward the Confessor and William the Conqueror. The more general 
opinion now is, that they belong to the time of William II. 

7U From Devonshire to Chester. 71 From Caithness, in Scotland, 

;o Totnes, in Devonshire. 72 It extended from Saint David's, in 

Wales, to Tynemouth, in Northumberland. 

VOL. I. N N 



546 AXNALS OF BOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1180. 

and Ermingstrete ; two of which extend along the length 
and two along the breadth of the kingdom. Another is that 
which the waters of certain rivers known by name possess, 
by the navigation of which provisions are carried from dif- 
ferent places to cities or boroughs. This protection under 
the king's hand, on the day of his coronation, and under his 
letters, is to be observed under penalty of a fine : in like 
manner a breach of the protection on the four public roads and 
the principal rivers is to be deemed equal to assault. If 
any building is erected [on the said roads or rivers], the same 
shall be destroyed, and one half of the expenses of the repairs 
thereof shall be paid. And if a person shall knowingly have 
committed such breach, the fine is to be paid by the eighteen 
hundreds, 75 in places subject to the Danish laws, 76 and his body 
shall be at the king's mercy. According to the law of the En- 
glish, his were, 77 that is to say, the price of his ransom is to 
be the same as the manbote payable to the lords for those of 
their men who have been slain. The manbote, according to 
the Danish laws, for a villein or a sokeman, is twelve oras j 79 
but for free men, three marks. But manbote, according to the 
law of the English, is three marks to the king, and to the 
archbishop, for the men who belong to them ; but to the bishop 
and to the earl of the same county, and to the king's seneschal 
it is twenty shillings ; and to other barons, ten shillings. Also, 
a recompense is to be paid to the relations of the person slain, 
or the duel is to be waged with them, as to which the English 
proverb says, ' Bige spere of side other here.' * Protection, 
however, upon the Four public Roads and the before-mentioned 
rivers lies under a higher jurisdiction than what we have men- 
tioned as to assault. Also, if a mill, or fishery, or any other 
work that is an obstruction to them is in preparation, the 
said works must be immediately destroyed, and the public 

73 Extending from the south of England towards Carlisle. 

75 See page 554. 76 The ' Denelega,' or law established by the 

Danes for those parts inhabited by their own nation. 

77 The ' were,' or ' wergeld,' was paid by a murderer, partly to the king 
for the loss of a subject, partly to the lord whose vassal he was, and 
partly to the next of kin of the person slain. 

79 The " ora " was a Danish silver coin, probably about ten shillings in 
value. 

so ti jj uv a S pp ar fo r your side, or wield it yourself," meaning, " Either 
hire a person to wage the battle for you, or fight yourself." 



A.D. 1180. THE LAWS OF HENEY THE SECOND. 547 

Roads and rivers must be placed in their former state of repair, 
and a fine to the king must not be forgotten. The lesser 
roads, however, leading from one city to another, and from 
borough to borough, and along which merchandize is carried 
and other business done, are to be subject to the laws of the 
county ; and if any person erects any work to their detriment, 
the same is to be levelled with the ground, and the roads are to 
be at once put in repair, and reparation is to be made, accord- 
ing to the law of the said county, to the earl and sheriff thereof. 
The same is to be done likewise as to the lesser rivers. As to 
the lesser rivers which carry vessels with the things that are 
necessary to boroughs and cities, wood, at least, and things of 
that nature, reparation of them is likewise to be made as pre- 
scribed by the law relative to the lesser roads. 

Of the Divisions of the Shires. 

" The divisions of the king's Shires properly belong to the 
same jurisdiction as the four Royal public Roads. The division 
Jinto Hundreds and Wapentakes, with their jurisdiction, belong 
to the earls and sheriffs of the counties. Treasures found in 
ithe ground belong to our lord the king, unless they are found in 
a church or in a burial-ground. And even if found there, the 
gold belongs to the king, and a moiety of the silver, and the 
other moiety to the church where it is found, whatever church 
it is, whether rich or poor. 

Of the Laws as to Murderers. 

" If a person was murdered anywhere, the murderer was 
sought throughout the vill where the person murdered was 
found. If he was found, he was to be delivered up to the king's 
justice, within eight days after the murder. If he could not be 
foutfd, then a period of a month and a day was given for 
making search for him ; and if within the given period he 
3ould not be found, then six and forty marks were levied 
upon the vill. But if it was not able to make so great a 
payment, then the amount was to be paid by the hundred 
which the vill was unable to pay. But when the boundaries of 
the vill were utterly confused, then the barons were to see that 
.t was collected throughout the hundred, and was sealed with the 
*eal of some baron of the county, and then carried to the king's 
treasurer, who was to keep the same under seal for a year and 
i day. If the murderer could bo found within that time, 

> x 2 



548 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1180. 

then he was to be delivered up to the king's justice, on which they 
were to have back the forty-six marks that had been deposited 
with the king's treasurer. But if he could not be apprehended 
within the said time, then the relations of the murdered person 
were to have six marks and the king the remaining forty. If 
his relations could not be found, then his superior lord was to 
receive them, and if he had no lord, then his fellow, e3 that is 
to say, the person who was tied to him by bonds of fidelity. 
But if there were none of these, in such case, the king of the 
realm, under whose safeguard and protection they all live, was 
to take back the six marks together with his own forty. 

" The law of murder was first enacted in the time of Canute, 
the Danish king, who, after gaining possession of England, 
and reducing it to a state of peace, at the request of the English 
barons, sent his army back to Denmark. The said barons, 
however, became surety to the king, that as many of his people 
as he should wish to retain with himself should enjoy assured 
protection in all respects ; and that if any of the English should 
happen to slay one of them, and could not defend himself 
against the charge, by the judgment of God, that is to say, by 
judgment of water or of iron, justice should be executed upon 
him ; and that if he should take to flight, then payment was 
to be made as mentioned above. 

Of the Duties of the King. 

" The king, as being the viceregent of the Supreme King, 
is appointed for the purpose of shewing due respect to and 
protecting the worldly kingdom, and the people of God, and, 
above all things, His Holy Church, and of ruling and de- 
fending it from those who would injure it, and of removing 
from it, and crushing and utterly dispersing all evil-doers ; and 
if he does not do so, then the name of king will not belong 
to him, pope John truly testifying that he loses the name 
of king who does not act as king. [On Pepin 84 and his son 
Charles, who were not yet kings, but only princes under the 
king of the Franks, hearing this definite opinion, pronounced 
as truthfully as prudently on the name of a king, quoted by 
William the Bastard, king of England, they foolishly wrote 
to the pope to enquire if on those terms the kings of the Franks 

83 " Felagus." 64 Probably an interpolation. It is more full in 

liuveden than in the text of Wilkins. 



A.D. 1180. THE LAWS OF HENKY THE SECOND. 549 

were to remain contented solely with the name of king. On 
which they received for answer that those ought to be called 
kings who watch, defend, and govern the Church of God and 
His people, in imitation of the Royal Psalmist, who says, ' He 
that worketh vanity shall not dwell in my house.' 86 ] 

Of the guilty condemned by Law who have recourse to the king's 
mercy. 

" If a person guilty of a capital offence shall ask the king's 
mercy for his crime, in his fear of death or of loss of limb, 
the king may, by the law of his dignity, pardon him if he 
pleases, even though he be deserving of death. The male- 
factor, however, shall make redress, so far as he shall be 
able, for the offence of which he has been guilty, and shall give 
sureties that he will keep the peace and observe the laws ; and 
if such sureties shall not be forthcoming, he shall be banished 
the country. 

What those are to do whom the Icing shall think proper to deliver 
from death, 

" The king has also another prerogative of mercy as to those 
who are under arrest. For wherever he shall come, whether into 
city, borough, castle, vill, or even in the road, if a person shall 
be under arrest, it is in his power, by a single word, to re- 
lease him from such arrest. The person released shall, however, 
make satisfaction to the person against whom the crime was 
committed. But as to a murderer, traitor, or criminal of that 
description, although the king shall pardon them as to life and 
limb, they shall on no account with the sanction of the law 
remain in the country ; but shall immediately make oath that 
they will go to the sea-shore within a time prescribed to them 
I by^he justice, and will immediately, as soon as they find a ship 
and a fair wind, cross the seas. And if, being forsworn, they 
shall afterwards remain in this country, whoever shall be able 
to find them, may execute summary justice on them without 
judgment pronounced; and if any person shall gratuitously 
harbour them for a single night only he shall be fined according 
to the greater law of the English or of the Danes, on the second 
occasion twofold, and for the third offence he shall be adjudged 
to be the associate and accomplice of malefactors. 

06 Psalm ci. 7. Our version has it, " He that worketh deceit." 



550 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1180. 

' 

Of the wives of malefactors and their children. 

" If any such shall have wives living in this country, and 
any one of the relatives of the person murdered shall say that 
they were accomplices in the crime, they shall make proof of 
their innocence by the judgment of God ; and if the mercy 
of God and their own innocence shall save them, they may 
continue to be lawful persons with their dowries and marriage 
portions. But children who, before commission of the crime, 
were born or begotten, are not to lose their lawful rights for a 
crime committed after they were begotten, nor are they to be 
deprived of their right of heirship. 

What " Frithborg" means, or the oath of the Ten Men, which the 
people of York call " Tenemental." 

'' There is likewise one great and especial institution, by means 
'f which all people are kept in a state of the greatest security, 
namely, where each person giving that pledge for himself on a 
certain security, which the English call ' Freoborger.' * The 
people of York, however, and they only, call it ' Tien manna 
tala,' 89 which means ' The number often men.' This surety was 
exercised in the following manner ; Inasmuch as all men in 
all vills throughout the whole kingdom were bound to be di- 
vided into frank-pledges of ten, if one of the ten were guilty 
of an offence, there would be nine to force him to make re- 
dress ; and if he took to flight, a term of thirty- one days by 
law was granted them. On the person being sought for, and 
found, he was taken before the king's justice, and out of his 
property reparation was instantly made for the injury he had 
done ; and if after that he was guilty of any offence, then 
justice was executed upon his body. But if within the time 
before-mentioned he could not be found, then, as there was in 
every frithborg one head man whom they called ' Freoborger 
heofod,' 90 this head man would choose two of the best men of 
his own frithborgers, and then of the three frithborgs that 
were nearest, he would take the head man of each, and two of 

88 Frank-pledge, or surety given by ten men for the good behaviour of 
the eleventh. 

99 Or " Tenemental." It was also called a " Decennary," and each 
person bound for himself and his neighbour, was called a " decennier." 

90 " Head of the frithborg." He was also called the " deciner," or 
"doziner." 



A.D. 1180. THE LAWS OF HEIfBY THE SECOND. 551 

the best men of each of those frithborgs, if he could find them, 
after which, himself being the twelfth, he would purge himself 
and his own frithborg of the offence, if he could, and of the 
escape of the said malefactor. If he could not do this, then 
he and his frithborg were to make good the loss out of the 
property of the malefactor so far as it would go, and on that 
falling short, make up the amount from the property of him- 
self and his frithborg, and so account to the justice for the 
amount legally adjudicated against them. Then last of all 
the nine would swear by themselves that they had been unable 
to make satisfaction therein according to their oath, by means 
of the three nearest frithborgs, and that they would in nowise 
be guilty thereof, and that if they should ever be able to cap- 
ture him, they would bring him to the justice, or inform the 
justice where he was. 

That all persons are to establish Frithborgs for their servants and 
dependants. 

" Archbishops, bishops, earls, and barons, are also to have 
their own knights and yeomen, their sewers, butlers, chamber- 
lains, cooks, and bakers, each in his own frithborg. They 
arc also to have their own esquires, or other servants, each in 
his own frithborg. And if these persons shall commit an 
offence against any man, and a charge shall be made by the 
neighbours against them, they are to compel them to make 
redress in their own courts ; that is to say, those who have the 
right of sac, and soc, and thol, and them, and infangthefe. 

" Sac, is when any person charges another by name with any 
offence and he denies it ; on which the fine levied on proof or 
disproof thereof, if there is one, belongs to the lord. 

" Soc, is when any person searches for anything on his lands, 
in which case, even though it be stolen it belongs to him, 
\vhcther found or not. 

" Thol, which we call ' Tholonium,' is the privilege of him 
who has the right of buying and selling on his own lands. 

" Them, is where any person lays claim to property in the 
hands of another, in which case the party so challenged shall 
produce his warranty, 9 - and if not, he shall be fined, and the 
penalty shall go to the lord ; and similar justice shall be dealt 
to him who makes the charge, if he shall fail in his proof. 
The seller. 



__, 



552 A1TNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEIT. A.D. 1180. 

"That person has the right of ' infangthefe,' who has the 
right of taking cognizance of robbery in his own court in the 
case of his own homager, if such person shall have been taken 
on his lands. But those who have not those customs, are to 
have justice done before the king's justice in the hundreds 
and wapentakes, or in the shires. 

Of entertaining guests. 

" If any person shall entertain a friend or a stranger, which 
in English is called ' cuth other uncuth,' 93 he shall be at 
liberty to keep him for two nights as a guest ; and if he shall 
be guilty of an offence, the host shall not incur a penalty for 
the guest. But if any injury shall be committed on any person, 
and such person shall make a charge before a court of justice 
against him that by his counsel the offence was committed, then, 
together with two of his neighbours, lawful men, he shall clear 
himself by oath of either counselling or abetting the same. 
And if he shall not do so, he shall make good the loss and 
pay a penalty. But if he shall be entertained a third night, 
and shall commit an offence against any person, then the host 
is to produce him to justice, as though one of his own household, 
which in English is expressed by ' Twa night gest, thrid night 
agen hine.' 94 And if in such case he shall not be able to produce 
him to justice, then he shall have the space granted him of a 
month and a day. And if the offender shall be found, he shall 
make amends for the injury he has done, and shall make good 
the same, even with his body, if that shall be adjudged against 
him. But if the offender shall not be able to make good the 
injury he has done, then his host shall make it good, and 
shall pay a fine. And if the justice shall hold him suspected, 
then he shall clear himself according to the judgment of the 
court of the hundred or the shire. 

What is to be done as to things found. 

" If any person shall lead an animal into a vill, or shall bring 
any money, and shall say that he has found the same, before he 
takes it to his own house, or even that of any other person, he is to 
take.it in front of the church, and in presence of the priest of the 

93 " Kith or unkith ;" " acquainted or unacquainted." 

94 Meaning " Two nights your guest, the third night one of your house- 
hold." 



A. D. 1180. THE LAWS OF HENRY THE SECOND. 553 

church, and of the reeve and chief men of the vill, show all that 
he has found, whatever it may be. The reeve of the vill is at 
once to send to the three or four nearest vills for their priests 
and reeves, who are also to bring with them three or four of 
the principal men of each vill, and in the presence of them 
all, the whole of what has been found is to be shown. After 
this, in the sight of these persons, the reeve, to whose jurisdic- 
tion the finder belongs, is to place the same in safe keeping until 
the next day. On the following day, he is to go with some of 
his neighbours who have seen what has been found to the bailiff 
of the hundred in which his vill- is situate, and show him 
the whole thereof. And if he is the homager of the lord on 
whose lands the same has been found, and the lord, in whose 
hands it has been found, has not his customs of sac or soc, 
he is to deliver the whole thereof to the bailiff of the hundred, in 
the presence of good witnesses, if he chooses to take it. But if 
the lord has such customs, then justice is to be done in the lord's 
court. 

Of Jews established in the kingdom. 

" Be it also known, that all Jews, wheresoever they are in the 
kingdom, are to be under the tutelage and lawful protection of 
the king ; and no one of them can serve under any rich man 
without the king's leave ; for the Jews and all their property 
belong to the king. And if any person shall lay hands on 
them or their money, the king is to demand restitution thereof, 
if he so pleases, as of his own. 

Of those who have protection by the king's Letters. 
" Those who have the king's protection, either under his 
hand or by his letters, must observe their fealty to him. There- 
fore it is their bounden duty to observe the same inviolably to- 
w*ds all men, and not, having gained the shelter of his pro- 
tection, to withhold rights or services from their superior lords, 
nor yet from their neighbours ; for he is not worthy to enjoy 
peace who is not ready to keep it towards others. And if any 
person should rely too much on the protection which he enjoys, 
and shall be guilty of an injury to another, then he is to make 
good the loss, and to pay a fine of the same amount. The former 
the English call ' murdre,' 95 and the fine ' astrihilthet.' 96 

95 The Saxon name for "concealment ." perhaps it was so called friiin 
the offender having sheltered himself under the king's protection. 

96 Compensation to the master of a house. 



554 ANNALS OF KOGEK DE HOYEDETT. A.D. 1180. 

What those a/re to pay to ike king and the dean who infringe upon 
the king's protection. 

" Protection given under the king's hand, that given on the 
first eight days from the time of his coronation, protection on the 
before-named festivals, and protection by the king's letters, have 
one mode of redress [for breach thereof], which is to be taken 
cognizance of in the highest court of justice, held in the shire 
in which the peace has been broken, as for example, in places 
subject to the Danish law, 95 the eighteen hundreds pay the 
penalty, the amount of which is one hundred and forty-four 
pounds ; as the Danes assessed the penalty paid by each hun- 
dred 96 at eight pounds Norwegian, and eight multiplied by 
eighteen makes one hundred and forty -four. And this, not 
without a reason. 97 For of these eight pounds the king had 
one hundred shillings, and the earl of the county, who had 
every third penny of fines, fifty shillings. The dean of the 
bishop, in whose deanery the peace had been broken, had the 
remaining ten, besides the king's protection, if the protection 
had been originally granted under the king's hand, or on his 
coronation, or on the festivals before-mentioned of the Na- 
tivity, Easter, or Pentecost. 



Of the supervision of those who disregarded tJiese laws. 

" As it happened that some foolish and dishonest people, 
without reason, and too frequently, did injuries to their neigh- 
bours, the wiser persons began to take cognizance of the matter, 
and appointed j ustices over every ten frithborgs, whom we may call 
' deciners.' These, in.English, were called ' tienheofod,' that is, 
' heads of ten.' They took cognizance of matters between the 
vills and their neighbours, exacted fines for offences com- 
mitted, and made parties come to terms, about such things as 
pasturage, meadows, harvests, disputes between neighbours, 
and innumerable questions of that nature, which harass human 
frailty, and are everlastingly attacking it. When, however, 
greater matters of dispute arose, they referred them to their 
superior judges, whom the wise men before-mentioned had ap- 
pointed over them, that is to say, over the ten deciners, and 

95 Denelega. M On this contribution to the penalty by sections 

of eighteen hundreds, where subject to Danelege, see pp. 546 and 557. 
*~' The text does not seem to disclose it. 



A.D. 1180. THE LAWS OF HENKY THE SECOND. 555 

whom we may call 'centurions' or 'centeners,' because they ex- 
ercised jurisdiction over a hundred frithborgs. 

Of Wapentage, and how those acted who accepted Wapentage. 

"Warwickshire, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Leicester- 
shire, and Northamptonshire, as far as "Watling Street extends 
and eight miles beyond, are under the law of the English. And 
what the English call a ' Hundred,' the counties above-named 
call a 'Wapentake.' And not without a reason ; for when a per- 
son received the headship of a wapentake, on a day named, at 
the place where they were accustomed to meet, all the elders 
went forth to meet him, and, on his dismounting from his horse, 
they all closed around him ; on which, raising his spear erect, in 
the usual manner, he received the assurance of all. Then all, 
as many as had come, with their lances touched his spear, and 
thus by touching arms gave assurance, publicly granting him 
their protection. Now, in the English language, arms are called 
' wsepnu,' and 'taccare' means 'to assure,' and the phrase, as it 
were, means ' the assurance of arms ;' or, if we may more ex- 
plicitly explain the word ' wapentake,' in the English lan- 
guage it means, 'the touching of arms,' for 'waepnu' means 
'arms,' and 'tac' is 'touch.' Therefore, we may conclude 
that for this reason all such assemblage was called a wapentake; 
it being the fact that by touching arms they were leagued 
together. 

What the difference is between a Wapentake, a Trihing, and 
a Hundred. 

" There were also other jurisdictions, above the wapentake, 
which were called ' Trihingas, ' because they consisted of the third 
part of a county. Those who truled the trihings were called 
' Triliingerefas ; ' and before them were brought the causes of 
the trihing which could not be settled in the wapentakes, 
and thus, what the English called by the name of hundreds ; 
they called ' wapentakes ; ' and what the people of England 
called, 'three' or 'four hundreds,' these people called 'trihinga.' 
In some counties, in the English language, what they called 
' trihinga,' was called ' lethe.' 99 Causes that could not be 
settled in the trihing were taken to the shire. 

no Now known as " lathe." 



556 A1TNAIS OP BOGER DE HOVEDEW. A. D. 1180. 

What is the meaning of the name ' Greve,' and ichat are his du- 
ties ; and what is the meaning of the name Ealdorman, which 
literally signifies an elder of the people ; and into how many 
meanings the name ' Greve' has been expanded. 

"Greve 1 also is a name that signifies power, and cannot be 
better expressed in Latin than by the word ' praefectura,' for the 
word is employed with such multiplied meanings, that there is 
the ' greve ' of the shire, of wapen takes, hundreds (also of the 
'lethe'), boroughs, and of vills even; in all of which it seems 
to have the same meaning, and to signify the same as ' domi- 
nus' [chief]. Some, also, are of opinion that the word 'greve' 
is a name compounded of the English 'grith' and the Latin 
'vse.' For 'grith' is a word denoting peace, whereas 'vae'* 
indicates misery : as the Lord testifies when He says, ' Va3* 
unto thee, Chorazin.' Consequently the greve is so called, be- 
cause by law he ought to ensure to the country ' grith,' or peace, 
against those who would bring upon it ' vas,' that is, evil or 
misery. The Germans, and Frisians, and Flemings, are in the 
habit of calling their earls by the name of ' margrave,' as though 
meaning 'higher lords,' or 'good peacemakers.' And those 
who are called ' greves' at the present day, having jurisdiction 
over others among the English, were anciently called ' ealdor- 
men,' as though elders, not by reason of old age, inasmuch as 
some were young men, but on account of their wisdom. 

For what reason Icing William abolished the laws of the English 
and retained those of the Danes. 

" The law of the Danes and Norwegians prevailed in Nor- 
folk, Suifolk, and Cambridgeshire. Now as to payment of 
penalties [by hundreds] for offences committed, where these 
counties had eighteen hundreds, the former ones 3 had only ten 
and a half, which arose from their being in the vicinity of the 
Saxons, 1 the whole sum of contribution in cases of the largest 
penalty among the Saxons in those times being eighty-four* 
pounds. But in all other matter for trial and penalties they 
had the same law with the [Danes and] Norwegians above- 

1 The Saxon " gerefa," more generally spoken of as the " reeve," or 
" reve." 2 " Woe !" An idea more fanciful than well-founded. See 

St. Matt. x. 21. 3 Probably those named hi p. 555. * Probably 

the kingdom of Wessex. 5 The text of Hoveden says eighty-four, 

and is probably correct ; that of Wilkius says forty-four. 



A.D. 1180 THR LAWS OF HENRY TUB SECOND. .5/37 

named. 5 *[When king William heard of this, together with 
the other laws of his kingdom, he greatly approved thereof, 
and gave orders that it should be observed throughout all his 
kingdom. For he stated that his ancestors, and those of 
nearly all the barons of Normandy, had been Norwegians, and 
had formerly come from Norway. And for this reason he 
asserted that he ought to follow and observe their laws before 
the other laws of his kingdom, as being more profound and 
more consistent with what was right : whereas the laws of 
other nations, Britons, Angles, Picts, and Scots, were prevail- 
ing in every quarter. On hearing of this, the whole of the 
people of this country who had promulgated these laws, being 
touched with sorrow, entreated him with one accord that he 
would allow them to retain their own laws and ancient customs, 
under which their fathers had lived, and they themselves were 
born and brought up, as it would be very hard for them to re- 
ceive laws of which they knew nothing, and judge on matters of 
which they were ignorant. The king, however, still remaining 
obdurate, they at last plied him with entreaties, for the sake of 
the soul of king Edward, who had granted him the crown and 
kingdom in succession to himself, and by whom and no strangers 
the said laws were founded, not to compel them to observe 
j other than the laws of their fathers. After taking this under 
I due consideration, at the earnest request of his barons, he at 
length acceded to their entreaties. From that day, therefore, 
I their authority being recognized, the laws of Saint Edward the 
I king were respected throughout all the kingdom, and were con- 
firmed and observed before all other laws of the country, hav- 
ing been first established and enacted in the days of king 
Edgar, his grandfather ; but, after his death, they had been 
I seaside for sixty-eight years. For Edward, his son and heir 
I by his lawful wife, reigned four years, less sixteen weeks; 
i after whose death, in his innocence, by the treachery of his 
| stepmother, on account of his innocent life, so chaste and so 
full of alms-deeds, and his undeserved end, they honored him 
as a Martyr, and held him to be a Saint. After him, his brother 
Aldred 6 received the kingdom, and ruled, amid many adver- 
, eities and perils, eight- and-thirty years. After Aldred, his 
I son Edmund Ironside reigned nearly nine months, during which 

J * This appears to be a gloss or interpolation. 

6 Before called by Hoveden " Egelred," and more generally " Eth- 
i elred." 



558 AXXALS OP EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1180. 

he valiantly fought five battles against Canute, the king of the 
Danes. After the last battle, they came to terms, and divided 
the kingdom in halves; and one moiety of England fell to 
Canute, the other to Edmund, on condition that whoever 
should survive the other should have the whole of the king- 
dom, and that neither should in the meanwhile be crowned. 
Matters, therefore, being thus settled, and all the chief men 
of England giving their assent to the arrangement thus made 
between them, within one month after, Edward was, alas ! 
removed from this world ; on which Canute received the king- 
dom of the whole of England, and ruled nearly eighteen years. 
After his decease, Harold Harefoot, supposed by nearly all to 
be falsely considered as the son of Canute and Elfgiva, succeeded 
to the throne, and reigned five years ; after whom Hardicanute, 
son of Canute and Emma, the sister of Robert, duke of Nor- 
mandy, and mother of the last king, Saint Edward, reigned 
two years, less twelve weeks. And thus passed sixty-eight 
years, during which the said laws were neglected. But after 
king E.dward came to the throne, by the advice of the barons 
of England, he raised the code of laws that had slept for sixty, 
eight years, and remodelled it thus raised, beautified it thus 
remodelled, and confirmed it thus beautified. When thus 
confirmed, it was called 'the law of king Edward,' 6 * not because 
he had been the first to frame it, but because it had been 
neglected and almost left in oblivion from the days of his 
grandfather, Edgar, who had reigned seventeen years, and who 
had been the first founder thereof, until his own times, being 
nearly, as said above, sixty-eight years. For Edward, because 
it was a just and good code of laws, raised it from the deep 
abyss, and matured it and ordered it to be observed as though 
his own. 

" Edmund Ironside before-named had a son, Edward by 
name, who, shortly after the death of his father, through fear 
of king Canute, fled to the king of the Rugi, which we more pro- 
perly call Russia ; and the king of that country, Malesclotus by 
name, when he understood who he was, gave him an honorable re- 
ception. He there married a wife of noble birth, by whom he 
had Edgar Atheling, Margaret, afterwards queen of Scotland, 
and Christiana, her sister, to which Christiana king Edward 
gave the lands afterwards held by Ralph de Limisey. Now, 
the said Christiana was sister of Edgar Atheling, who was sent 
** See the note in page 545. 



A.D. 1180. THE LAWS OF HENKY THE SECOND. 559 

for by his uncle king Edward, who caused him to come to 
his court ; on arriving at which he did not long survive, and 
in a very short space of time his wife died. King Edward, 
however, kept his son Edgar with him, and brought him up 
as his own son. And because he intended to make him his 
heir be gave him the name of ' Atheling,' the same as we say 
' domicellus' or ' damisell,' meaning ' young lord ; ' but we say 
it indifferently of many, inasmuch as we 7 call the sons of 
barons ' damisells,' whereas the English called none but the sons 
of kings by that name. And if we would express this still 
more clearly, in one part of Saxony" an image is known by the 
name of ' ling ;' and ' athel,' in the English, signifies noble ; 
wherefore, the two being joined together, the word ' Atheling' 
would signify the ' image of nobility.' Hence it is that the 
West-Saxons, that is, the people of Exeter, have an expres- 
sion signifying supreme contempt 'hinderling,' meaning ' an 
image cast down from or forsaking all propriety.' King Ed- 
ward, however, as he was aware of the wickedness of his 
nation, and especially the vanity of the sons of Godwin, namely, 
Harold (who afterwards seized the kingdom), Gurth, Leofwin, 
and the rest of his brothers, thinking that that could not 
possibly be lasting or durable which he had purposed respecting 
Edgar Atheling, adopted William, duke of the Normans, as 
his successor in the kingdom, William the Bastard, that is 
to say, the bastard son of Robert, his mother's brother and 
his own uncle, a valiant, brave, and warlike man, who after- 
wards, by the will of God, having conquered the above-named 
Harold, the son of Godwin, victoriously gained possession of 
the kingdom of the English.] 

Of robbers slain for robbery. 

**If, after judgment given, any one shall make a charge 
fore the justiciary that a person has been unrighteously slain, 
and that unjustly he lies buried among robbers, and shall say 
I that he is willing'to make proof thereof, he is to give a pledge 
land find sureties ; upon which, the space of one month and a day 
shall be given him, and then he is to take relatives of the per- 
son slain, on both sides, namely, his father's and his mother's 
side, twelve on his father's side and six on his mother's. And 
I if these eighteen are willing to make proof with him who first 
(made the charge, and who has given the pledge, each of them 
' Meaning the Normans. The text of Wilkins is siiil followed here. 



J 



560 AX3TALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEIf. A.D. 1180. 

is to give his pledge with his sword ; and, after that, he is to 
find sureties, such as can pay his fine, that is to say, his ' were/ 
in case they cannot make proof of what they say. Then 
the slayer is to give his pledge and find sureties that the person 
was rightfully slain, and deservedly lies buried among robbers, 7 
and according to law, as being a robber. And then, he is 
first, to show for what robbery and for what reason he was 
slain. And if he shall acknowledge that he was taken alive, 
he is to name a court, and judges, and lawful witnesses of the 
number of his neighbours. And if these persons shall un- 
dertake to prove that justice was rightfully done upon the per- 
son as his theft deserved, then his slayer shall be acquitted. 
In such case they who have made the charge shall forfeit 
their securities, the same to be paid over to the judges and 
witnesses. And if it shall be proved that he was unjustly 
slain, then the slayer shall give pledge to the justice of the 
bishop, and sureties that he will make redress. After this, 
the justice of the bishop shall cause a procession to be formed, 
with the priest clad in alb, maniple, and stole, and the clerks 
in their surplices with holy water and cross, with candle- 
sticks going before, and thurible, fire, and incense. And then, 
his friends are to bring him forth, and place the dead man on 
a bier and carry him to the church ; where the mass having 
been performed for the dead and the other offices performed, 
they shall inter him as becomes a Christian. Between that 
day and sixteen days therefrom, the slayer is to pay three 
fines to the bishop : one, because he has slain a lawful man 
as a robber ; another, 'because he has buried his brother as a 
robber ; which the English call ' his emne-Christen ;' 8 and the 
third because he has given security that he would make proof 
and has not been able so to do. 

Of Usurers. 

" King Edward also forbade usurers to remain in his king- 
dom ; and if any person was convicted of exacting usurious in- 
terest, he was to lose all his substance, and be thenceforth 
considered out of the pale of the law. Por this king used to 
assert, that he had heard it remarked, at the court of the king 
of the Franks, while he was staying there, that usury is the 
root of all vices. 

1 Being buried probably in unconsecrated ground. 
* His brother in Christ. 



A.D. 1180. THE LAWS OF HENET THE SECOND. 561 

Of purchases. 

" By the same law it was also forbidden, that any person 
should buy a live animal or worn garment without sureties and 
good witnesses. If it was a work of gold or silver, concerning 
which the buyer might be in doubt, he was not to buy it 
without the aid of goldsmiths or moneyers. If these, on seeing 
it, said that it came out of a church or treasury, he was not 
to buy it without finding sureties ; and if the seller could not 
find sureties, then he was to be detained with the property 
until his lord should come, or some one else who could give 
good security for him ; and if any man bought on any other 
terms, because he had purchased foolishly, he was at once to 
lose what he had bought and pay a fine. After this, inquisi- 
tion was to be made by legal men, 8 and the chief men of the 
borough, or vill, or hundred where the buyer lived, as to what 
(was his mode of life, and if they had ever heard of his being 
bharged with acting unlawfully : and if witness was borne by 
fchem, that he was of good life and lawful character, he was to 
jprove before the court of the county that he did not know that 
(the seller was acting unlawfully in the sale thereof, or was guilty 
fof any unlawful offence, and if he should know who the seller 
hvas or where he was, he was to say so ; on which the .jus- 
ticiary was to make search for him, in order to bring him to 
(justice, and if he could not be found he was to be outlawed. 

Of buyers and provision dealers. 

" But when it was stated that no man was to buy a live 
animal without sureties, the provision-sellers in the cities and 
iboroughs, whom the English call ' fishmongers,' made an out- 
cry, that every day they were obliged to buy, kill, and sell 
jlive animals, as their livelihood was got by killing such 
|anials. In addition to which, the citizens, burgesses, and 
[populace cried out for their customs, because they had about 
[the feast of Saint Martin been in the habit of buying animals 
at market without any surety, for the purpose of killing them 
^against the Nativity of our Lord. There was also a great mur- 
muring among the multitude about this enactment. Wherefore 
I am of opinion, that if enquiry had been made whether that 
l-decree pleased or not, as is the case in some assemblages, an 
; answer would with universal assent have been given by multi- 
1 tudes, ' it does not BO please us.' There, also, you might have 
8 Lagamannos. 

VOL. I. 



562 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1180. 

heard, had you been present, different whispers muttered aside 
in the ear, and the clamours and murmurs of a tumultuous po- 
pulace. It was to the king's praise, however, that he would 
not do away with customs that were just and wisely framed'; 
but he only required in the king's market, on the sale of their 
wares, that there should be witnesses and some knowledge of 
the parties selling." 

The Genealogy of the Dukes of Normandy. 

Hollo, the first duke of Normandy, who at his baptism was also 
named Robert, reigned thirty years ; his son William, twenty- 
five, Richard the Elder, fifty-three, Richard the Second, thirty, 
Richard the Third, one year, Robert, his brother, eight years ; 
William the Bastard reigned as duke thirty years, and after 
he was king of the English, twenty years. Now Richard the 
Elder had a daughter named Emma, who was married to 
Adelred, 9 king of the English, and by whom that king became 
the father of Edward and Alfred. In the time of Richard 
the Second, king Adelred caused the Danes throughout England 
to be slain, in consequence of which Sweyn, king of the Danes, 
invaded England and subdued it ; on which, Adelred, with his 
wife and sons, fled to Normandy, to the court of Richard the 
Second, the brother of his wife, and duke of Normandy. 
Shortly after this, Sweyn died, and was carried to Denmark to 
be buried there. 

In the mean time, Adelred, with his wife, returned to his 
kingdom, leaving his sons in the charge of their uncle. After 
Sweyn was buried, his son Canute, with a great fleet, bringing 
with him Lachiman, the king of the Swedes, and Olaf, the 
king of the Norwegians, who was afterwards baptized at Rouen, 
entered the Thames, and besieged king Adelred in London ; who, 
while thus besieged, was suddenly attacked by a malady, and 
died. Canute, on gaining possession of the kingdom, took the 
before -named queen Emma to wife, and by her became the 
father of Hardicanute, who was afterwards king of the Danes, 
and of a daughter named Gunhilda, who became the wife of 
Henry, emperor of the Romans. In the meantime, on the de- 
cease of Richard the Second, his son Richard succeeded him for 
a single year ; after whose death his son 10 Robert succeeded him. 
He, being wishful- to replace Edward on the throne of the 
English, gave him a fleet, but being forced to return in conse- 
quence of contrary winds, after having been detained a long 

9 Called before Egelred. 10 The son of Richard the Second. 



A.D. 1180. GENEALOGY OF THE DTJKES OF NOBMANDT. 563 

time at the isle of Gerneswic, 11 returned to Normandy. After 
this, setting out for Jerusalem, he left his son "William, then a 
little child, his heir ; and having fulfilled his vow, in return- 
ing to his country, died at the city of Nicaea. 

At the time of William succeeding to the dukedom of Nor- 
mandy, Canute, king of the English, departed this life, and 
was succeeded by Harold Harefoot, his son hy his concubine 
Elgiva. Edward, feeling indignant at this, setting sail with 
forty ships, landed at Hampton, 12 where the English showing 
resistance, after taking considerable booty, he returned to Nor- 
mandy. In the meantime, however, his brother Alfred, who, 
with a large body of troops, had made an attempt upon another 
part, being received by earl Godwin with an appearance of 
hospitality, was by stratagem taken by him at night together 
with his followers ; and being placed in chains and brought 
before king Harold, together with his companions, was deprived 
of his eyes, the rest being put to death. 

Not long after this, Harold Harefoot also died, and Hardica- 
nute, returning from Denmark, succeeded him, being the son 
of Emma, the mother of Edward. On this, Hardicanute sent 
for his elder brother Edward from Normandy, and made him 
five with him, and on his death,two years after, Edward suc- 
ceeded him as his heir. The good king Edward reigned 
twenty-two years, but having no issue, sent to his kinsman, 
William, duke of the Normans, Robert, the archbishop of Can- 
terbury, and made him the heir to his kingdom : after him 
he also sent earl Harold, who swore fealty to William at 
Rouen. But, after the death of Edward, Harold treacherously 
and rebelliously took possession of the kingdom and reigned nine 
months, and together with his powerful accomplices, seducers, 
ant associates, unjustly, iniquitously, and seditiously deprived 
the lawful heir of the good king Edward of the crown of the 
whole of the said kingdom ; 13 on hearing of which, William 
setting sail with a powerful fleet, landed at Pevensey, and after 
building a fortress there, erected another at Hastings. Harold, 
meeting him with the English, fought a battle at about the third 
hour of the day on the second day before the Ides of October, in 
which Harold" was slain at the first onset ; the fight, how- 
ever, having been prolonged until nightfall. William being vic- 
torious, was, on the following feast of the Nativity of our Lord, 

11 Guernsey. 12 Southampton. 13 Several lines are here given from 
Wilkins, which are clearly by inadvertence omitted in the text of Ilovedea. 






564 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEtf. A.D. 1180. 

in the year of the Incarnation of our Lord one thousand six 
hundred and sixty-six, crowned at London, king of the English. 

He reigned over England twenty-two years, and after his 
death his son William reigned thirteen years ; in the ninth 
year of whose reign a pilgrimage 14 of the nations to Jerusalem 
against the Saracens took place. In the fourth year of this " 
expedition, Jerusalem was taken by the Franks, and Godfrey, 
duke of Lorraine, reigned over it, though for one year only ; and , 
was succeeded by his brother Baldwin, who reigned eighteen 
years. "King William was slain with an arrow while hunting - 
in England, in the thirteenth year of his reign ; on which he 
was succeeded by his brother Henry, who reigned thirty- six 
years. He was a feeder of wild beasts, 15 and a guardian of the 
forests, and has been styled by Merlinus Ambrosius, 16 in his 
" History of the Kings," " the lion of justice ;" for he exi ' 
ercised justice and judgment in the land. 

He was succeeded by Stephen, his nephew, who reigned - 
nineteen years ; after whose death Henry, the son of Geoffrey, ; 
earl of Anjou, and of Matilda, the former empress of the 1 
Romans, and daughter of the before-named king Henry the ; 
First, took the helm of the kingdom of England, and reigned S 
thirty-five years. He dying, and being buried at the abbey of ' 
the nuns at Fontevraud, his son Richard succeeded him in the i 
government of the kingdom, and after having reigned nine ^ 
years, seven months, and, twenty days, being struck by an ( 
arrow at the siege of the castle of Chaluz, departed this life on ' 
the eighth day before the ides of April. His entrails were in- 5 
terred at Chinon, his heart at Rouen, and his body at Fonte- i 
vraud. After his decease his brother John succeeded to the , 
throne, and reigned over the kingdom of England. 17 

14 The first Crusade. I5 Alluding to his maintenance of the Forest 
laws in all their strictness. 16 A Latinized form of the British 

name of Merlin, or Merdhin Emrys, the magician and prophet. It is 
pretty generally supposed that there was no such person. His pretended 
prophecies are still in existence. n He now resumes the thread of his ! 
Annals. 

ERRATUM. 



In p. 82, note 28, add, " A quotation from Horace." 
EXD OF VOL. I. 



HORN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



ongfellow's Poetical Works, com- 
plete, including The Wayside Inu. 
Twenty-four page Engravings, by Birhet 
Foster and others, and a new Portrait. 

; or, without the illustrations, 

3s. 6d. 

Prose Works, complete. Six- 
teen page Engravings by Birket Foster 
ami otters. 

joudon's (Mrs.) Entertaining Natur- 
alist. New Edition. Kevised by W. S. 
DALLAS, F.L.S. IPith nearly 500 En- 
gravings. It. 

larryat's Masterman Ready; or, 

The Wreck of the Pacific. 93 Engravings. 

Mission ; or, Scenes in Af- 
rica. (Written for Young People.) Illus- 
trated by Gilbert and Ualziel. 

Pirate ; and Three Cutters. 

Xew Edition, with a Memoir of the 
Author. With. 20 Steel Engravings, from 
Drawings by Clarkson Stanfidd, R.A. 

Privateer's-Man One Hun- 
dred Years Ago. Eight Engravings on 
Steel, after Stothard. 

Settlers in Canada. New 

Edition. Ten fine Engravings by Gilbert 
and Dal fid. 
Harwell's Victories of Wellington 

and the British Armies. Illustrations on 
Steel 

ffichael Angelo and Raphael, their 
Lives and Works. By DUPPA and QCA- 
TREJIEKE DE QUINCT. With 13 Kighly- 
ftnished Engravings on Steel. 

filler's History of the Anglo-Sax- 
ons. Written In a popular style, on the 
basis of Sharon Turner. Portrait of 
Alfred, Itap of Saxon Britain, and 12 
elaborate Engravings on Steel. 

filton's Poetical Works. With a 

Memoir by JAMES MONTGOMKBT, TODD'S 

Verbal Index to all the Poems, and Ex- 

, planatory Notes. Wit\ 120 Engravings 

1 oy Tliompson and others, from Drawings 

by W. Harvey. 2 vols. 

VW. 1. Paradise Lost, complete, with 

Memoir, Notes, and Index. 
Vol. 2. Paradise .Regained, and other 
Poems, with Verbal Index to all the 
Poems. 

lEudie's British Birds. Revised by 
I W. C. L. MARTIN. Fifty-two Figures and 
1 Plates of Eggs. In 2 vols. 

I ; or, with the plates coloured, 

Is. 6d. per vol. 

i'aval and Military Heroes of Great 

) Britain ; or, Calendar of Victory. Being a 
Record of British Valour and Conquest 
by Sea and Land, on every day In the 
year, from the time of William the 

i Conqueror to the Battle of Inkernwnn. 

' By Major JOHKS, R.M., and Lieutenant 

I P. H. NICOLAS, K.M. Twenty-four Por- 
traits. 6s. 



Nicolini's History of the Jesuits: 

their Origin. Progress, iJoctrines, and De- 
signs. J-^ine Portraits of Loyola, Laines, 
Xavier, Borgia, Acquaviva, Ptre la Chaise, 
and Pope Ganganetti. 

Norway and its Scenery. Compris- 
ing Price's Journal, with large Additions, 
and a Koud-Book. Edited by T. KURESXKB. 
Twenty-two Illustrations. 

Paris and its Environs, including 

Versailles, St. Cloud, and Excursions Into 
the Champagne Districts. An illustrated 
Handbook for Travellers. EdiUid by T. 
FORESTER. Twenty-eight beautiful En- 
gravings. 

Petrarch's Sonnets, and other Poems. 

Translated into English Verse. By various 
bands. With a Life of the Poet, by 
THOMAS CAMPBELL. With 16 Engravings. 

Pickering's History of the Races of 

Man, with an Analytical Synopsis of the 
Natural History of Man. By Dr. HALL. 
Illustrated by numerous Portraits. 

; or, with the plates coloured, 

Is. 6d. 

%* An excellent Edition of a work ori- 
ginally published at 31. 3*. by the 
American Government. 

Pictorial Handbook of London. Com- 
prising Its Antiquities, Architecture, Arts , 
Manufactures, Trade, Institutions, Ex- 
hibitions, Suburbs, &c. Two hundred 
and Jive Engravings, and a large Map, by 
Lowry. 

This volume contains above 900 pages , 
and is undoubtedly the cheapest five- 
shilling volume ever produced. 

Pictorial Handbook of Modern Geo- 
graphy, on a Popular Plan. 3*. tki. Illus- 
trated by 150 Engravings and 51 If apt. 6s. 

; or, with the maps coloured 

Is. 6d. 

Two large Editions of this volume have 
been sold. The present New Edition 
is corrected and improved ; and, besides 
Introducing the recent Censuses of 
England and other countries, records 
the changes which have taken place 
In Italy and America. 

Pope's Poetical Works. Edited by 
KOBERT CAKKUTHKKS. Numerous Sn- 
gravings. 2 vols. 

.. Homer's Iliad. With Intro- 

duction and Notes by J. S. WATSON, M.A. 
Illustrated by the entire Series of Flam- 
man's Designs, beautifully engraved by 
Moses (in the full vo. site). 

Homer's Odyssey, Hymns, 

&c., by other translators, including Chap- 
man, and Introduction and Notes by J. S. 
WATSON, M.A. Flamnan't Designs beau- 
tifully engraved by Hosts. 



Pope's Life. Including many of his 
Letters. By ROBERT CA BBCTHEBS. New 
Edition, revised and enlarged. Illustra- 
tions. 

The preceding 5 rob. make a complete 
and elegant edition of J'ope's t'oetical 
Works and Translations for 25*. 

Pottery and Porcelain, and other Ob- 
jects of Vertu (a Guide to the Knowledge 
of). To which Is added an Engraved List 
of all the known Marks and Monograms. 
By HENBT G. BOHN. Numerous Engrav- 
ings. 

; or, coloured. 10s. 6d. 

Prout's (Pather) Beliques. New 
Edition, revised and largely augmented. 
Twenty-one spirited Etchings by Maclise. 
Two volumes in one. 7*. 6d. 

Eecreations in Shooting. By 

" CRAVEN." New Edition, revised and 
enlarged. 62 Engravings on Wood, after 
ffarvey, and 9 Engravings on Steel, chiefly 
after A. Cooper, R^A. 

Bedding's History and Descriptions 
of Wines, Ancient and Modern. Twenty 
beautiful Woodcuts. 

Beanie's Insect Architecture, xew 

Edition. Kevised by the Eev. J. Q. 
WOOD, M.A. 

Bobinson Crusoe. With Illustrations 
by STOTHARD and HARVET. Twelve beau- 
tiful Engravings on Steel, and 74 on 
Wood, 

; or, without the Steel illustra- 
tions, 3s. 6(2. 

The prettiest Edition extant. 

Borne in the Nineteenth Century. 

New Edition. Revised by the Author. 
Illustrated by 34 fine Steel Engravings. 
2 vols. 

Southey's Life of Nelson. With 
Additional Notes. Illustrated with 64 
Engravings. 

Starling's 'Miss) Noble Deeds of 
Women ; or, Examples of Female Courage, 
Fortitude, and Virtue, fourteen beautiful 
Illustrations. 



Stuart and Bevett's Antiquities of 

Athens, and other Monuments of Greece. 
Illustrated in 71 Steel Plates, and nu- 
merous Woodcuts. 

Tales of the Genii ; or, the Delightful 

Lessons of Horam. Numerous Woodcuts, 
and 8 Steel Engravings, after Stothard. 
Tasso's Jerusalem Delivered. Trans- 
lated into English Spenserian Verse, with 
a Life of the Author. By J. H. WIFFKN. 
Eight Engravings on Steel, and 24 on 
Wood, by Thurston. 

Walker's Manly Exercises. Con- 
taining Skating, Riding, Driving, Hunting, 
Shooting, Sailing, Rowing, Swimming, &c. 
New Edition, revised by " CBAVEN." 
Forty-four Steel Plates, and numerous 
Woodcuts. 

Walton's Complete Angler. Edited 
by EDWARD JESSE, Esq. To which is 
added an Account of Fishing Stations, .fee., 
by H. G. BOHN. Upwards of 203 En- 
gravings. 

; or, with 26 additional page 

Illustrations on Steel, It. 6d. 

Wellington, Life of. By AN OLD 
SOLDIER, from the materials of Maxwell. 
Eighteen Engravings. t 

White's Natural History of Sel- 

borne. With Notes by Sir WILLIAM JAE- 
DINB and EDWARD JESSE, Esq. Illustrated 
by 40 highly-finished Ejigramngs. 

; or, with the plates coloured, 

It. 6d. 

Young, The, Lady's Book. A Ma- 
nual of Elegant Recreations, Arts, Sciences, 
and Accomplishments ; including Geology, 
Mineralogy, Conchology, Botany, Ento- 
mology, Ornithology, Costume, Embroi- 
dery, the Escritoire, Archery, Riding, 
Music (instrumental and vocal), Dancing, 
Exercises, Painting, Photography, &c. &c. 
Edited by distinguished Professors. Twelve 
Hundred Woodcut Illustrations, and seve- 
ral fine Engravings on Steel. It. 6d. 
; or, doth gilt, gilt edges, 9s. 



XI. 



Bohn's Classical Library. 

5s. per Volume, excepting those marked otherwise. 



JEschylug. Literally Translated into 
English Prose by an Oxonian. 3s. 
Ml 

, Appendix to. Containing 

the New Readings given in Hermann's 
posthumous Edition of ^Eschylus. By 
GEOBGE BURGHS, M.A. Si. d, 

i 



Ammiamts Marceliinus. History of 
Rome from Constantius to Valens. Trans- 
lated by C. I). YOSOE, B.A. Donbto 
volume, 7*. 6d. 

Apuleius, the Golden Ass ; Death of 

Socrqtes ; Florida; and Discourse on Magic. 
To which is added a Metrical Version of 
Cupid and Psyche ; and Mrs. Tighe's 
Psyche, frontispiece. 






SOHN-S VARIOUS LILRAEIES. 



Aristophanes' Comedies. Literally 

Translated, with Notes and Extracts from 

Frere'a and other Metrical Versions, by 

W. J. HICKIK. 2 vols. 

VoL 1. Acharnians, Knights, Clouds, 

Wasps, Peace, and Birds. 
Vol. 2. Lysistrata, Thesmophoriazusai, 
Frogs, Ecclesiaznsaa, and Plutus. 

Aristotle's Ethics. Literally Trans- 
lated by Archdeacon BROWNE, late Classical 
Professor of King's College. 

' Politics and Economics. 

Translated by K. WAAFOKD, M.A. 

Metaphysics. Literally Trans- 
lated, with Notes, Analysis, Examination 
Questions, and Index, by the Rev. JOHN 
H. M'MAHON, M A., and Gold Medallist in 
Metaphysics, T.C.D. 

History of Animals. la Ten 

Books. Translated, with .Notes and Index, 
by RICHARD CBESSWELL, 11 .A. 

Organon ; or, Logical Treat- 

ises. With Notes, &c. By O. F. Owxtc, M.A. 
2 vols., 3s. 6d. each. 

Rhetoric and Poetics. Lite- 



rally Translated, with Examination Ques- 
tions and Notes, by aa Oxonian. 

Athena3US. The Deipnosophists ; or, 
the Banquet of the Learned. Translated 
by C. D. YON&K, B.A, 3 vols. 

Caesar. Complete, with the Alexan- 
drian, African, and Spanish Wars. lite- 
rally Translated, with Notes. 

Catullus, Tibullus, and the Vigil of 

Venus. A Literal Prose Translation. To 
which are added Metrical Versions by 
LAMB, GRAINGEK, and others, frontis- 
piece. 

Cicero's Orations. Literally Trans- 
lated by C. D. YOMS*, B.A. In 4 vols. 

Vol. 1. Contains the Orations against 
Verres, &c. Portrait. 

Vol. 2. Catiline, Archiag. Agrarian 
Law, RaMrins, Mnrena, Syila, &c. 

Vol. 3. Orations for his House, Plancius, 
Sextlus, Coelius, Milo, Ligarius, &c. 

Vol. 4. Miscellaneous Orations, and 
Rhetorical Works; with General In- 
dex to the four volumes. 

on the Nature of the Gods, 

Divination, Fate, Luws, a Republic, <fcc. 
Translated by C. I). YONGE, B.A-, and 
F. BAXJIAM. 

Academics, De Finibns, and 

Tnsculan Questions. By C. 1). YONGB, 
B.A. With Sketch of the Greek Philo- 
sophy. 

Offices, Old Age, Friendship, 

Sclplo's Dream, Paradoxea, &c. Literally 
Translated, by R. EMIOKDS. 3*. 6d. 



Cicero on Oratory and Orators. By 

J. S. WATSON, M.A. 

Demosthenes' Orations. Translated, 
with Notes, by C. RAKJJ KKNKEDY. In 6 
volumes. 
Vol. 1. The Olynthiac, Philippic, and 

other Public Orations, as. 6d. 
Vol. 2. On the Crown and on the Em- 
bassy. 
Vol. 3. Against Leptlnes, Mld'.cs, An- 

drotrlou, and AriHtocrates. 
VoL 4. Private and other Orations. 
VoL 6. Miscellaneous Orations. 

Dictionary of Latin Quotations. In- 
cluding Proverbs, Maxims, Mottoes, Law 
Terms, and Phrases; and a Collection of 
. above 500 Greek Quotations. With nil the 
quantities marked, & l-Jiclinb Translations. 

, with Index Verbortua. 6s. 

Index Verbonnn only. 1*. 

Diogenes Laertius. Lives and Opin- 
ions of the Ancient Philosophers. Trans- 
lated, with .Notes, by C. IX YONGE. 

Euripides. Literally Translated. 2 vols. 
Vol. 1. Hecuba, Orestes, Medea, Hippo- 

lytus, Alcestla, Bacclwe, Heraclidse, 

Ipblgenla in AulWe, and Iphigcnia In 

Tauris. 
Vol. 2. Hercules Furens, Troades, Ion, 

Andromache, Suppliants, Helen, 

Electra, Cyclops, Rhesus. 

Greek Anthology. Literally Trans- 
lated. With Metrical Versions by various 
Authors. 

Greek Romances of Heliodorus, 

LongH6, and Achilles Tat ins. 
Herodotus. A New and Literal 
Translation, by HENRY CAM, M.A., of 
Worcester College, Oxford. 

Hesiod, Callimachus, and Theognis. 
Literally Translated, with Notes, by J. 
BANKS, M.A. 

Homer's Iliad. Literally Translated, 
by an OXONIAX. 

Odyssey, Hymns, Sec. Lite- 
rally Translated, by an OXOKIAK. 

Horace. Literally Translated, by 
SMART. Carefully revised by an OXONIAN. 
3s. 64. 

Justin, Cornelius Nepos, and Eutro- 

pius. Literally' Translated, with Notes 
and Index, by J, S. WATSOS, M.A. 
Juvenal, Persius, Sulaicia, aad Lu- 
ciliu*. By U KVAXS, M.A. With the 
Metrical Version by Giffbrd. /Vatutptc. 
Livy. A new and Literal Tiaiuiation. 
By Dr. SFILLAN and others. In 4 voU. 
VoL 1. Contains Books 1 S, 
VoL 2. Book* 926. 
VoL 3. Books 2736. 
Vol. 4., Books 37 totlte ud ; and Inilcx. 
II 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Lucan's Pharsalia. Translated, with 
Notes, by H. T. KILEY. 

Lucretius. Literally Translated, with 
Notes, by the Rev. J. S. WATSON, M.A. 
And the Metrical Version by J. M. GOOD. 

Martial's Epigrams, complete. Lite- 
rally Translated. Each accompanied by 
one or more Verse Translations selected 
from the Works of English Poets, and 
other sources. With a copious index. 
Double volume (660 pages). It. 6d. 

Ovid's Works, complete. Literally 
Translated. 3 vols. 
Vol. 1. Fasti, Tristta, Epistles, &c. 
Vol. 2. Metamorphoses. 
Vol. 3. Heroides, Art of Love, &c. 
Pindar. Literally Ti-anslated, by DAW- 
SON W. TCBNER, and the Metrical Version 
by ABBAHAM MOORS. 

Plato's Works. Translated by the 
Rev. H. CART and others. In 6 vols. 
Vol. 1. The Apology of Socrates, Crlto, 
Phaedo, Gorgias, Protagoras, Phsedrus, 
Thetetetus, Euthyphron, Lysis. 
VoL 2. The Republic, Timaeus, ftCritias. 
Vol. 3. Meno, Euthydemus, The So- 
phist, Statesman, Cratylus, Parme- 
nides, and the Banquet. 
Vol. 4. Phllebus, Charmides, Laches, 
The Two Alclbiades, and Ten other 
Dialogues. 
Vol. 6. The Laws. 
Vol. 6. The Doubtful Works. With 

General Index. 

Dialogues, an Analysis and 

Index to. Wiih References to the Trans- 
lation in Bohn's Classical Library. By Dr. 
DAT. [In preparatwii. 

Plautus's Comedies. Literally Trans- 
lated, with Notes, by H. T. RILET, B.A. 
In 2 vols. 

Pliny's Natural History. Translated, 
with Copious Notes, by the late JOHN 
BOSTOCK, M.D., F.R.S., and H. T. RILKT, 
B.A. In 6 vols. 

Propertius, Petrouius, and Johannes 

Secundus. Literally Translated, and ac- 
companied by Poetical Versions, from 
various sources. 

Quintilian's Institutes of Oratory. 
Literally Translated, with Notes, &c., by 
J. S. WATSOK, M.A. In 2 vols. 



Sallust, Floras, and Velleius Pater- 

culus. With Copious Notes, Biographical 
Notices, and Index, by J. S. WATSON. 

Sophocles. The Oiford Translation 

revised. 
Standard Library Atlas of Classical 

Geography. Twenty-two large coloured 
Maps according to the latest authorities. 
With a complete Index (accentuated), 
givirg the latitude and longitude of every 
place named in the Maps. Imp. 8vo. 7s. 6d 
Strabo's Geography. Translated, 
with Copious Notes, by W. FALCONER, 
M.A., and H. C. HAMILTON, Esq. With 
Index, giving the Ancient and Modern 
Names. In 3 vols. 

Suetonius' Lives of the Twelve 

Cassars, and other Works. Thomson's 
Translation, revised, with Notes, by T. 
FOBEWTEB. 

Tacitus. Literally Translated, with 
Notes. In 2 vols. 
Vol. 1. The Annals. 
Vol. 2. The History, German!*, Agri- 
cola, &c. With Index. 

Terence and Phaedrus. By H. T. 
RILET, B.A. 

Theocritus, Bion, Moschus, and 

Tyrtasus. By J. BANKS, M.A. With the 
Metrical Versions of Chapman. 

The Thoughts of the Emperor M. 

Aurelius Antoninus. Translated by GEO. 

LONG. 3s. 6d. 
Thucydides. Literally Translated by 

Rev. H. DALE. In 2 vols. 3s. 6d. each. 

Virgil. Literally Translated by DA- 
VIDSON. New Edition, carefully revised. 
3s. 6d. 

Xenophon's Works. In 3 Vols. 

Vol. 1. The Anabasis and Memorabilia. 
Translated, with Notes, by J. S. WAT- 
SOX, M.A. And a Geographical Com- 
mentary, by W. F. AJNSWOBTH, F.SA-, 
F.R.G.S., &c, 

VoL 2. Cyropanlia and Hellenics. By 
- v. H. 



. . 

J. S. WATSON, M.A., and the Rev. 
DALE. 

Vol. 3. The Minor Works. By J. 
WATSON, M.A. 



XII. 



Bohn's Scientific Library. 

5s. per Volume, excepting those marked otherwise. 



Agassiz and 6ould's Comparative 

Physiology. Enlarged by Dr. WEIGHT. 
Upwards of tOO Engravings. 

Bacon's Novum Organum and Ad- 

vancement of Learning. Complete, with 
Notes, by J. DKVET. M.A. 
Blair's Chronological Tables, Revised 

and Enlarged. Comprehending the Chro- 
nology and History of the World, from 
12 



the earliest times. By J. WILLOUGHBI 
ROSSE. Double Volume. 10. ; or, half- 
bound, 10s. 6rf. 

Index of Dates. Comprehending the 
principal Facts in the Chronology and 
History of the World, from the earliest to 
the present time, alphabetically arranged. 
By J. W. ROSSE. Double volume, 1(W. ; 
or, half- bound, 10*. Od. 



BONN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



Bclley's Manual of Technical Analy- 
sis. A Gn'de for the Testing of Natural 
and Artificial Substances. By B. H. PAUL. 
100 Wood Engra.L-i.ngt. 

BBIDGEWATEB TREATISES. 
Bell on the Hand. Its Mecha- 
nism and Vital Endowments as evincing 
Design. Seventh dition Revised. 

Kirby on the History, Habits, 

and Instincts of Animals. Edited, with 
Notes, by T. RTKEB JONES, numerous 
Engraving*, many of which are iidditUmal. 
In 2 vols. 

Kidd on the Adaptation of 

External .Nature to the Physical Condition 
of Man. 3s. 6d. 

Whewell's Astronomy and 

General Physics, considered with refer- 
ence to Natural Theology. 3s. 6d. 
Chalmers on the Adaptation 

of External Nature to the Moral and In- 
tellectual Constitution of Man. 5s. 

Front's Treatise on Chemis- 
try, Meteorology, and Digestion. Edited 
by Dr. J. W. GRIFFITH. 

Bucklaud's Geology and 

Mineralogy. 2 vols. 15s. 

' Boget's Animal and Vege- 

table Physiology. Illustrated. In 2 vols. 
6s. each. 

Carpenter's (Dr. W. B. Zoology. A 

Systematic View of the Structure, Habits, 
Instincts, and Uses, of the principal Fami- 
lies of the Animal Kingdom, and of the 
chief forms of Fossil Remains. New edition, 
revised to the present time, under arrange- 
ment with the Author, by W. S. DALLAS, 
F.L.S. Illuttratcd with, many hundred 
Jine Wood Engravings. In 2 vols. 6s. each. 

Mechanical Philosophy, As- 
tronomy, and Horology. A Popular Ex- 
position. 183 Illustrations. 

Vegetable Physiology and 

Systematic Botany. A complete Intro- 
* duction to the Knowledge of Plants. New 
Edition, revised, under arrangement with 
the Author, by E. LANKESTEB, M.D., &c. 
Several hundred Illustrations on Wood. 6*. 
Animal Physiology. New 



Edition, thoroughly revised, and in part 
re-written by the Author. Upwards of 
300 capital Illustration!. 61. 

Chess Congress of 1862. A Collec- 
tion of the Games played, and a Selection 
of the Problems sent in for the Competi- 
tion. Edited by J. LOWENTHAL, Manager. 
With an Account of the Proceedings, and 
a Memoir of the British Chess Association, 
by J. W. MEDLEY, Hon. Sec. 7*. 

Chovreul on Colour. Containing the 
Principles of Harmony and Contrast ol 



Colours, and their application to the Art?. 
Translated from the French by CHAKI.J-- 
MABTEL. Only 'compete Edition. Several 
Motet. Or, with an additional series of 
16 Plates in Colours. 7*. 64 

Clark's (Hugh) Introduction to 

Heraldry. II ith. nearly \ 000 Illustrations. 
1 8 Edition. Revised und enlarged by J. R. 
PLANCH*, Rouge Croix. Or, with all the 
Illustrations coloured, 15s. 

Cointe's Philosophy of the Sciences. 
By G. H, LEWES. 

Ennemoser's History of Magic. 
Translated by WILLIAM Howrrr. With 
an Appendix of the most remarkable and 
best authenticated Stories of Apparitions, 
Dreams, Table-Turning, and Spirit-Rap- 
ping, &c. lu 2 vols. 

Handbook of Domestic Medicine. Po- 
pularly arranged. By Dr. HENRY DAVTES. 
700 pages. With complete Index. 

Handbook of Games. By various 
Amateurs and Professors. Comprising 
treatises on all the principal Games of 
chance, skill, and manual dexterity. In 
all, above 40 games (the Whist, Draughts, 
and Billiards being especially comprehen- 
sive). Edited by H. G. BOHK. lUiu- 
trated by numerous Diagrams. 

Hogg's (Jabez) Elements of Experi- 
mental and Natural Philosophy. Con- 
taining Mechanics, Pneumatics, Hydro- 
statics, Hydraulics, Acoustics, Optics, 
Caloric, Electricity, Voltaism, and Mag- 
netism. New Edition, enlarged. Up- 
wards of 400 Woodcuts. 

Hind's Introduction to Astronomy. 

With a Vocabulary, containing an Expla- 
nation of all the Terms in present use. 
New Edition, enlarged. Jfumervu* En- 
gravings. 3s. 6d. 

Humboldt's Cosmos ; or Sketch of a 
Physical Description of the Universe. 
Translated by E. C. Orri and W. S. 
DALLAS, F.L.S. Fine Portrait. In five 
vols. 3*. 6d. each ; excepting VoL V., 6s. 
** In this edition the notes are placed 
beneath the text, Humboldt's analytical 
Summaries and the passages hitherto sup- 
pressed are included, and new and com- 
prehensive Indices are added. 
Travels in America. InSrols. 

Views of Nature ; or, Con- 

templations of the Sublime Phenomena of 
Creation. Translated by E. C. Orrf and 
H. G. BOHN. A fac-Blmile letter from the 
Author to the Publisher ; translations of 
the quotations, and a complete Index. 

Humphrey's Coin Collector's Ma- 
nual. A popular Introduction to the 
Study of Coins. Highly finished Enyrav- 
ingt. In 2 vols. 

13 



A CA TALOOUE OP 



Hunt's (Eobert) Foe ry of Science; 

or, Studies i>; the Physical Phenomena of 
Nature. By Professor HCKT. New Edi- 
tl'u, enlarged. 

Index of Dates. See Blair's Tables. 

Joyce's Scientific Dialogues. Com- 
pleted to ihe present state of Knowledge, 
by Dr. GRIFFITH. Xiuiuarout Woodcuts. 

Xnighl's (Chas.) Knowledge is Power. 

A i'upu'ar Manual of Political Economy. 

Lectures on Painting. By the Royal 
Academicians. With introductory Essay, 
mid Notes by R. WORXUH, Esq. Portraits. 

ItaatelTs (Dr.) Geological Excur- 

gions through the Isle of \\'ight and Dor- 
setshire. New Ediuon, by T. RCPEUT 
JOSKS, Esq. Jfumerout beautifully exe- 
cuted Woodcut*, and a. Ceological Map. 

-' - Medals of Creation ; or, 

First Lessons in Geology and the Study 
of Organic Remains; including Geological 
Excursions. New Edition, revised. Co- 
loured Plata, and teveral hundred beau- 
tiful Woodcuts. ID 2 rols., If. 6d. each. 

Petrifactions and their 

Teachings. An Illustrated Handbook to 
the Organic Remains in the British Mu- 
seum. A'umerout Kngramiitgs. tig. 

' Wonders of Geology ; or, a 

Familiar Exposition of Geological Phe- 
nomena. New Edition, augmented by T. 
KOPEBT JOSKS, K.G.S. r'olourad Geoloyical 
Map of England, Plates, and nearly 200 
beautiful Woodcutt. In 2 vols., Is. 6ii. each. 

Morphy's Games of Chess. Being 

the Matches and best Games played by 
the American Champion, with Kxplana- 
tory and Analytical Notes, by J. IJOWES- 
THAL. Portrait and Memoir. 

It contains by far the largest collection 
of games played by Mr. Morphy extant in 
any form, and has received his endorse- 
ment and co-operation. 

Oersted's Soul in Nature, &c. Portrait. 



Bichardson's Geology, includii 

Mineralogy and Paheontology. Revfe 
and enlarged, by Dr. T. WEIGHT. Upwai 
of 400 ftlustratisms. 

Echouw's Earth, Plants, and Man ; ai 
Kobeil's Sketches from the Mineral Kin 
d'im. Tianslated by A. HFSPKKT, F.R 
''i loured Jfap of the (teo'jrajihy of Plant 

Smith's (Pye) Geology and Scri 

tare ; or, The Relation between the Ho 
Scriptures and Geological Science. 

Stanley's Classified '.Synopsis of ti 

Principal Painters of the Dutch and F 

mish Schools. 

Staunton's Chess-player's Handboo 

A'uinerous Diagrams. 

Chess Praxis. A Suppleme 

to the Chess-player'g Handbook. Co 
tainlng all the most Important modi 
improvements in the Openings, lllustral 
by actual Games ; a revised Code of Cher 
Laws; and a Selection J 6f Mr. Morphy* 
Games In England and France. 6. 

Chess-player's Companiox 

Comprising a new Treatise on Odds, Co 
lection of Match Games, and a Selectio 
of Original Problems. 

Chess Tournament of 1851 



Numerous lllustrationt. 

Stockhardt's Principles of Chemii 

try, exemplified In a series of simple exw 
riments. Upioards of 270 n lustration's. 

Agricultural Chemistry ; 01 

Chemical Field Lectures. Addressed 
Fanners. Translated, with Notes, 1 
Professor HKNFBEI, F.R.S. To which, 
added, a Paper on Liquid Manure, I 
J. J. MECHI, Esq. 

Tire's (Dr. A.: Cotton Manufactur 

of Great Britain, systematically invest 
gated ; with an introductory view of i 
comparative state In Foreign Countrie 
New Edition, revised and completed 
the present time, by P. L SOCKON-DS. Ci 
hundred and fifty Illustration*. In 2 volt 

Philosophy of Manufactures ; 

or, An Exposition of the Factory Systemi 
of Great Britain. New Ed., continued to th( 
present time, by P. L. SIKMONIW. It. 64 



Berber, The ; or, The Mountaineer 
of the Atlas. A Tale of Morocco, by W S. 
MAYO, M.I). 1. 6d 



Boswell's Life of Johnson. Includ- 
ing his Tour to the Hebrides, Tour In 
Wales, Ac. Edited, with large additions 
and Notes, by the Right Hon. JOHN WILSON 
CROKKH. The second and most complete 
Copyright Edition, re-arranged and re- 
vised according to the suggestions of 
Lord Macanlay, by the late JOHX 
WEIGHT, &q , v.ith further additions b> 
14 



XIII. 

Bohn's Cheap Series. 

Mr. CHOKER. Upwards of 40 fne E> 
gravings on Steel. In 4 vols. cloth, 44. 
each, or 8 parts If. each. 

* The public has now for 16s. what 

was formerly published at 22. 
Boswell's Johnsoniana. A Collectiot 
of Miscellaneous Anecdotes and Saying* 
of Dr. Samuel Johnson, gathered from 
nearly a hundred publications. A Sequel 
to the preceding, of vhii:h itformt vol. 6, 
or jarti 9 and 10. Knyravinpt on Stei. 
ic 1 voL cloth, 4*., or in 2 parts, 2s. each. 



n 



DA 

200 

H613 

1853 

v.l 



Moved en, Roger of 

The annals of Roger de 
Hoveden 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



SEEN BY 
PRESERVATION 



DATE, 



