A CATALOGUE OF 
BOHN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 

PUBLISHED BY 

BELL AND DALDY, 

6, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN, 



Htflbiiby 



Hlfepam^'jai 



?i^« 




Cirlb0j^ 






and Sermons, with Notes. Portrait. 

Carafas (The) of MacLdaloni: ar.d 

Naples undei- Spanish Dominion. Trans- 
lated from the German of Alfred de 
Iveuraont. 

Carrel's Counter Revolution in Eng- 
land. Fox's History and Lonsdale's 
.Memoir of James II. Portrait. 

Cellini (Benvenuto), Memoirs of. 

Translated by Eoscoe. Portrait. 

Coleridge's (S. T.) Friend. A Series 

of Essays. [Just Published. 

Conde's Dominion of the Arabs in 

Spain. Translated by Mrs. Foster. In 
3 vols. 

Cowper's Complete "Works. Edited, 

with Memoir of the Author, by Southet. 
Illustrated with 50 Engravings. In 8 vols. 

Vols. 1 to 4. Memoir and Correspondence. 

Vols. 5 and 6. Poetical Works. Plates. 

Vol. 1. Homer's Iliad. Plates. 

Vol. 8. Homer's Odyssey. PlaUs. 
2 



Lectures at Eroadmead 

ChapeL Edited by J. E. Ri'LANi). In 
2 vols. 

Critical Essays. Edited by 

J. E. Rtland. In 2 vols. 

Essays— On Decision of Cha- 
racter, &c. &c. 

Essays — On the Evils of Po- 
pular Ignorance. 

Fosteriana: Thoughts; Re- 



flections, and Criticisms of the late Johx 
FosTER, selected from periodical papers, 
and Edited by Hexkx G. Bohn (nearly 
600 pages). 5s. 

Miscellaneous "Works. In- 
cluding his Essay on Doddridge. Prer 
paring. 

Fuller's (Andrew) Principal "Works. 



With Memoir. Pertrai*- 



BOOKSELLERS 

I40,STRAND 

LONDON 



BOHN'8 VARIOUS LIBBABIE8. 



Goethe's Works, translated into Eng- 
lish. In 5 vols. 

"Vols. 1. and 2. Autobiography, 13 Booka ; 
and Travels in Italy, France, and 
Switzerland. Portrait. 

Vol. 3. Faust, Iphigenia, Torquato 
Tasso, Egmont, &c., by Miss Swan- 
wick ; and Gotz von Berlichingen, by 
Sir Walter Scott. Frontispiece, 

Vol. 4. Novels and Tales. 

Vol. 5. Wilhelm Meister's Apprentice- 
ship. 

Gregory's (Dr.) Evidences, Doctrines, 

and Duties of the Christian Religion. 

Guizot's Representative Government. 

Translated by A. R. Scoele. 

History of the English devo- 
lution of 1640. Translated by William 
HAZLm. Portrait. 

History of Civilization, Trans- 

Lated by William Hazlitt. In 3 vols. 
Portrait. 

Hall's (Eev. Robert) Miscellaneous 

Works and Remains, with Memoir by 
Dr. Gregory, and an Essay on his Cha- 
racter by John Foster. Poi-trait. 
Heine's Poems, complete, fiom the 
Gennan, by E. A. Bowring. New edi- 
tion, enlarged. 5s. 

Hungary: its History and Revolu- 
tions ; with a Memoir of Kossuth from 
new and authentic sources. Portrait. 

Hutchinson (Colonel), Memoirs of, 

and an Account of the Siege of Lathom 
House. Portrait. 

James's (G. P. R.) Richard Coeur-de- 

Lion, King of England. Portraits. In 
2 vols. 

Louis XIV. Portraits. In 

2 vols. 

Junius's Letters, with Notes, Ad- 
ditions, and an Index. In 2 vols. 

Lamartine's History of the Girond- 
ists. Portraits, la 3 vols, 

Restoration of the Monarchy, 

with Index. Portraits. In 1 vols. 

French Revolution of 1848, 



with a fine Frontispiece. 

Lanzi's History of Painting. Trans- 
lated by KoscoE. Portraits. In 3 vols. 

Locke's Philosophical Works, con- 
taining an Essay on the Human Under- 
standing, &c., with Notes and Index by 
J. A. St. John. Portrait. In 2 vols. 

Life and Letters, with Ex- 
tracts from his Common-Place Books, by 
Lord King. 

Luther's Table Talk. Translated by 
William Hazlitt. Portrait. 



Machlavelli's History of Florence, 

The Prince, and other Works. Portrait. 

Menzel's History of Germany. Por- 
traits. In 3 vols. 

Michelet's Life of Luther. Translated 

by William ILvzlitt. 
Roman Republic. Translated 

by William Hazlitt. 

French Revolution, with In- 



dex. Frontispiece. 
Mignet's French Revolution from 

1789 to 1814. Portrait. 

Milton's Prose Works, with Index. 
Portraits. In 5 vols. 

Mitford's (Miss) Our Village. Im- 
proved Ed., complete. Illustrated. 2 vols. 

Heander's Church History. Trans- 
lated: with General Index. In 10 vols. 
Life of Christ. Translated. 

First Planting of Christi- 
anity, and Antiguostikus. Translated, in 
2 vols. 

History of Christian Dogmas. 

Translated. In 2 vols. 

^ — Christian Life in the Early 

and Middle Ages, including his 'Light la 
Dark Places.' Translated. 

Ocldey's History of the Saracens. 

Revised and completed. Portrait. 

Pearson on the Creed. New Edition. 
With Analysis and Notes. [^Shortly. 

Ranke's History of the Popes. Trans- 
lated by E. Foster. In 3 vols. 

Ssrvia and the Servian Re- 
volution. 

Reynolds' (Sir Joshua) Literary 

Works. PoHrait. In 2 vols. 

Roscoe's Life and Pontificate of 

Leo X., with the Copyright Notes, and an 
Index. Portraits. In 2 vols. 

Life of Lorenzo de Medici, 

with the Copyright Notes, &c. Portrait. 
Russia, History of, by Walter K. 

Kelly. Portraits. In 2 vols. 
Schiller's Works. Translated into 
English. In 4 vols. 
Vol. 1. Thirty Years' War, and Revolt 

of the Netherlands. 
Vol. 2. Continuation of the Revolt 
of the Netherlands; Wallenstcin's 
Camp ; the Piccolomini ; the Death 
of Wallenstein; and William Tell. 
Vol. 3. Don Carlos, Mary Stuart, Maid 

of Orleans, and Bride of Messina. 
Vol. 4. The Robbers, Fiesco, Love and 
Intrigue, and the Ghost-Seer. 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Schlegel's Philosophy of Life and 

of Language, translated by A. J. W. Mok- 

KISON. 

History of Literature, An- 
cient and Modern. Now first completely 
translated, with General Index. 

Philosophy of History. 

Translated by J. B. Robertson, jt'or- 
trait. 

■ Dramatic Literature. Trans- 
lated. Fwtrait. 

Modern History. 

Esthetic and Miscellaneous 

"Works. 

Sheridan's Dramatic "Works and 
Life, Portrait. 

Sismondi's Literature of the South 

of Europe. Translated by Eoscoe. I'or- 
traits. In 2 vols. 

Smith's (Adam) Theory of the Moral 

Sentiments; with his Eseay ou the First 
Formation of Languages. 



Smyth's (Professor) Lectures on 

Modern Historj'. In 2 vols. 

Lectures on the French Re- 
volution. In 2 vols. 
Sturm's Morning Communings with 

God, or Devotional Meditations lor Every 
Day in the Year. 

Taylor's (Bishop Jeremy) Holy Living 

and Dying. Fortrait. 

Thierry's Conquest of England by 

the Normans. Translated by William 
Hazlitt. Fortrait. In 2 vols. 

Thierry's Tiers Etat, or Third Estate, 

in France. Translated by F. B. "Wells. 
2 vols, in one. bs. 

Vasari's Lives of the Painters, 

Sculptors, and Architects. Translated by 
Mrs. Foster. 5 vols. 
Wesley's (John) Life. By Egbert 
SouTHET. Nev/ and Complete Edition. 
Double volume, 5«. 

Wheatley on the Book of Common 

Prayer. Frontispiece, 



II. 



Uniform with Bohn's Standard Library. 



Bailey's (P. J.) Festus. A Poem. 
Seventh Edition, revised and enlarged. 
5s. 

British Poets, from Milton to Kirke 
White. Cabinet Edition. In 4 vols. 
14«, 

Cary's Translation of Dante's Hea- 
ven, Hell, and Pur^'atory, 7s. Qd. 

Chillingworth's Eeligion of Pro- 
testants. 3s. 6cZ. 

Classic Tales. Comprising iu One 
volume the most esteemed works of the 
imagination. 3s. 6cZ. 

Demosthenes and .Eschines, the 

Orations of. Translated by Lelaxd, 3s. 

Dickson and Mowbray on Poultry. 
P^dited by ]\Irs. Loudon. Illustrations by 
Harvey. 5s. 

Henry's (Matthew) Commentary on 

the Psalms. Numerous Illustrations. 
4s. 6d. 

Eofland's British Angler's Manual. 

Improved and enlarged, by J-^dward Jesse, 
Esq. Jllustraied with 60 Engravinqs. 
Is. 6d. ^ 

Horace's Odes and Epodes. Trans- ! 
lated by the Ptev, "W. Sev.'ell. 3s. GoL ' 
4 



Irving's (Washington) Complete 

"Works. In 10 vols. 3s. 6d each. 

"Vol. 1. Salmagundi and Knickerbocker. 
Portrait of the Author, 

Vol. 2. Sketch Book and Life of Gold- 
smith. 

"\^ol. 3. Bracebridge Hall and Abbots- 
ford and Newstead. 

Vol. 4. Tales of a Traveller and the 
Alhambra. 

Vol. 5. Conquest of Granada and Con- 
quest of Spain. 

Vols, 6 and 1. Life of Columbus av.d 
Companions of Columbus, with a new 
Index. Fine Pm-trait, 

"Vol. 8. Astoria and Tour in the Prairies. 

"Vol. 9. Mahomet and his Successors. 

"\^ol. 10. Conquest of Florida and Ad- 
ventures of Captain Bonneville. 

(Washington) Life of Wash- 
ington. Portrait. In 4 vols. 3s. 6d. each, 

(Washington) Life and Let- 
ters. By his Nephew, Pieeke E. Ievikq. 
In 2 vols. 3s. 6(1. each. 
For separate Works, see Cheap Sej-ies, 
p. 15. 

Joyce's Introduction to the Arts and 

Sciences. "With Examination Questions. 
3s. 6d. 



BOHN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



Lawrence's lectures on Compara- 
tive Anatomy, Physiology, Zoology, and the 
Natural History of Alan. Illustrated. 5s. 

Lilly's Introduction to Astrology. 

With numerous Emendations, by Zadkiel. 
5s. 

Miller's (Professor) History, Philoso- 
phically considered. In 4 vols. 3s. <od. 
each. 

Parkes's Elementary Chemistry. 

3s. &d. 

Political (The) Cyclopaedia. lu 4 

vols. 35. 6cZ. each. 



Political (The) Cyclopsedia. Also 



bound in 2 
15s. 



vols, with leather backs. 



Shakespeare's Works, with Life, 

by Chalmehs. In diamond type. 3s. 6d. 

or, with 40 Engravings. 5s. 

Uncle Tom s Cabin. With Introduc- 
tory Remarks, by the Rev. J. Shekjian. 
Printed in a large clear type. Illustra- 
tions. 3s. 6d. 

Wide, Wide World. By Elizabeth 

Wetherall. Illustrated vnth 10 highly' 
finished Steel Engravings. 3s. 6d. 



III. 



Bohn's Historical Library. 



UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME. 



Evelyn's Diary and Correspondence. 

Illustrated laith numerous Fortraits, Ac. 
In 4 vols. 

Pepys' Diary and Correspondence. 

Edited by I^ord Braybrooke. With im- 
portant Additions, including numerous 
Letters. Illustrated with many Portraits. 
" In 4 vols. 

Jesse's Memoirs of the Reign of the 

Stuarts, including the Protectorate. With 
General Index. Upivanls of 40 Poj-traits. 
In 3 vols. 



Jesse's Memoirs of the Preteade's 

and their Adherents. 6 Port7-aits. 

Nugent's (Lord) Memorials of 

Hampdf-n, his Party, and Times. 12 
I'ortraits. 

Strickland's (Agnes) Lives of the 

Queens of England, from the Norman 
Conquest. From official records and 
authentic documents, private and public. 
Revised Edition. la 6 vols. 

[iVo!'; comj)lele. 



IV. 



Bohn's Library of French Memoirs. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT oS. Gd. PER VOLUME. 



Memoirs of Philip de Commines, 

containing the Histories of Louis XI. and 
Charles VIII., and of Charles the Bold, 
Duke of Burgundy. To which is added. 
The Sjcsndaloua Chronicle, or Secret 



History of Louis XI. Fortraits. In 
2 vols. 

Memoirs of the Duke of Sully, Prime 

Minister to Henry the Great. Fortraits 
In 4 vols. 



Bohn's School and College Series. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARF. 



Bass's Complete Greek and English 

Lexicon to the New Testament. 2s. 6d. 

2Jew Testament (The) in Greek. 

Griesbach's Text, with the various read- 
iUigs of Mill and Scholz at foot of poge, and 



Parallel References lu the marj^in; also a 
Critical Introduction and Chronological 
Tables. Tu-O facsimiles of Greek Manu- 
st-ripts. (650 pages.) 3s. 6(/. ; or with the 
Lexii-vu;; 5s. 



A CATALOGUE OF 



VI. 



Bohn's Philological and Philosophical Library. 

uniform with the standard library, at 5s. per volume 
(excepting those marked otherwise). 



Hegel's Lectures on the Philosophy 

of History. Translated by J. Sibkee, M.A. 

Herodotus, Turner's (Dawson "W.) 

Notes to. With Map, &c. 

Wheeler's Analysis and 

Summary of. 

Kant's Critique of Pure Eeason. 

Translated by J. M. 1). Meiklejohn. 

Logic ; or, the Science of Inference. 

A Popular Manual. By J. Devet, 

Lowndes' Bibliographer's Manual of 

English Literature. New tldition, en- 
larged, by H. G. BoHN. Parts I. to X. (A 
to Z). 3s. 6d. each. Part XI. (the Ap- 



pendis Volume). 5s. Or the 11 parts in 
4 vols., half morocco, 21. 2s. 

Smith's (Archdeacon) Complete Col- 
lection of Synonyms and Antonyms. 

[In the Press. 

Tennemann's Manual of the History 

of Philosophy. Continued by J. R. Morel l. 

Thucydides, Wheeler's Analysis of. 
V/heeler's (M.A.) W. A., Dictionary 

of Names of Fictitious Persons and Places. 
[^Just published. 

Wright's (T.) Dictionary of Obsolete 

and Provincial English. In 2 vols. 5s. 
each. ; or half-bound in 1 vol., 10s. 6(Z. 



VII. 



Bohn's British Classics. 

uniform with the STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 3s. Gd. PER VOLUME. 



Addison's Works. With the Notes 
of Bishop HuKD, much additional matter, 
and upwards of 100 Unpublished Letters. 
Edited by H. G. Bohn. Portrait and 8 
Engravings on Steel. In 6 vols. 
Burke's Works. In 6 Volumes. 

Vol. 1. Vindication of Natural Society, 

On the Sublime and Beautiful, and 

Political Miscellanies. 

Vol. 2. French Revolution, &c. 

Vol. 3. Appeal from the New to the 

Old Whigs ; the Catholic Claims, &c. 

Vol. 4. On the Affairs of India, and 

Charge against Warren Hastings. 
Vol. 5. Conclusion of Charge against 

Hastings ; on a Regicide Peace, &c. 
Vol. 6. Miscellaneous Speeches, &c. 
With a General Index. 



Burke's Speeches on Warren Hast- 
ings; and Letters. AVith Index. In 
2 vols, (forming vols. 7 and 8 of the 
works). 

Life. By Prior. New aud 

revised Edition. Portrait. 

Defoe's Works. Edited by Sir Wal- 
TEE Scott. In 7 vols. 

Gibbon's Eoman Empire. Complete 
and Unabridged, with Notes; including, 
in addition to the Author's own, those of 
Guizot, Wenck, Nlebuhr, Hugo, Neander, 
and other foreign scholars ; and an ela- 
borate Index. Edited by an English 
Churchman. In 7 vols. 



vin. 



Bohn's Ecclesiastical Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY. AT 5s. PER VOLUME. 



Eusebius' Ecclesiastical History. 

With Notes. 
Philo Judaeus, Works of ; the con- 
temporary of Josephus. Translated by 
C. D. Yonge. In 4 vols. 

Socrates' Ecclesiastical History, in 

continuation of Eusebius. With the Notes 
of Valesius. 
« 



Sozomen's Ecclesiastical History, 

from A.D. 324-440 ; and the Ecclesiastical 
History of Philostorgius. 

Theodoret and Evagrius. Ecclesias- 
tical Histories, from a.d. 332 to a.d. 427 ; 
and from A..D. 431 to a.d. 544. 



BOEN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



IX. 



Bohn's Antiquarian Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME. 



Bede'3 Ecclesiastical History, and 

Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. 

Boethius's Consolation of Philoso- 
phy, in Anglo-Saxon, -with the A. S. 
Metres, and an English Translation, by 
the Rev. S. Fox. 

Brand's Popular Antiquities of Eng- 
land, Scotland, and Ireland. I5y Sir Heniit 
Ellis. In 3 vols. 

Browne's (Sir Thomas) Works. 

Edited by Simon Wilkin. In 3 vols. 

Vol. 1. The Vulgar Errors. 

Vol. 2. Religio Medici, and Garden of 
Cyrus. 

Vol. 3. Urn-Burial, Tracts, and Corre- 
spondence. 

Chronicles of the Crusaders. Richard 

of Devizes, Geoffrey de Vinsauf, Lord de 
Joinville. 

Chronicles of the Tomhs. A Collec- 
tion of Remarkable Epitaphs. By T. J. 
I'ETTIGREW, F.R.S.. F.S.A. 

Early Travels in Palestine. Willi- 

liaUi, Saiwulf, Benjamin of Tudela, Man- 
deville, La Brocquiere, and Maundrell ; 
all unabridged. Edited by THOiXAS 

WUIGHT. 

Ellis's Early English Metrical Ro- 
mances. Revised by J. 0. Halliwell. 

Florence of Worcester's Chronicle, 

with the Two Continuations : comprising 
Annals of English Histoiy to the Reigu of 
Edward 1. ■ 

Giraldus Cambrensis' Historical 

Works : Topography of Ireland ; History 
of the Conquest of Ireland; Itinerary 
through Wales ; and Description of Wales. 
With Index. Edited by Thos. Weight. 

Handbook of Proverbs. Comprising 
all Ray's English Proverbs, with additions; 
his Foreign Proverbs ; and an Alphabetical 
Index. 

Henry of Huntingdon's History of 

the English, from the Roman Invasion to 
Henry II. ; with the Acts of King Stephen, 
&c. 

Ingulph's Chronicle of the Abbey of 

Croyland, with the Continuations by Peter 
of Blois and other Writers. By H. T. 

RlLET. 



Keightley's Fairy Mythology. Fro7i- 

tispiece by Cruikskank. 

Lamb's Dramatic Poets of the Time 

of Elizabeth; including his Selections from 
the Garrick Plays. 

Lepsius's Letters from Egypt, Ethio- 
pia, and the Peninsula of Siiiai. 

Mallet's Northern Antiquities. By 

Bishop Percy. With an Abstract of the 
Eyrbiggia Saga, by Sir Walter Scott. 
Edited by J. A. Blackwell. 

Marco Polo's Travels The Trans- 
lation of Marsden. Edited by Thomas 
Wright. 

Matthew Paris's Chronicle. In 5 

vols. 
First Section : Roger of Wendover's 

Flowers of English History, from the 

Descent of the Saxons to a.d. 1235. 

Translated by Dr. Giles. In 2 vols. 
Second Section: From 1235 to 1273. 

With Index to the entire Work. In 

3 vols. 

Matthew of Westminster's Flowers 

of History, especially such as relate to the 
affairs of Britain ; to a.d. 1307. Translated 
by C. D. YoNGE. In 2 vols. 

Ordericus Vitalis' Ecclesiastical His- 
tory of England and Normandy. Trans- 
lated with Notes, by T. Foicester, M.A. 
In 4 vols. 

Pauli's (Dr. E.) Life of Alfi.-ed the 

Great. Translated from tiie Geiinan. 

Polyglot of Foreign Proverbs. With 

English Translations, and a General Index, 
bringing the whole into parallels, by H. G. 

BOHN. 

Eoger De Hoveden's Annals of Eng- 
lish History ; from a.d. 732 to a.d. 1201. 
Edited by H. T. Riley. In 2 vols. 

Six Old English Chronicles, viz. :— 

Asser's Life of Alfred, and the Chronicles 
of Ethelwerd, Gildas, Nennius, Geoffrey 
of Monmouth, and Richard of Ciren- 
cester. 

William of Malmesbury's Chronicle 

of the Kings of England. Translated by 
Shaepe. 
Yule-Tide Stories. A Collection of 
Scandinavian Tales and Traditions. Edited 
by B, Thorpe. 

1 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Bohn's Illustrated Library. 

uniform with the standard library, at 5s. per volume 
(excepting those marked other\vise). 



Allen's Battles of the Britisli Navy. 

Revised and enlarged. Numerous fine 
Portraits. In 2 vols. 

Andersen's Danish Legends and 

Fairy Tales. With many Tales not in any 
other edition. Translated by Caroline 
Peachey. lIQM'ood Evgravings. 
Ariosto's Orlando Furioso. In Eng- 
lish Verse. By W. S. Rose. Twelve fine 
Engravings. In 2 vols. 

Eechstein's Cage and Chamber Birds. 

including Sweet's Warblers. Enlarged 
edition. Numerous plates. 

*;^* All other editions are abridged. 
With the plates coloured. Is. 6c?. 
Eonomi's Nineveh and its Palaces. 

New Edition, revised and considerably 
enlarged, both in matter and Plates, in- 
cluding a Full Account of the Assyrian 
Sculptures recently added to the National 
Collection. Upwards of 300 Engravings. 

Butler's Hudibras. With Variorum 
Notes, a Biography, and a General Index. 
Mited by Henry G. Bohn. Thirty beau- 
tiful Illustrations. 

; or, further illustrated vAth 

62 Outline Portraits. In 2 vols. 10s. 

Cattermole's Evenings at Haddon 

Hall. 24 exquisite Engravings on Steel, 
from designs by himself, the Letterpress 
by the BAR0NES3 De Carabella. 

China, Pictorial, Descriptive, and 

Historical, with some Account of Ava and 
the Burmese, Siam, and Anam. Nearly 
100 Illustrations. 

Craik's (Gr. L.) Pursuit of Knowledge 

under Difficulties, illustrated by Anec- 
dotes and Memoirs. Revised Edition. 
With numerous Portraits. 

[Just Published. 

Cruikshank's Three Courses and a 

Dessert. A Series of Tales, ivith 50 hu- 
morous Illustrations by Cruikshank. 

Dante. Translated by I. C. Wright, 
M.A. New Edition, ' carefully revised. 
Portrait and 34 Illustrations on Steel, 
after Flaxman. 

Didron's History of Christian Art ; 

or. Christian Iconography. From the 
French. Upwards of 150 beautiful out- 
line Engravings. Vol. I. (Mons. Didron 
has not yet written the second volume.) 



Flaxman's Lectures on Sculpture. 

Numerous Illustrations. 6s. [Now ready. 

Gil Bias, The Adventures of. 24 

Engravings on Steel, after Smirke, and 
10 Etchings by George Cruikshank. (612 
pages.) 6s. 

Grimm's Gammer Grethel ; or, Ger- 
man Fairy Tales and Popular Stories 
Translated by Edgar Taylor. Numerous 
Woodcuts by Cruikshank. 3s. 6d. 

Holbein's Dance of Death, and Bible 

Cuts. Upwards of 150 subjects, beauti- 
fully engraved in facsimile, with Intro- 
duction and Descriptions by the late 
Francis Douce and Dr. T. F. Dibdin. 
2 vols. In 1. 7s. 6d. 

Howitt's (Mary) Pictorial Calendar 

of the Seasons. Embodying the whole of 
Aiken's Calendar of Nature. Upwards of 
100 Engravings. 

(Mary and William) Stories 

of English and Foreign Life. Twenty beau- 
tiftd Engravings. 

Hunt's (Leigh) Book for a Comer. 

Eighty extremely beautiful Engravings. 

India, Pictorial, Descriptive, and 

Historical, from the Earliest Times to the 
Present. Upwards of 100 fine Engravings 
on Wood, and a Map. 

Jesse's Anecdotes of Dogs. New Edi- 
tion, with large additions. Numerous fine 
Woodcuts after Harvey, Bewick, and otJiers. 

. ; or, with the addition of o4- 

highly-finished Steel Engravings ; after 
Cooper, Landseer, dx. Is. 6d. 

Kitto's Scripture Lands and Biblical 

Atlas. 24 Maps, beautifully engraved on 

Sted, with a Consulting Index. 
; orj xoith the maps coloxired, 

Is. 6ti. 
Krummacher's Parables. Translated 

from the German. Forrty Illustrations by 

Clayton, engraved by Dalziel. 

Lindsay's (Lord) Letters on Egypt, 

Edom, and the Holy Land. New Edition, 
enlarged. Thirty-six beautiful Engrav- 
ings, and 2 Maps. 
Lodge's Portraits of Illustrious Per- 
sonages of Great Britain, with Memoirs. 
Two Hundred and Fm-ty Portraits, beau- 
tifully engraved on Steel. 8 vols. 



cy^ 



Oi-/: jtfLAfiLS-^ . ;» eft-, 



-<^/tAfi^-^^ 



THE 



ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY 



ENGLAND AND NORMANDY. 



ORDEKICUS VITAL IS. 



TRANSLATED, WITH NOTES, 
AND THE INTRODUCTION OF GUIZOT, 

By THOMAS FORESTER, M.A. 



VOL. IV. 



LONDON: 

HENRY G. BOHN, YORK STREET, COYENT GARDEN. 

MDCCCLYI. 



KABDOX, BKOTHESIS, AND 00., ?*1«TZS;, CXSThH 3T?-Si;T, FIKSBUKT 



"BR 



EDITOR'S NOTICE. 



The publication by tbe Societe de VHistoire de 'Prance 
of their last volume of Ordericus Yitalis has at length 
enabled me to complete the translation from their accurate 
text. The delay is the less to be regretted, as it has 
afforded me an opportunity of presenting the English 
reader with a valuable Notice, not only containing a review 
of the life, character, and writings of the monk of St. 
Evroult (which had, indeed, been somewhat anticipated by 
the paper of M. Guizot, given as an Introduction to 
this edition), but also supplying details of the studies and 
sciences cultivated in the Middle Ages, and their literary 
history. 

This Notice is from the pen of M. Leopold Delisle, 
a gentleman attached to the Imperial Library at Paris, on 
whom the duties of editor devolved when M. Le Prevost 
was compelled, by loss of sight, to relinquish a task to 
whicb he had devoted a considerable portion of his life. 
And here I may be permitted to express my acknowledg- 
ments to botb these gentlemen for valuable services ren- 
dered me in the course of my own undertaking. 

Eollowing the steps of the Erench editors, I have given 
a place at the end of the History to the "Chronicle of 
St. Evroult." It not only formed the basis of numerous 
facts narrated by Ordericus, but some of the entries 
appear to have been made in his own hand ; and it is 
besides interesting, as being continued for more than three 
centuries after bis death. 



IT editor's notice. 

A Chronological Index is appended, to compensate in 
some degree for the desultory manner in which the author 
has brought together times separated by long intervals, as 
well as places and subjects the most distant and incon- 
gruous. 

The G-eneral Index has been compiled, with the same 
object, on a plan more than usually comprehensive. 
Copious, however, as it is, it will convey but an imperfect 
idea of the prodigious mass of minute circumstances col- 
lected in the work. "Xo book," observes M. Guizot, 
"contains so much and such valuable information on, the 
history of the eleventh and twelfth centuries, on the 
political state, both civil and religious, of society in the 
"West of Europe, and on the manners of the times, whether 
feudal, monastic, or popular." 

T. r. 

January 25th, 1856. 



GENERAL CONTENTS. 



VOL. I. 



Editor's Preface . . 


iii — vi 


Introduction, Notice by M. Guizot 


vii — xvi 


The Author's Preface .... 


1—4 


Books I., II., III. of the History 


5—495 


VOL. II. 




Books IV., V., VL, VIL, and VIH. to Chap, xviii. 


1—524 


VOL. III. 





Books VIII., from Chap, xix., IX., X., XI., and XII. to 

Chap. xx. ..... 1—492 

VOL IV. 

Editor's Notice, &c. ...... iii 

Kemarks on the Life, Work, and Times of Ordericus 

ViTALis. BY M. Leopold Delisle . . . vii — xcii 

Book XII. op the History, from Chap. xxi. and Book XIII. 1 — 225 
The Chronicle of St. Eyroult .... 229 — 268 

Chronological Index ..... 269 — 294 

General Index ... . , 295 — 427 



CONTENTS OF M. DELISLE'S REMARKS. 

Introduction ....... vii, viii 

I. The Studies at the Abbey of St. E\T0ult . . ix — xxviii 

IL Life of Ordericus. — His Character. — His Acquirements xxix — xxxix 
III. Plan of the History. — Period of its Composition. — 

Divisions. — The blank in Book VII. supjDlied . xxxix — xlix 



VI GENEEAL CO^'TENTS. 

Pftgo 
IV. The value of the Ecclesiastical History of Ordericus. 

— The oblivion in which it rested during the Middle 

Ages. . xlix — liv 

V. The Chronological system adopted by Ordericus Vitalis liv — Ivii 

VL Works consulted by Ordericus Vitalis . . . Ivii — Ixxxi 

VII. Manuscripts, Editions, and Translations of the Ecclesi- 
astical History ..... Ixxxii — xcii 



EEMAEKS 
ON THE LIFE, CHARACTER, WORK, AND TIMES 

OF 

ORDERICUS YITALIS. 

BY M. LEOPOLD DELISLE. 



Oedeeicus Vitalis was one of the first authors whose 
works the Societe de VRistoire de France resolved on pub- 
lishing : the choice was determined as much by the im- 
portance of the work as by the rarity of former editions, 
and their manifold imperfections. Its wisdom was still 
more confirmed when a scholar of distinguished reputation 
offered to undertake the duties of editor. 

The society has had no reason to repent its decision: 
from the first, the public duly appreciated the value of the 
text as settled by M. Le Prevost, with the active assistance 
of M. Gruerard,"'his friend and fellow member of learned 
nstitutions, who has been unhappily taken from us before 
ne could witness the completion of an enterprise in which 
he felt the same interest as he did in his own works. Es- 
pecial notice was also taken of the valuable comments, in 
which the editor, by the aid of documents often known only 
to himself, threw light on obscure passages in the test, and 
touched with great originality on the most difficult points 
in the chronology, the history, and the geography, of the 
Middle Ages. 

After twenty years of persevering industry, M. Le Prevost 
had nearly accomplished his task, when he found himself 
under the painful necessity of relinquishing studies which 
had been the delight and the glory of his life. Little re- 
mamed for him to do, except to compose an introduction, in 



VIU 0>f THE LIFE, WOEK, A:jfD TIMES 

wliidi, no doubt, tlie public would bave recognized tbe well- 
known talents of tbe autbor of tbe Pouille de Lisieux, of 
tbe Dissertations on tbe Heart of St. Louis, of Notes on tlie 
Communes of the Department of tlie Eui^e, of tbe JEListory of 
St. Martin du Tilleul, and of so many memoirs, written 
Avitb equal learning, spirit, and elegance. 

It was under tbese circumstances tbat M. Le Prevost 
tbougbt fit to entrust tbe publication of tbe fiftb, and last, 
volume of Ordericus to one of bis friends, a native of IS^or- 
mandj, like bimself, wbo esteems it an bonour to call bim- 
self tbe disciple of sucb a master. Thougb fully alive to tbe 
peculiar delicacy of tbe task assigned me, I felt it my duty 
not to sbrink from tbe effort to justify tbis mark of con- 
fidence. Tbe public, bowever, will, I trust, grant me some 
indulgence ; and, wbile perusing a notice for tbe compo- 
sition of wbicb I bad no opportunity of mucb previous pre- 
paration, will kindly lay aside all tbougbt of tbe remarkable 
piece of bistorical and literary criticism wbicb we migbt 
bave bad from tbe pen of M. Le Prevost, employed on sucb a 
subject. 

After describing tbe literary activity wbicb prevailed 
in tbe abbey of St. Evroult during tbe eleventb and 
twelftb centuries, I sball give some account of tbe life and 
cbaracter, tbe tastes and babits, of Ordericus Vitalis, of tbe 
plan of bis bistory, tbe periods at wbicb bis work was com- 
posed, and tbe different ways in wbicb it was divided. An 
effort will also be made to supply tlie loss of a part wbicb is 
wanting in tbe seventb book. I sball state tbe grounds on 
wbicb Ordericus is entitled to rank so bigbly among tbe 
writers of tbe Middle Ages ; and sbow, in contrast, tbe state 
of oblivion into wbicb bis work bas long fallen. I sball 
attempt to determine tbe cbronological system pursued by 
tbe autbor, and to discover wbat productions of former 
writers be placed under contribution. My task will termi- 
nate witb a catalogue of tbe manuscripts, editions, and 
translations of tbe Ecclesiastical History now existing. 



OF OEDEEICUS VITALIS. IX 

I. 

THE STUDIES PUESFED AT THE AEBEY OF ST. EVEOTJLT. 

Pounded in 1050, on the ruins of a Merovingian monas- 
tery, the abbey of St. Evroult, a name indelibly associated 
with recollections of Ordericus Yitalis, was one of the prin- 
cipal sources of that light which shone with so much 
brilliance on Normandy in the eleventh and twelfth cen- 
turies. Most of the abbots on whom the administration of 
the affairs of that house devolved were no less zealous in 
augmenting its revenues, than in developing a taste for stu 
dious pursuits among its members. 

Thierri de Mathonville, a monk of Jumi^ges, to whom, in 
1050, the organization of the new abbey was intrusted, 
drew around him numerous disciples. He it was who laid 
the foundation of the library, the relics of which we still 
view with admiration. By way of example, he copied with 
his own hand a compilation of collects, a gradual, and an 
antiphonary.^ He had several books of the Bible, a missal, 
and some of the works of St. Jerome and St. Gi-regory, tran- 
scribed by his nephew, Ealph, his companion Hugh, and a 
priest named E-oger.^ Many excellent copyists were formed 
in his school ; among whom are mentioned Berenger, after- 
wards bishop of Yenosa, Joscelin, Ealph, Bernard, Tiu^- 
quetil, and Richard ; who enriched the library of St. Evroult 
mth the works of St. Jerome, St. Augustine, St. Ambrose, 
Isidore, Eusebius, and Orosius.^ To encourage the industry 
of his scribes, he often related to them the story of a monk 
who was saved, they say, for having copied a ponderous 
volume. When he stood before the tribunal of the Sove- 
reign Judge, the number of offences he had committed was 
reckoned on one side of his account, and the sum total of 
the letters he had traced was coimted on the other. The 
last exceeded the first by a single unit, and that turned the 
scale on the side of mercy .^ 

Osberne, one of Thierri' s successors, employed his leism'e 
hours in the fabrication of implements for writing and pre- 
paring tablets of wax.^ In his time flourished William 
Grregory, whose transcripts and illuminations were long 

1 Vol. i. 386, 38.8. 2 YqI, ^ 406. 3 i^id. 

* Vol. i. 406, 407, 435. ^ Vol. i. 407. ^ Vol. i. 442. 



X ON THE LIFE, WORK, AiN^D Ti:^ES 

admired as cliefs-d' ceuvre} Robert Andre, a superior pen- 
man, and Bernard Matthew, to whom Ordericus gives the 
character of "an eminent antiquarian." 

In the course of time the rising library was enriched by 
various acquisitions. A¥illiam de Bretueil made an offering 
of the text of the Evangelists, ornamented with gold, silver, 
and jewels •? Eobert de Glrentemesnil presented a large 
psalter, embellished with paintings, which Queen Emma 
had sent from England to Eobert, archbishop of Eouen.^ 
Other manuscripts crossed the channel, and were placed on 
the shelves of the library of St. Evroult. Among these was 
a psalter, which, at a later period, came into the possession 
of the monks of St. Ouen.* There were also a calendar,^ and 
a benedictionaire, some considerable fragments of which are 
still preserved,^ exhibiting, in a manner not to be mistaken, 
the characters of the Anglo-Saxon writing. 

About the middle of the twelfth century, a short cata- 
logue was compiled of the books at that time in the library 
of the monastery, of which the text is here given. 

1 Vol. i. 428, 429. 

2 Vol. ii. 191. 

3 Vol. L 401, 402. 

* This manuscript which is now in the Library of Rouen (No. 307, 391), 
contains, besides the psalter, a terier of the revenues of St. Evroult ; a 
'etter of Gregory IX. (April 17, 1230); a letter of Philip Augustus on 
patronages (Oct. 1207); several odes of Horace; some prayers; and an 
account of the possessions given by Baldwin de St. Lambert. The 
Benedictines consider this MS. to be of the seventh or eighth century. 

* At the end of a MS. in the Imperial Library, which will be again 
referred to. 

^ They are contained in a manuscript of 156 leaves in small folio, written 
on parchment, partly in England, partly at St. Evroult, in the twelfth 
century. It contains no less than thirty-three separate articles, most of 
which are lives and passions of saints. Among them are a life of St. 
Ethel wold, bishop of Winchester, and some hymns and masses to his honour. 
There is also a diploma of Charles the Simple in favour of St. Evroult, 
October 31, 900, discovered at Orleans by abbot Robert (1059—1061) 
who immediately had it transcribed by "the monk Joscelin, an excellent 
penman." It is printed by Mabillon, Martene, and Bouquet. The volume 
also contains two books of St. Chrysostom, De, Compunctione. 

M. Delisle remarks that in several parts of this volume he has recognized, 
without the least hesitation, the same hand as that by which the oldest 
manuscript of Ordericus was written. It also contains some curious paint- 
ings. For exact details of the contents of this volume, and of the manu- 
scripts referred to throughout this notice, the notes to the original prefixed 
to the fifth volume of Ordericus Vitalis (Paris, 1855) may be consulted. 



OF OEDEEICUS YITALIS. 



THESE AEE THE BOOKS COIS'TAINED IN THE LIBEAEY Or 
ST. ETEOULT : — 

Genesis. 

The Books of Kings. 
Chronicles. 

The Book of the Prophets. 
The New Testament. 
The text of the Evangelists. 
An Ecclesiastical History. 
The History of Clemens. 
The Great Psalter.^ 
Three Antiphonaries. 
Three Graduals. 
Twelve"'' Trophaires. 
Gracianus. 

Bahanus on JSIatihew. 

The Sentences of Warin of Seez ; with the Sentences of 
Origen on the Canticles. 

The Homilies of William cle Merula. 

The Ajpocalypse, hy the same. 

The Morals of St. Gregory, in three volumes.^ 

His Books of Dialogues. 

3£ariale. 

Alhot Bernard on the Song of Songs. 

The Book of Pastorals. 

A book of Eorty Homilies. 

A Eegister. 

A Commentary on Ezechiel.* 

A catalogue of the Bopes ; tvith the New Testament. 

Solinus. 

Bufinus on the Somilies of Origen. 

Augnstine on St. John. 

Augustine against Eaustus.^ 

The Enchiridion of Augustine. 

Augustine " De Verbis Domini." 

' Probably the Anglo-Saxon psalter already mentioned in p. ix. 
2 The words printed in italics were inserted in the catalogue after it was 
first made. 

' See Ordericus, vol. i. 406. 

* Ibid. 

' See vol. i. 253. 



XU ON THE LIFE, TTOEE:, AND TIMES 

Augustine's Soliloquy. 

The first part of the Psalter ; the second ; the third 
Augustine on the Trinity. 

Augustine on our Lord's Sermon on the Mount. 
Augustine on Christian Doctrine. 
Augustine on Confession. 
Augustine on tlie Divination of Demons. 
The Sentences of Abbot Warin. 
Suberfs Decrees. 
His Sentences. 
Doetliius on Dhilosopliy.^ 
Orosius.^ 

The Eule of St. Basil. 
Bede on the Canticles. 
Ma7^bodius. 

Abbot Bernard on, Gabriel was sent. 
Jerom against Jovinian, 
Jerom " De Questionibus."^ 
Jerom on the Psalter. 
Ambrose on the Sacraments. 
Ambrose on Eaith.^ 
The Hexarneron of Ambrose.^ 
Ambrose on, Blessed are the pure in heart. 
Isidore on the Natures of things. 
Isidore on the Old Testament. 
The Synonyms of Isidore. 
Athanasius on the Trinity. 
Summum Bonum. 
Albricus. 
Bede upon Mark. 
Bede's Expositions. 
The Crown of the Monks. 
Ten Collations of Pathers. 
A book of Sermons. 
The Epistles of Paul. 

The Great Passional, which begins at the life of St. 
Gregory. 

1 This i\IS. is now in the Library of Alenjon. 
- See Ordericus, vol. i. 407. 

^ There are manuscripts in the Library of Alenpon which are probably 
t]TOse here referred to. 



OF OEDEEICUS YTTALIS. xiii 

Item, auotlier great one, wHcIi begins at the life of St. 
Maur. 

An old Passional. 

The Life of St. Judoc.^ 

The Life of Hippocrates. 

The Life of St. Martin. 

His Miracles. 

The Life of St. Columban. 

The Life of St. Philibert.^ 

The Life of St. Gregory. 

The Passion of St. Sebastian."^ 

The Life of St. Maur. 

The Miracles of St. Benedict." 

Lives of the Fathers. 

Paradise.^ 

Two Calendars. 

The Eule of St. Benedict. 

The Canons. 

The Old Text. 

The Miracles of St. Stephen. 

The Life of St. Elias. 

Tlie Old Epistles of St. Paul. 

The Life of St. JRaclegund. 

Two volumes on Uses. 

JPaiiVs Epistles, with Glosses. ^ 

The Life of St. Columhan. 

Jerom on Daniel. 

The Psalter of John the Prior, ivith a Gloss. 

Bede on the Apocalypse. 

Bede's History of England. 

Bede on Luke. 

Haimon on the Epistles of Paul. 

The Passion of St. Kilian.^ 

The Passion of St. Eustachius. 

Exposition of the Lord's Prayer. 

Exposition of the Psalter. 

Ambrose on the Benefit of Death. 

^ See Ordericus, vol. i. 472—479. 
* These entries are erased in the manuscript catalogue. 
^ This book is mentioned (^ again in the catalogue of the'Library at 
Lire. See p. xx. 



XIV ON THE LIFE, WOEK, AJfD TIMES 

The Passion of St. Eleutherius. 

The Passion of St. Agatha. 

Amalarius.^ 

The Life of St. Edmund. 

Omnilogiis. 

Jerom on the Twelve Prophets. 

Angelomus. 

The Life of St. Leonard, a small volume. 

The Books of Josephus's Antiquities, with the Jewish War." 

Augustine de Civitate Dei. 

The History of the Lombards ; with the Acts of the Popes. ^ 

Priscian. 

The Epistles of Jerom to Augustine. 

The Book of Paterius ; with the Epistles of Bishop Ivo.^ 

The Sentences of the Lord Abbot Eichard. 

The Miracles of St. Agil. 

Liber Marciani, cum Yersibus Offerendarum. 

Haimon on Isaiah, with the Book of Augustine on the 
Harmony of the Evangelists. 

A disputation between a Christian and a heathen ; with 
divers prayers. 

Origen on the Old Testament. 

Jerom on Jeremiah. 

Augustine on the Letter of Grenesis. 

Smaragdus on the Eule of St. Benedict. 

Eour Volumes of Yitalis." 

The Book of Hugh, archbishop of Eouen. 

Life of SS. Herluin and Anselm. 

The Booh of LLum])hrey the Prior, which legins with the 
Sentence of Gregory on Easter, with various other Sentences ; 
and the Canticles of Hugh, in one volume. 

Liber elucidarii cum diversis sententiis. 

This catalogue, particularly when compared with the 
documents of the same kind and the same age which we pos 

^ Now in the Library of Alenfon. 

2 This is possibly the manuscript of Josephus described by M. Travers, 
Bulletin Monumental, 3rd series, i. 126. 
2 Now No. 18 of the Library of Alenpon. 
* Now No. 19 of the Library of Alen^on. 
5 The original MS. of our author. See afterwards, § vii. 1. 



or OEDEEICTJS TITALIS. XV 

sess, connected with tlie cathedral of Eouen^ and the monas- 
teries of Bec,^ Eecamp, and Lire,* enables us to perceive 
exactly what were the resources which the libraries of Nor- 

1 Published by M. I'Abbe Langlois, Recherches sur Ics BihliotMques des 
Archeveques et du Chapitre de Rouen (Rouen, 1853, 8°). See also 
Biblioth. de I'Ecole des Chartes, 3^ sdrie, i. 217; and 3Iem. de la Societe 
des Antiq. de Normandie, S^ serie, viii. 42 des Chroniques. 

2 Published from a MS. of the Library at Avranches, by M. Ravaisson. 
Rapports, 575. 

^ 1 consider it useful to publish these two catalogues. The first is 
found at the end of the Latin manuscript 1298 in the Imperial Library; 
the second at the end of MS, 4221 of the same collection. The articles 
printed in italics were added after the catalogue was first made. 

[the books of the church of FECAMP.] 

Bibliotheca, in one volume. 

Another, in two. 

Two Passionaries. 

Three Lectionaries. 

Augustine on the Epistles of Paul, in a large volume. 

Augustine de Civitate Dei. 

Augustine de Trinitate. 

Augustine on the Psalter, in three large volumes. 

Augustine de Moribus Ecclesise. 

The Epistles of Augustine. 

Augustine on Confessions. 

Augustine on the Perfection of Justice. 

Augustine on ... . 

Augustine against Julian the heretic. 

Augustine's Retractations. 

Augustine on the Harmony of the Evangelists. 

Augustine on Christian Doctrine. 

Augustine on John. 

Augustine on the Words of our Lord. 

Augustine on Genesis. 

Augustine on divers questions. 

Augustine's Homily on Charity, in leather. 

Augustine on the work of the Monks. 

Augustine de Moribus Ecclesise. (An entry blotted out.) 

Jerom's Psalter. 

Jerom on Isaiah. 

Jerom against Rufinus. 

Jerom on Ezekiel. 

Jerom on Jeremiah. 

Jerom against Jovinian. 

Jerom on Alark. 

Jerom on Matthew. 

Ambrose on Virginity. 



SVl Oy THE LIFE, WORK, AXD TIMES 

mandy afforded to studious meu in the tTrelfth century. 
Classical antiquity seldom possessed any other representa- 
tives in these collections except some poets and grammarians. 

The Exposition of Ambrose. 

Ambrose on the Benefit of Death. 

Ambrose on Blessed are the pure in heart. 

Jerom on the XII. Prophets. 

Ambrose on Luke. 

The Hexaraeron of Ambrose. 

Ambrose on the Sacraments. 

Isidore on Etymologies, in two places. 

Isidore on Genesis. 

Hilary on the Trinity. 

Hilary on Matthew. 

Isidore de Summo Bono. 

Origen upon Leviticus. 

Origen on the Old Testament. 

Origen on the Epistle of Paul to the Romans. 

The Life of St. Gregory. 

Gregory on Ezekiel. 

The Homilies of Gregory. 

Gregory's Dialogues. 

Moralia Job, in two large volumes, and others in two very small ones. 

Bede on the Tabernacle. 

Bede de Temporibus. 

Bede on Mark. 

A body of Canons. 

The Canons. 

Cassiodorus. 

Two books of Josephus. 

The History of Josephus. 

Egesippus. 

Haimon on the Epistle of Paul. 

Rabanus on Matthew. 

The Four Gospels. 

Abbot Bernard's exposition of the Canticles. 

Alquinus. (Alcuin.) 

The book of Effrem. 

The book of Numbers. 

The Epistles of Cyprian, in two places. 

Questions in Hebrew. 

Collations of the Fathers. 

Athanasius on the Trinity. 

Guibert on Genesis. 

Amalarius. 

Orosius. 

The book of Kings. 

The book of Clemens. 



OF OEDEEICUS TITALIS. XVU 

Of Greek literature we. discover nothing but translations of 
some of the books of Aristotle, and of several treatises on 
medicine. To gain a knowledge of the sciences and of hk- 

Noah's Ark. 

The Parables of Solomon. 

Decrees of the Popes. 

The Decrees of Ivo. 

Tlie Apocalypse. 

A Comment on the Apocalypse. 

The Sentences of Master Peter Lombard, in two volumes. 

The History of Master Peter Comestor. 

Homilies on Quadragesima. 

Boethius on the Trinity; two copies. 

Solinus. 

The Gerarchia of Dionysius. 

The Pastoral. 

Bernard's Book on Dispensation and Precept 

A Tripartite History. 

The Canonical Rule. 

The Golden Munth.g 

Angelomus. 

The book of the ^neid, in leather. 

The Life of St. Martin, in two places. 

Cassiodorus on the Psalter. 

The Crown of the Monks. 

Buccardus, 

The book of Solomon. 

A book of Miscellanies. 

A book of Anselm's. 

Herpericus. 

Paradise. 

A book of Medicine. 

Leviticus. 

Brutinarius. 

Rabert on Matthew. 

The Canons of the Apostles. 

Homilies in praise of Paul. 

A Commentary on the Rule of St. Benedict. 

The Life of St. Edward, in verse. 

The Homilies of Eusebius. 

Ecclesiastical History. 

Sermons on St. Mary. 

The Apology of Ambrose. 

Boethius de Consoiatione. 

Somnium Scipionis. 

A Commentary on the Evangelists, in two volumei. 

A large Priscian. 

Priscian on the Twelve Verses. 

VOL. IV. h 



XViii ON THE LIFE, WOEK, AND TIMES 

tory, there was nothing to whicli recourse could be had, but 
the compilations of ecclesiastical writers. What prevailed 
most in these deposits, and we still find forming the great- 

The Acts of our Saviour. 

The Lamentations of Jeremiah. 

Job, with a Gloss. 

Jlavmo on Isaiah. ^ 

The Life of St. Columban. 

The Life of St. Cuthbert, in leather. 

The book of Master Hugh on the Sacraments. 

Sermons for the whole year, in one volume. 

The Calendar of Abbot William. 

Gesta Normannorum. 

A book on the erection of the church of Fecamp. 

Gregory's Register. 

The Epistles of Paul, with Glosses, in five parts. 

Genesis, with a Gloss, in two parts. 

The Four Gospels, with Glosses. 

John, with a Gloss. 

Matthew, with a Gloss. 

Mark, with a Gloss. 

Six Psalters, with Glosses. 

Augustine on LXX. Questions. 

The Epistle of Bernard to Pope Eugenius. 

The Life of St. Taurinus. 

The Sentences of ISIaster Peter Lombard, in one volume. 

Aristotle's Topics, in stamped leather. 

THESE BOOKS BELONG TO THE CHURCH OF LIRE. 

Of the works of St. Jerom, the following are possessed by this library : 

St Jerom says : " Read lirst my Samuel and Malachi ; ' mine,' I say, 
' mine ;' for whatever we learn and acquire by frequent study and careful 
improvement is our own." He says that all the books of the Old and New- 
Testament are his, because he translated them into Latin from Hebrew and 
Greek, word for word, with the greatest care. 

These books are preserved in this church, in two volumes called the 
Library of the Holy Scriptures. 

The first volume contains the following books : Genesis, Exodus, Leviti- 
cus, the book of Numbers, the book of Joshua, the son of Nun ; the book 
of Judges, the book of Ruth, the IV. books of Kings ; Isaiah, Jeremiah, 
Ezekiel, Daniel ; the book of the XII. Prophets, namely, Rosea, Joel, 
Ainos, Abdias, Jonas, Micah, Nahum, Habbakuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, 
Zachariah, Malachi. 

The second volume contains : the book of Job, three books of Solomon, 
namely, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs; the book of 
Wisdom, the book of Jesus the Son of Sirach, called Ecclesiasticus ; the 
two books of Chronicles, the book of Tobias, the book of Judith, the book 
of Esther, the book of Esdra, two books of ]\Iaccabees, the Psalms of 



OF OEDEEICFS VITALIS. XIX 

est portion of tlie relics, wliich have been gathered from 
these scattered treasui'es, are the works of the Fathers 

David. The following are the books of the New Testament — the book 
of the Acts of the Apostles; the Apocalypse of St. John; VII. Canonical 
Epistles, namely, James I., Peter II., John III,, Jude I.; Paul XIII.; 
IV. books of the Evangelists, namely, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John. 

This library does not possess the Psalter which St. Jerom translated 
from the Hebrew into Latin, word for word, nor the book called " The 
Shepherd," which is not in the canon. 

Jerom on Mark. 

The Epistles of Jerom. 

The book of Jerom on the Lives of the Holy Fathers. 

Jerom's Sermon on the Assumption of St. Mary. 

Jerom against Jovinian. 

Jerom de Memhris Domini. 

The Gloss of Abbot Haimon on Genesis, and a Moral Gloss of an 
uncertain author. 

The. Gloss of Haimon on Exodus. 

The Gloss of Haimon on Leviticus. 

The Gloss of Haimon on the book of Numbers. 

On Deuteronomy. 

On the book of Joshua, the son of Nave. 

On the book of Judges. 

On the book of Ruth. 

On the books of Kings. 

On Isaiah. 

On Jeremiah. 

On Ezekiel. 

On Daniel. 

On the Twelve Prophets. 

On the book of Job. 

On the Parables of Solomon. 

On Ecclesiastes. 

On the Song of Songs. 

On the books of Chronicles. 

On the book of Esther. 

On the book of Esdras. 

On the Psalms of David : the marginal Gloss, and runnipg Gloss of 
Master Gilbert, bishop of Poitiers, and the running Gloss of Master Peter, 
bishop of Paris. 

On the book of Wisdom. 

On Ecclesiasticus. 

On the book of Tobias. 

On the book of Judith. 

On the books of the Maccabees. 

On the Acts of the Apostles. 

On the Apocalypse. 

On the Seven Canonical Epistles. 

b2 



XX 02f THE LIFE, WOEK, JlKD TIMES 

of the Latin churcli, Commentaries on tlie Holy Scriptures, 
Lives of saints, and Liturgical collections. 

One circumstance which adds a peculiar value to the old 

On the Fourteen Epistles of Paul, the marginal Gloss and running 
Gloss of Gilbert, bishop of Poitiers, and the running Gloss of Peter, bishop 
of Paris. 

On Matthew, the marginal Gloss and running Gloss of Master Anselm, 
with another running Gloss. 

On Mark. 

On Luke. 

On John, a marginal and running Gloss. 

The Decrees of Gratian. 

The Decrees of the Popes. 

The book of Rufinus on Ecclesiastical History. 

The book of Josephus. 

A book of Chronicles. 

The Epistles of Ivo, bishop of Chartres. 

The Epistles of Hildebert, bishop of Mans. 

The Homilies of Eusebius Emesenus to Monks. 

The book of Lanfranc, the archbishop, on the Body and Blood of the 
ojord, against Berenger. 

The book of Alberic on Lunar calculations. 

The book of EfFrem. 

The Institutes of St. Basil. 

The Crown of the Monks. 

The book of St. John the hermit on the Rules of the IMonks, and ok 
the Seven principal Vices. 

The book of St. John the hermit on the collations of the Fathers. 

A book on the natures of beasts. 

The book of Paschasius on the Body and Blood of the Lord. 

A Harmony of Rules. 

Berengaud on the Apocalypse. 

The following are contained in a certain volume : the book of St. Turpin 
of Rheims, showing how Charles conquered Spain ; the book of Pope 
Calixtus on St. James the Apostle; the miracles of St. Paul the Apostle, 
" et Sanctorum Clan " (sic) ; the Life of St. Leonard the Confessor ; the 
book of St. Heraclides, the bishop, on the Lives of the Holy Fathers, 
called Paradise ; the book of the Lord Hugh, archbishop of Rouen, against 
Heretics. [This entry, which perhaps was an addition to the catalogue, 
seems to refer to a MS. in the Library at Rouen, Y. 17, 15.] 

The volume of Pope St. Anaclete on Provinces and Cities. 

The book of Alcuin on Virtues and Vices. 

A book in which are contained : Verses on the Psalter, the Commentary 
of St. Jerom on the Lamentations of Jeremiah, the Lamentations of Jere- 
miah, with a marginal Gloss ; Master Hugh's Commentary on the La- 
mentations of Jeremiah; some Sentences and Verses, and a Gloss on John. 

The book of Robert of Cricklade, entitled " The Mirror of Faith," in 
one volume. 



OP OEDE"RICrS YITALIS. Xxi 

catalogue of the library of St. Evroult is, tbat we find in it 
a considerable number of works, composed by tbe religious 
of tbat house, in tbe course of tbe eleventh and twelfth cen- 

The Mirror of the Church, in which is contained the book of Philo on 
Hebrew names, translated bv St. Jerom ; with several other things. 

Of the works of St. Ambrose, the church of Lire is in possession ot the 
following : — 

Ambrose on Luke. 

Ambrose de Fide ; addressed to the Emperor Gratian. 

Ambrose de Officiis. 

The Hexameron of Ambrose. 

Ambrose de Virginitate. 

Ambrose on the Mysteries, or on those to be initiated. 

Ambrose on the Sacraments. 

Ambrose on the Conflict of Vices and Virtues. 

Ambrose on the Psalm, Blessed are the pure in heart. 

Of the Writings of 3f aster Peter, Ushop of Parts ;— 

Master Peter on the Psalter, in one volume, a running Gloss. 

Item, A Scholastic History, in three volumes. 

The same Eistortj, in one volume. . ^ .z r • .7 v 

The Sentences of the same Master ; a runmng aoss on the Lpistles 0/ 
Paul the Apostle, in one volume. 

The book of Hegesippus. . o ^^ • 

Of the works of St. Augustine, this church possesses the tollowing :— 

Augustine on John. 

Augustine de Verbis Domini. 

Augustine on the Sermon on the Mount. 

Augustine on the Psalter, 

Augustine de Civitate Dei. 

Augustine on Christian Doctrine. 

Augustine against Faustus. 

Augustine against Julian. 

Augustine against five sorts of enemies. 

Augustine on the Christian Warfare. , , m -r, . c 

Augustine on the Ten Plagues of Egypt, and the Ten Precepts of our 
Lord. , . , 

Augustine concerning the man who provokes another to swear. 

Augustine's book of Retractations. 

Augustine's Enchiridion. 

Augustine's book to Dulcilius on Eight Questions. _ rr.^ ■ . 

Au|ustine against Felicianus,on the Trinity,and the Incarnation of Christ. 

Augustine on divers usages of the Church. 

Augustine on Genesis to the letter. j ui ^ ^ 

Of the works of St. Cyprian, Cassiodorus, Haymon, Bernard, abbot ox 
Clairvaux, and Master Hugh, bishop of Paris, there are :-— 

Cyprian's Sermon on Works and Almsgiving. 

Cyprian's Sermon on the Lord's Prayer. 

The book of Cassiodorus. '* Variarum Formarum." 



X3U ON THE LIFE, WORK, AND TIMES 

turies. Thougli we are unacquainted with most of these 
works, their titles, and the accounts given of them by 
Ordericus Yitalis, enable us to form an idea of the literary 
activity which then prevailed in that society. 

Among the able Latinists who were formed in this school, 
we may name Guitmond,^ Eeynold the G-reat,^ Berenger, 
son of Arnold, who was raised to the episcopal throne of 
Yenosa;^ G-eoffrey of Orleans, afterwards abbot of Croy- 

The book of Cassiodorus on the SouL 

The book of Cassiodorus on the Institution of the Holy Scriptures. 
Cassiodorus on the Psalter, in three volumes. 
Haimon on the Epistles of Paul. 

The Homilies of Haimon on the Gospels of Quadragesima. 
Item, the same Homilies in another volume. 
The book of Bernard on the Song of Songs. 
The book of Bernard to Pope Eugenius, "de Consideratione." 
The book of Bernard on the Twelve Steps of Humility. 
The book of Bernard (Apologia) to the Monks of Cluni. 
The book of Bernard to the Monks of Coulombs. 
The book of Hugh on the Sacraments. 
The Didascalicon of Hugh. 
The book of Hugh, " de Arra Animae." 

The book of Hugh on the Material Cloister, on the Twelve Abuses of 
the Cloister, and on the Spiritual Cloister. 

Hugh's Commentary on the Lamentations of Jeremiah. 
Of the works of St. Gregory, Isidore, Bede, and Origen, there are : — 
Gregory on the book of Job, in two volumes, called Moralia. 
Gregory on the first and last part of Ezekiel, in one volume. 
The book of Gregory called " The Register." 
Gregory's book of Pastoral Care. 
Gregory's Dialogue. 

Gregory's Forty Homilies on the Gospels. 

Isidore on Genesis. Isidore de Summo Bono. Isidore's book called 
Synonima. Isidore's Etymologies. In one volume. 
Bede on Genesis. 
Bede's booh de Tahernaculo. 
Bede's booh de Temporihus ei de Computo Lunce. 
Bedes book on the Rides of Ch'ammar. 
Origen on the Old Testament. 
Origen on Leviticus. 

Cetera que desunt, quia cuncta dapes anime sunt, 

Scribite scriptores, ut discant posteriores. 

What books we need, the soul to feed. 

Let copyists pen, for coming men. 
1 Vol. i. 444. 
■"* Vol. i. 435. 
=» Vol. i. 435,439. 



OE OEDERICUS VITALIS. XXlll 

land ;^ and Eobert de Prunelai, successively prior of ^^Tovon- 
sur-Andelle, and abbot of Thomey, in England.' The 
memory of the last is still kept alive by one of the most 
ancient manuscripts preserved in the library at Alen9on.^ 

John of Eheims, wbo was educated in the city from 
which he took his name, entered the monastery of St.^ 
Evroult in the time of abbot Mainier, on the nomination of 
Ealph de Montpin9on, who endowed the convent for his 
support. He lived there nearly forty-eight years, and tilled, 
with great credit, the ofl&ce of sub-prior. In 1090 he went 
to Eome ; he also spent some time at the priory of Maule ; 
and he composed a considerable number of works, both in 
prose and verse. Ordericus Yitalis, his disciple, mentions 
the poems which he " dictated" in honour of Jesus Christ, 
the blessed Virgin, and St. Evroult.^ These poems were 
included, with other compositions, in a manuscript,^ for 

' Vol. ii. 101. 

2 Vol. iii. 421. 

3 This valuable manuscript (No. 12, d'Alenfon), a folio of 18/ pages 
oil parchment, is divided into two parts. The first, containing ff. 1 — 58, 
is of the tenth century, and appears in the ancient catalogue of the library 
of St. Evroult ; (before, p. xii). The second, ff. 55—187, is not older 
than the end of the twelfth century. 

The manuscript contains twenty-nine articles, among which may be men- 
tioned : 1. The Consolation of Philosophy, by A. M. S. Boethius, with 
marginal and interlineary glosses. At the top of the first folio, there is 
written in a hand of the twelfth century, " Robert de Prunelai repudiates 
the credit of having composed these glosses." At the end of the first part 
(fol. 57), the copyist has inserted four Latin verses expressive of his 
pleasure at completing his task. No. 2. Is a piece of thirty-one verses in 
Latin, entitled Versus Platonis de Deo. No. 29. Contains part of the 
History of Geoffrey of Monmouth, beginning from the Prophecies of 
Merlin. The other articles are, for the most part, Acts, Lives, and Passions 
of Saints. 

* Vol. ii. 185,212—216, 229. 

^ This MS. was in the library of St. Evroult. It is described m a 
catalogue now in the Imperial Library at Paris made in 1682, and entitled 
" Joannis Remensis Opuscula." The compositions referred to are. Verses 
on the blessed Mary, according to the letters of the alphabet: to Warm, 
abbot of St. Evroult, on the priors of that abbey and the restoration of the 
monastery : moreover on the endowments made to it by princes, nobles, 
and other pious persons. — Another on the entire life of Christ.-— The life of 
St. Evroult ; the same in verse ; the preface bears the author's name, and 
dedication of his work to Ralph, abbot of Seez» afterwards bishop of 



Xxiv OK THE LIFE, WOBK, AIS^D TIME 3 

wliicli I have made a fruitless searcli in tlie library at 
Alencon: and nothing, tliat we know of, is preserved ot 
the writings of John of Eheims, but Hs epitaph, m verse, 
on Peter de Maule.^ 

•William, of Merleraut, wrote some homihes,^ and a his- 
tory of the translation of Saint Josse to the church ot 

"PfirTies 

The metrical epitaph on Ansold de Maule was composed 
about the year 1118, by Eudes de Montreml,^ who, m 1130, 
accompanied abbot Warin in a journey to Kebais. 

Warin de Sdez, who entertained Louis le Gros at toe 
priory of Maule, and visited the abbey of Eebais m 1130, 
was an able man and a good scholar.^ A collection of Sen- 
tences attributed to him was preserved m the library at 
Evroult in the twelfth century.' . 

Hoger du Sap, abbot of St. Evroult, whose acquirements 
gamed him the friendship of Lanfranc,« composed hymns m 
honour of St. Evroult.^ He has just claims on our grati- 
tude, for having been the first to encourage Ordericus 
Yitaiis to undertake his work.^*^ 

His successor, "Warin des Essarts, pursued the same 
course,^^ and composed several pieces, m prose and verse, 

Rochester, and archbishop of Canterbury.-" Col^ctanea'' from the 
Fathers, on God, the Trinity, the Word incarnate, and on angels and men. 
BesSsome other theologic'al treatises, it also contams a short chron^le 
Som the Incarnation to the year 1112, and some verses from Virgd and 
other poets. 

^ Iee'befoil%^lV. The author of the catalogue, just referred to, is 

one of Johannes Scotus. 
3 Vol. i. 478, 479, 

* Vol. ii. 232. 

* Vol. ii. 318. 
« Vol. ii. 236. 

' See before, p. viii. 
8 Vol. i. p. 468. 
3 Vol. i. 443. 
i« Vol. i. 3. 
" Vol. i. 4. 



OF OEDEEICUS YITALIS. XXV 

one of wliicli is preserved by Ordericus Vitalis.^ Besides 
this, lie left a Collection of Sentences,' 

The old catalogue also tells us of such a Collection, made 
by the abbot Eichard of Leicester.^ 

Prior Greoifrey's name is attached to a volume of Mis- 
cellanies.* 

Another prior, of the name of John, composed a gloss on 
the Psalter," which is conjectured, though perhaps without 
sufficient foandation, by a Benedictine of the seventeenth 
century, to be extant in a manuscript preserved in the 
library of Alen9on.^ 

Walter, of Jumieges, made a transcript of Seneca's Let- 
ters, and at the end of his copy inserted some verses, which 
he composed in honour of this philosopher,' 

A monk, who writes anonymously, dedicated a poem of 
nearly two hundred lines to the praises of abbot Eobert de 
Leicester,^ I cannot venture to attribute this poem to 
Ordericus Vitalis, although there are circumstances which 

» Vol, iii. 323—331. 

^ See the Catalogue of St. Evroult, p. xi,, xii. 

* Ibid., p, xiv, 

* Ibid. 

^ Ibid., p. xiii. 

^ Lib, d'Alenfon, MS. No. 13; now 35 of the library of St. Evroult. 
This MS., which is of the twelfth century, besides the glossed Psalter, con- 
tains thirteen other articles, one of which is a fragment of the Commentary 
of Bede on the Gospel of St. Mark, commencing : " The kingdom of God 
is like a man sowing seed," 

' This MS. was also in the library at St. Evroult, and is numbered 13G 
of those which are still preserved. 

The two last lines of the verses referred to in the text, are: — 
" At ne scriptoris nomen livore prematur, 

Gemmeticensis in hac Galterus parte notatur." 

* Mountfaufon {Bib. bill., ii, 126) notices this poem in the MS, No. 43 
of St. Evroult, There is another copy in the library of Rouen, in a MS. 
of the twelfth century, now marked No, H, 98 of the abbey of St. Ouen. 
Besides the principle article, the poem " de Abbate Ricardo," this MS. 
contains St. Augustine on Genesis, the Rule of St. Benedict in verse, and 
three other articles. 

There is this curious note at the beginning of the volume, in characters 
of the thirteenth century : " This book belongs to St. Evroult, and is 
delivered to brother Matthew de Claremont, of the order of Friars- Minors. 
And the monks of St. Evroult have an acknowledgment for it by letters 
from the lord bishop of S^ez." 



XXVI ON THE LIFE, WORK, AFD TIMES 

support the conjecture. For instance, the piece, which -was 
^Titten soon after the 9th of May, 1140, commences with 
lines ^ which involuntarily call to mind the feelings ex- 
pressed by Ordericus in 1141, when he put the last hand to 
his Ecclesiastical History.^ 

Nor were the arts wholly slighted by the religious of St. 
Evroult. It was one of the monks, Nicholas by name, who 
superintended the works for the erection of the church.^ 
Another monk, Eoger de Warrenne, ornamented a copy of 
the gospels with gold, silver, and pearls.* Abbot Osberne 
cultivated the mechanical arts with remarkable skill; he 
practised carving, and perhaps forging metals.^ 

AYe learn, from a variety of facts, with what ardour music 
was cultivated at St. Evroult. The first abbot, Thierri de 
Mathonville, taught his scholars to sing.^ His successor, 
Eobert de Grrentemesnil, engaged Arnold the chanter of 
Chartres, a pupil of bishop Eulbert, to compose the music 
for the office of St. Evroult. Two of the younger monks, 
Eobert and Ealph, made a journey to Chartres, for the pur- 
pose of hearing it from the author's mouth ;'' which leads 
us to suppose, that the musical characters then in use did 
not supply a perfect notation, serving only to assist the 
memory of the chanters. Eeginald the Bald had several pieces 
of his own composition inserted in the antiphonaires of the 
abbey.^ Gruitmund enriched the tropaire and antiphonaire 
with several chants of great melody, and made some im- 
portant additions to the office of St. Evroult.^ Ordericus 

> Qui quondam stadium puer exercere solebam, 
Ingenio terpens, jam nunc cessare volebam. 
Proposito tali sors obviat exercialis 
Quae jubet ut studiam, quia causa patet specialis. 
' " Now, worn out by age and infirmities, I have a strong desire to 
Dring this book to a close ; and from various circumstances I have good 
reasons for so doing." — Orderic. b. xiii. c. 45, post p. 222. 
3 Vol. ii. 259. 

• Vol. ii. 252. [The illumination of manuscripts is also mentioned as 
one of the arts cultivated at St. Evroult. See vol. i. 429. — Ed.] 

' Vol. i. 442. We may be allowed to add, that architecture, as well as 
sculpture, were among the arts cultivated by Abbot Osberne. We find 
also Durand, the gardener, among the earliest monks of the new founda- 
tion. A monk Avho was gardener of Jumieges became abbot of Dive. — Ed. 

• Vol. i. 388. ' Vol. i. 443. 

• Vol. i. 443. ' Vol. i. 443. 



OF OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. XXvil 

has handed down to posterity the names of the chanters, 
William Grregorv/ and Eobert G-amaliel.^ A collection of 
chants preserved in the Imperial library, and some rules of 
music inserted in one of the most valuable manuscripts of 
the library at Alen9on,^ must, in justice, be referred to the 
school of St. Evroult ; and the traditions of this school were 
carried to Italy, and taught in the monasteries of St. Eu- 
phemia, Yenosa, and Melito,* by Eobert de Grentemesnil 
and his disciples. 

We find an Hippocrates in the catalogue of the books in 
the library at St. EvTi-oult, in the twelfth century ;° nor need 
we be surprised at it, as this monastery became the retreat 
of several religious of great medical skill. Such was Grois- 
bert of Chartres, the physician of Ealph de Toeni, who 
continued the practice of his art after he had assumed the 
monastic habit in the abbey at Ouche.^ Such also was 
Ealph Mal-Coronna, who was first a monk of Marmoutier, 
and afterwards became a member of the society of St, 
Evroult. He had studied the sciences with great success in 
the schools of Erance and Itah^ ; and such was his skill in 
medicine, that his equal could hardly be found in the city of 
Salerno. Long after his death, the inhabitants of the dis- 
trict of Ouche still spoke of his skill, and attributed real 
prodigies to its success.' 

It appears, then, that during a century there was no branch 
of human knowledge which was not cultivated in the abbey 
of St. Evroult. Unfortunately it was not long before that 
house, as well as most of the Benedictine establishments, 
fell into decay. 

1 Vol. i. 429. 

2 Vol. i. 436. 

^ This manuscript, which has been shortly described by M. Ravaison 
(Rapports, p. 249), now numbered 2, was marked 80, in the library of 
St. Evroult. It is a small folio of 146 leaves, of the twelfth century, and 
contains a great number of curious and valuable articles, besides the 
musical rules referred to in the text. Among these are several of St. 
Jerom's works, Tertullian's Apolog)', tracts on Weights and Measures, a 
multiplication table, and other such things. 

* " In these three Italian monasteries the chant of St. Evroult is used." 
—Vol. i. 439. 

* See before, p. 

« Vol. i. 471; ii. 185, 189, 204, 236, 237. 
7 Vol. i. 394, 423, 424, 426. 



sxvm o:n" the life, woek, ain^d times 

An attempt at reform, made in the reign of Francis I., 
appears to have failed.^ In the seventeenth century it was 
renewed with greater success. The reform of the congrega- 
tion of St. Maur, in 1628, introduced at the abbey of St. 
Evroult an era which may be compared with the period 
of which Ordericus has furnished the history. Then the 
old manuscripts were drawn forth from the oblivion into 
which they had fallen. Dom Anselm le Michel was one of 
the first men of learning who became alive to their import- 
ance.^ Then came Dom Luke d' Achery, who had the most 
valuable of them brought to Paris.^ These manuscripts 
were used in all the great works of the Benedictine fathers.* 
In the course of the year 1682, a monk, whose name 1 
regret that I have not been able to discover, drew up a 
catalogue of them, the original of which is still preserved in 
the Imperial Librar}^,^ and of which Mountfau9on published 
extracts in 1739.^ 

AYhen the abbey was suppressed, the manuscripts were 
conveyed to Laigle, and at a later period reassembled in the 
library of Alen9on, where nearly eighty of them are now 
preserved. But before they were removed several volumes 
had been lost, and others had passed into different collec- 
tions, public or private.' 

^ See the preface of William Vallin on Ordericus (§ vii. of these 
Remarks), the Gallia Christiania, xi. 828, and more particularly this note 
of Anselme le Michel: "A 1524, Felix de Brie, the abbot commendatory, 
tried to introduce some measures of reform through the monks of St. 
Martin aux Frees at Faris ; but the attempt proved fruitless, the monks 
[of St. Evroult] being averse to it, and the abbot taking little pains to 
enforce it." St. Germain, Latin, N. 1066, fol. 200. 

^ The notes of this Benedictine are preserved in the Imp. Lib. at Paris. 
MS. 1066, St. Germain, Latin. 

^ D'Achery's notes are still to be seen on several of the IMSS. 

* Acta Sanctorum ordinis Sancti Benedict i. — Mabillon Analecta. — 
Augustini opera (vi. 633, 335). — Amhrosii opera (at the end tome i.). — 
Gregorii opera (i. xv.). — Eieronymi opera (v. 5). — Martene, Amplissima 
coUectio.^-The same J)e Ritibus Ecclesice. — Bouquet (xi. 628). 

^ Residu St. Germain, paquet 160. 

^ Bibliotheca hibliothecarum, ii. 1267. 

' Several of the manuscripts which belonged to the abbey of St. Evroult 
are now in the Imperial Library at Faris, and are referred to in the course 
of these Remarks. 



or OEDEEICUS VITALIS. XXIX 

II. 

LIFE or 0EDEEICT7S. — HIS CHAEACTEE. — HIS ACQTJIEEMENTS, 

Odelerius of Orleans/ the son of Constantius, was one of 
the folio vrers of Eoger de Montgomery when he came into 
England ; and, for his share in the conquest, received a grant 
of lands lying on the banks of the river Meole at the east 
gate of Shrewsbury.^ He found on his domain an ancient 
chapel, a building constructed of timber, which Odelerius 
vowed, during a pilgrimage he made to Eome, to replace by 
a church of stone. Assisted by his lord, Eoger de Montgo- 
mery, he performed his vow, and contributed according 
to his means to the foundation of a monastery dedicated to 
St. Peter and St. Paul, to which he retired for the end of 
his life, on, probably, the 3rd of June, 1110, the Priday in 
TVTiitsun week.' 

Odelerius had three sons,Benedict,Everard, and Ordericus.* 
The last was born on the 17th of Pebruary, 1075,^ and bap- 
tized on the Saturday of Easter following, that is on Holy 
Saturday, which fell that year on the 4th of April.^ The 
rite was performed in the church at Atcham, on the Severn, 
dedicated to St. Eata. There is still standing on the 
spat a church of which M. de Gerville has procured a draw- 
ing, and from the style of its architecture, it may be consi- 
dered a building of the eleventh century. "We may, there- 
fore, indulge the idea that the chiu-ch now standing witnessed 
the baptism of one of the most illustrious historians of the 
Middle Ages. 

The priest who administered the sacrament, and was also 

^ Odelerius is in all probability the person called Oilerius sacerdos and 
Oilerius j)resbiter, in the charters of foundation of Shrewsbury Abbey. See 
Monast. Anglic, iii. 518, 620. 

2 Vol. ii. 48, 197, 198. 

' Vol.ii. 198—203. 

* Vol. ii. 200, 202. 

5 Vol.ii. 113; iv. 222. 

' Ibid. Sabbato Paschce. I interpret these words, not as meaning the 
Saturday after Easter, but Holy Saturday — Easter-eve. The quotations 
given by Dom Martene (De Antiquis Eccleda Ritibus, iii. 406, in the 
edition of 1737) prove that in the Middle Ages the Holy Saturday was 
called the Saturday of Easter. 



XXX ON THE LirE, WOEK, AND TIMES 

sponsor on the occasion, \Yas called Ordericus, whicli name 
he bestowed on his godson.^ 

Ordericus was five years old when, in 1080, he was sent 
to school at Shrewsbury. His master, Siward, a priest, 
taught him "the letters of Nicostrasta Carmenta,"- that 
is, the Latin alphabet, and instructed him in the proper 
mode of performing his duties as one of the children of the 
choir in the church of St. Peter and St. Paul. 

Odelerius was a man of fervent piety ; and, he had a 
strong desire to dedicate hie son to the service of Grod. It 
would have been very natural for the young Ordericus 
to assume the monastic habit in the monastery at Shrews- 
bury, of which his father was one of the founders. But 
Odelerius feared that under such circumstances the sacri- 
fice would uot be sufficiently complete. He, therefore, in 
the course of the year 1085, bathed in tears, delivered his 
son, then aged ten years, to a monk named E-eynold,^ and 
sent him, for the love of God, with an endowment of thirty 
silver marks, into a strange land, never to see him again. 
The boy wept, but made no resistance. In submission to 
his father's will, and relying on his assurances, which gua- 
ranteed to him in the name of God a place in Paradise 
if he became a monk, he left his country, his kinsmen 
and friends, who wept over him, and bid him a most affect- 
ing farewell.^ 

Thus it was that at the age of ten years Ordericus 
crossed the Manche and landed in Normandy, where 
he knew no one and was quite unknown. Like Joseph 
in Egypt, he could not understand the language which 
was talked around him ; but, conducted to the monas- 
tery of St. Evroult, he would soon find himself again 
established in a family, in the bosom of which, loved and 
honoured by all, it was his happy lot, to the end of his life, 



1 Vol. ii. 113; iv. 222. 

' Vol. il 113; iv. 223. Several authors have attributed the invention 
of the alphabet to Niostrata Carmenta, the mother of Evander. See the 
Nouveau traite de Diplomatique, ii. 10. 

3 Reynold was probably the monk of Seez, who came over in 1083 to 
assist in the erection of the new monastery at Shrewsbury, and had 
remained in England till this period. See vol. ii. 203. Ed. 

* \ol. ii. 113, 201,204; iv. 223. 



OI' OEDEEICUS YITALIS. IXXl 

to taste those ineftable deliglits with which Grod rewards his 
most devoted servants.^ 

The circumstances which I have just detailed left a vivid 
impression on the mind ot Ordericus. At the advanced 
age of sixty-six years, he still cherished with tender re- 
gard the memorv^ of a father whom he had scarcely known ; 
and spoke with respectful feeling of the priest who baptized 
him, and the master who taught him to read. Notwith- 
standing the kind welcome which he received in Normandy, 
he always considered himself an exile there, and the care with 
which he constantly used the title of Englishman" ^ {Vitalis 
Angligena) was simply an act of patriotism. iThis feeling also 
explains the large share assigned to England in the Eccle- 
siastical History.* 

On Sunday, the 31st of October, 1085, Mainier, abbot of 
St. Evroult, admitted Ordericus into the number of his 
monks. He then received the tonsure, and as the name of 
Ordericus sounded ill in Norinan ears, that of Vitalis was 
substituted for it, in remembrance of one of the companions 
of St. Maurice, whose memory was solemnized by the church 
on that day.^ 

Dividing his time between prayer and study, Ordericus 
conciliated in the highest degree the esteem and affection 
both of his superiors and his brethren. Thus flowed his 
days in a course of profound tranquillity ; and the only 
events by which, as far as we know, the even tenour of his 
life was interrupted, were the solemnities when his succes- 
sive orders in the church w^ere conferred upon him. Or- 
dained subdeacon on the 15th of March, 1091, by Grilbert, 
bishop of Lisieux,^ and deacon on the 26th of March, 1093, 
by Serlo bishop of Seez,' he went to Kouen by the order of 
^ Vol. ii. 204; iv. 223. 

2 Vol. ii. 113, 202—204; iv. 223. 

3 Vol. ii. 103, 214, 269, 448. [In the places referred to, Vitalis 
Angligena is prefixed to different copies of verses written by the author 
He also describes himself as " The Englishman, monk of St, Evroult," in 
the title of his great work.— i^cZ.] 

^ " See the preface which M. Forester has prefixed to his English 
translation of Ordericus Vitalis." — [Vol. i. pp. iii. and iv. of this work.] 

^ Vol. ii. 113; iv. 223, 224. The feast of St. Maurice is observed on 
the 22nd of October. 

« Vol. ii. 122; iv. 224. 

7 Vol. iv. 224. 



XXxii OS THE LIFE, WOEK, AlfD TIMES 

his abbot, Eoger du Sap, on the 21st of December, 1107. 
His age was tben thirty-two years, wanting two months. 
William, archbishop of Eouen, conferred on him the order of 
priest. The service was marked by circumstances of pecu- 
liar solemnity. No less than seven hundred candidates^ for 
ordination, among whom was an abbot of Eecamp, received 
orders of various degrees. Ordericus composed a short 
copy of verses in memory of this august solemnity.^ 

In 1141, Ordericus was compelled by age and infirmities 
to bring his work to an end.^ He was then sixty-six years 
old : we are left in ignorance how long he lived after the 
cessation of his labours. We find a Vitalis, monk of St. 
Evroult, registered in the obituary ^ of that church on the 
3rd of Eebruary. This might have been our historian. 

If the life of Ordericus Vitalis presents to our notice, from 

1 Vol. iii. 414, 415; iv. 224. 
a Vol. iv. 222. 

3 Imp. Lib. at Paris, Lat. No. 801, fol. 4. As this manuscript is often 
referred to in the course of this Notice, I will describe its contents. 

1. (fol. 1) Obituary of the alley of St. Evroult, copied in the thirteenth 
century. Many entries have been added apres coup. 

2. (fol. 36) Note on the anniversary of Hugh de Grentemesnil. I quote 
the first lines, which do not agree with what Ordericus says (vol. iii. 220) 
of the death of this eari: "A.D. 1098, on the ninth of the calends of 
March [Feb. 21] died Hugh de Grentemesnil, earl of Leicester, founder of 
this monastery, a monk of our congregation," &c. 

3. (fol. 37) A martyrology, written about the middle of the twelfth 

century. „ , j j 

4. (fol. 77) Notes on associations formed to pray for the dead. 

5. (fol. 80) Note on the translation of an arm of St. Evroult. Cf. 
Ordericus, vol. ii. 320. 

6. Catalogue of the bools belonging to the abbey of St. Evroult. 

7. (fol. 81) Continuation of the notes on associations to pray for the 
dead. 

8. (fol. 82) Lessons. 

9. (fol. 122) Rule of St. Benedict. 

10. (fol. 122) Adonic verses on the rule of St. Benedict. 

11. (fol. 123) On the twelve degrees of humility. 

12. (fol. 123) Liturgical notes ; among which is one relating to the dedi- 
cation of the church of St. E\Toult in 1099. 

13. (fol. 124) A calendar written in the thirteenth century. 

14. (fol. 130) Rules and tables for calculating [the moveable feasts]. 

15. (fol. 138) A chronological tablcy in the margin of lohich are the 
Annals of St. Evroult. 

16. (fol. 162) Fragment of an Anglo-Saxon calendar of the eleventh 
century. 



OF OEDERICUS VITALTS. XXXUl 

the materials we possess but few occurrences, his work con- 
veys to us many incidental notices from which his character 
may be drawn, and which disclose his tastes, his habits, ana 
tlie extent of his acquirements. 

Ordericus had a strong inclination for travel, one of the 
best means of acquiring information at the time in which he 
lived ; but " confined to the cloister," he says, " by vows 
which have bound me to the strict observance of the 
monastic rule, I am unable to investigate the affairs of 
Alexandria, Grreece, and E-ome."^ His superiors, however, 
on more than one occasion gave him permission to leave the 
monastery. In 1105, we find him in France.^ About the 
year 1115 he went to England, and spent five weeks at 
Croyland Abbey ,^ over which a former monk of St. Evroult, 
Greoff'rey of Orleans, then presided. In a subsequent journey 
be visited Worcester*, where he saw a manuscript of the 
chronicle of Marianus Scotus, continued by Florence of 
Worcester.^ The period at which he was shown a manu- 
script of Sigebert in the monastery of the Holy Sepulchre, 
at Cambray, is unknown.® Perhaps he went, in the month 
of October, 1119, to the council of Eheims.' It is certain 
that he was present, in the abbey-church at Cluni, on the 
20th of March, 1132, at a great assembly of twelve hundred 
monks of the order to which the abbey of St. Evroult was 
affiliated.^ We find him at Merleraut on the 9th of 
August, 1131^, during a storm of extraordinary violence ; 
and the next day he hastened to the village of Planches, for 
the purpose of making his own observations on the singular 
efi'ects of the lightning, which he has described in the last 
book of his History.^ 

But if Ordericus had seldom opportunities of observing 
the events which he relates, and visiting the places which 

» Vol. 1. 3. 

2 Vol. ii. ]16; ill. 369. 

3 Vol. ii. 86. 

•» Vol. i. 493, 494. 

* [Cf. our note to the Chronicle of Florence of Worcester, printed in the 
Antiq. Lib., pp. vi. — x. — Ed.^ 
« Vol. i. 494. 
' Vol. iv, 1, and note. 
" Vol. iv. 132; i. 423. 
« Vol. iv. 140, 141. 
VOL. IT. C * 



XXXIY ON THE LIFE, WOEK, AND TlilES 

had been their theatre, at least, he obtained much informa- 
tion from ocular witnesses. It so happened, that the abbey 
of St. Evroult became the asylum of many aged soldiers of 
rank who had been either engaged in the expeditions of the 
jN^ormans in Italy, or had joined the crusades, or fought in 
the wars of William the Conqueror and his sons. Besides 
this, it was in constant communication with Italy, on one 
hand, where the three monasteries of Saint Eaphemia, 
Venosa, and Melito were peopled by colonies from St. 
Evroult,^ and, on the other hand, with England, whence it 
drew a considerable portion of its revenues.^ On their 
return from the missions on which they had been sent, 
either to these two countries, or to the court of the sove- 
reign pontiffs, the monks took pleasure in relating whatever 
they had observed during their travels. Ordericus enables 
us to perceive the attention with which he listened to such 
details, in the portrait which he has drawn of Heynold 
d'Echaufour, one of the brethren, whose fortune it was 
to visit twice Apulia and Calabria. " His vigorous me- 
mory," says our author, "enabled him to relate with great 
fulness whatever he had seen or heard. His conversation 
charmed his companions."^ 

It also frequently happened that the abbey of Ouche gave 
its hospitality to men of religion from foreign countries ; and 
these our author lost no opportunity of placing under con- 
tribution. One day, a monk of Winchester, a passing 
guest, showed him a Life of St. William, copies of which 
were exceedingly rare in Normandy. Unfortunately, the 
traveller was in haste to depart, and it being winter, the 
fingers of Ordericus were numbed with cold. Still the 
opportunity was not to be lost ; he seizes his tablets, and 
takes notes from the manuscript, to enable him afterwards 
to compose at leisure a life of the founder of the abbey of 
St. Gellone.^ 

Sometimes the guests entertained at the abbey were pil- 

» Vol. i. 438, 439. 

2 Vol. ii. 189, 254 — 256, 443. Respecting the possessions of the abbey 
of St. Evroult in England, see the fourth article of the MS. No. 10 
d'Alen9on, deicribed hereafter, § vi. 38 ; the Chartulary preserved in the 
Imperial Library at Paris, and seveial charters deposited in the archives of 
the department of lOrne. References to most of tl.ese possessions will 
be found in the General Index to this work. 

s Vol. i. 453, 454. * Vol. ii. 243, 244. 



OF OEDEEICUS VITALIS. XXXV 

J. -ims or crusaders returning from Spain or from Palestine. 
Many of these, like "William VII., count of Poitou, delighted 
in giving a poetical and romantic air to the narrative of 
their adventures.^ Ordericus listened to them with a pious 
enthusiasm, and it was no doubt under such inspiration 
that he relates, in measured and rythmical prose, several 
episodes of the crusade, in which fiction is often mingled 
with truth. 

In his love of the marvellous, our author's imagination 
led him to borrow materials for liis work even from the 
popular traditions. At one time he seeks from them the 
etymology of local names,^ at another the origin of the 
relics of antiquity scattered over the land.^ He employed 
them to supply what was wanting in written documents 
containing the Lives of the saints.^ It may be added that 
we are indebted to these traditions for the picturesque 
description of the infernal cavalcade given in the eighth 
book of the Ecclesiastical History.* 

Nor were even the poems of chivalry without their echoes 
in the cloisters of St. Evroult. Ordericus makes direct 
allusions to the romance of "William Court-Nez,^ the sati- 
rical songs of Luke de la Barre,' and the fable of the giant 
Bohemond.^ 

This taste of Ordericus for light literature, if I may use 
the term, was united with real classical acquirements, as far 
as such were in vogue in the twelfth, century. He was 
conversant with the works of many of the ancient pagan 
writers, as well as those of the fathers of the church. Thus, 
without having in all cases read their works, we find him 
quoting on several occasions, among the Greeks, Aristotle,^ 
Herodian,^'' Josephus,^^ and Philo ;^" among Latin prose 

» Vol. iii. 301. 

2 Vol. ii. 288. 

' Vol. ii. 275, 287, 314, 457. 

* Vol. i. 424; ii. 136, 137, 279, 280. 

^ Vol. ii. 511— 520. 

s Vol. ii. 243. 

' Vol. iv. 76. 

8 Vol. iii. 366. 

» Vol. ii. 40. 

^0 Vol. ii. 40. [Plato might have been added, ii. 39.] 
11 Vol. i. 11,212, 179, 180. 
»2 Vol. i. 175. 

c2 



XXXVl OS THE LIFE, WOEK, AFD TIMES 

writers, Cicero/ Sallust,^ Trogus Pompeius^ (that is Jus- 
tin),* and the pretended Dares of Phrygia;^ among the 
poets, Plautus,^ Terence,^ Yirgil,^ Horaee,^ Ovid,^'' Per- 
sius,^^ Lucan,^'-^ and Statins ;^^ among the ecclesiastical 
writers, TertuUian,^* Origen,^^ Prudentius,^'' Orosius,^'' St. 
Jerome,^* St. Angustin,^^ Pulgentius,-° St. Gregory,^^ and 
Isidore of Seville.^- I purposely omit to insert in the list 
those authors whom he particularly employed in composing 
his History, as I shall have to refer to them before long. 

Towards the end of the eleventh and the beginning of 
the following century, letters shed an unusual flood of 
light on the north of Prance. At this period several 
of the master-pieces of theology, and of the Latin poetry 
of the Middle Ages, saw the day. It was not long before the 
fame of some of these works reached the ears of Ordericus, 
who vastly preferred recording in his annals the success of 
new books than the military exploits of his countrymen. 
Eising above the jealousies which caused dissensions be- 
tween so many rival abbeys, he has paid the most distin- 

» Vol. ii. 40. 

2 Yd. ii. 46. 

3 Vol.1. 1, and note; ii. 494. 

* In the middle ages, Justin's Abridgment passed under the name of 
Trogus Pompeius. The following note was written in the thirteenth 
century on a MS. of Justin to combat this opinion : " Know, reader, that 
this work is not that of Trogus Pompeius, but Justin's, who abridged the 
forty-four volumes of Trogus Pompeius, and, like him, wrote in Latin." 
Imp. Lib. Paris. Sorbonne, No. 907. 

5 Vol. i. 1. 

« Vol. ii. 479. 

7 Vol. iii. 19. 

" Vol. i. 492; ii. 51; iii. 295, 494, 504. 

3 Vol. i. 403, 416. 

»o Vol. ii. 112; iii. 280. 

" Vol. ii. 479. 

»2 Vol. iii. 466. 

»' Vol. i. 492. 

1* Vol. i. 174. 

1- Vol. ii. 240. 

" Vol. iv. 114. 

" Vol. i. 1, 83. 

18 Vol. i. 6, 83; ii. 40, 240; iii. 154 

" Vol. i. [83], 253; ii. 40. 

'" Vol. ii. 375, 376. 

« Vol. ii. 34, 284. 

" Vol. i. 6, 83. 



OF OEDEEICUS TTTALIS. XXXvii 

guished homage to tlie celebrity which the schools of Bee 
enjoyed at this time : " that monastery, of which every monk 
merited, so to speak, the title of philosopher."^ He has 
given a clear idea of the deep impression made on their co- 
temporaries by the genius of a Lanfranc,^ a Saint- Anselm,^ a 
Baudri,* and a Hildebert.^ In a more modest rank, he 
brings under our review the productions of several monks 
of St. Evroult,^ of Guitmond of Aversa/ Eobert de Tombe- 
laine,^ and Eichard de Pourneaux.^ 

Like all the clever men of his age, he took great pleasure 
in the composition of Latin verses. It would even appear 
that his poetic talents were remarked by his fellow-monks ; 
for they often applied to him when epitaphs were wanted, 
and it is easy to be seen that he attached a certain value to 
the pieces of poetry which he has introduced into his works. 
Among these we find a poem on Henry I ;^° a prayer ad- 
dressed to God, ipaploring protection against the spirit of 
evil;^^ and the epitaphs on Avicia de Sauqeville,^- Walter 
d'Aufai,^^ Warin des Essarts,^^ Hugh de GrentemesniV^ John 
of Eheims,'^ Eobert de Ehuddlan,'' Eoger du Sap,'^ Thierri 
de Mathonville,^9 and Earl Waltheof.'^ I have akeady 

^ Vol. ii 68. 

•^ Vol. ii. 40, 41, 68. 

3 Vol. ii. 67, 68. 

^ Vol. iii. 190, 191. 

^ Vol. ii. 72; iii. 227, 228. 

^ See before, pp. xx., &c. 

7 Vol. ii. 53. 
Vol. ii. 429; iii. 35,36. 

^ Vol. iv. 152. 

-° Vol. iii. 323. 

'^ Vol. ii. 269. 

'2 Vol. ii. 269. 

'^ Vol. iv. 180, 181. 

** Vol. ii. 214; [commencing — 

" Thrice had March, lowering, windy, cold, and bleak." 
It is one of the best of our author's poetical productions. — Ed.J 

" Vol. ii. 448, 449, 450. 

i« Vol. iv. 57. 

" Vol. ii. 316, 317. 

[" Trained in Jumieges' holy school," &c.] 

^ Vol. ii. 103. 

[The last two are very good ; and the verses on Robert de Rhuddlan 
(vol, ii. 448, &c.) especially, are full of spirit. — Ed.] 



XXXVIU ON THE LIFE, WOEK, AND TIMES 

spoken of the verses which he wrote at the time of his 
ordination/ 

Notwithstanding the simplicity of his character, Orde- 
ricus never omits any fair opportunity of making a display 
of his erudition. Thus he transfers to his own times terms 
belonging to classical antiquity ; introducing, for instance, 
tribunes and centurions into the armies of William E-ufus.^ 

Another piece of pedantry is seen in his employment of 
Grreek words, gathered somewhat at random from the 
writings of the fathers of the Latin church.^ It would 
appear also that this practice was much in vogue at the 
abbey of • St. Evroult. Grreek was, doubtless, as little 
understood there as in the rest of the French monasteries. 
But in spite of this ignorance, we are in possession of 
several documents which exhibit the pretensions of the 
religious of Ouche. Thus, among the manuscripts which 
w^ere executed in the twelfth century, I have observed a 
Greek alphabet with the name and numerical value of each 
letter ; and a sort of table with the same design, but which is 
in such disorder, and so incorrect, as to prove that the copyist 
did not understand what he wrote. There is, besides, a 
formula in which the Latin words are expressed in Grreek 
characters. I have also particularly remarked some chants 
for the church interlarded with Grreek and Hebrew. I beg 
leave to quote one of the most curious specimens : — 

^ Before, p. xxxii. See what I have said, p. xxv., respecting the 
authorship of the poem on Richard of Leicester. The metrical life of 
Saint Lomer, which will be referred to afterwards (§ vii. 1), may have also 
been the production of Ordericus Vitalis. 

2 Vol. ii. 269 and 495 [where we have adopted the phrase, " officers in 
command," for centurionibus et trihunis. Perhaps the use of such terms 
is not so much an instance of pedantry, as of the want of equivalent words 
in medieval Latin to describe the position of the leaders of troops mar- 
shalled under the feudal system. The adaptation of classical terms to this 
purpose is common in writers of our author's age, and in translation the 
military titles of modern times are equally inappropriate. — Ed.] 

^ Such as cauma, charisma, Epanalepsis, Epitumum, Monadicon, 
Plasma, Polyandrum, Soma, Symmathttes, Symnista, Syntagema, Theo- 
machia, Theusebia. [References are given by M. Delisle, but they would 
be useless in referring to a translation of the text. He remarks that 
several of the Greek words employed by Ordericus are explained by a 
glossary contained in a MS., No. 25 of the Library at Alenpon, which was 
No. 64 in that of St. Evroult.] 



OF OEDEEICUS YITALIS. 

' Christe, salvator, Jesu, et, alfa et a>, eia, Alleleuia, 
Eloym, eloe, adonai, sabaoth, ia, 
Aday, robustus, kyrros, elom, fortis, vita, 
Tetragammaton, ioth, evau, bet, Deus, Dominus, via, 
Sol, eie, eser, messias, qui est sother Veritas. 
Unctus, homo, usyon, excelsus, ymago, magister, figura." 



III. 

PLAN OP THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY — DATE OP ITS 
BEING COMPILED — DIVISIONS — THE PAET WANTING IN 
THE SBYENTH BOOK. 

The eminent men who successively governed the abbey 
of St. Evroult discovered the singular qualifications for be- 
coming a writer of history, with which Ordericus was en- 
dowed. Eoger du Sap and "Warin des Essarts had no great 
difficulty in persuading him to undertake the work.^ At first, 
he only contemplated a history of the monastery of St. 
Evroult : Historia Jlticensis} Animated by feelings of 
gratitude, Ordericus desired to baud down to future ages 
the memory of the abbots, the monks, and benefactors of 
the house which was the most cherished object of his affec- 
tions on earth. But it was not long before his views became 
more extended, and, not content with relating the events of 
his own times, he either copied or abridged the writings of 
his predecessors, used them as materials for the work he 
was compiling, and ended by converting his work into a 
general history, commencing with the first preaching of the 
gospel, and ending only with the year 1141. 

Solely occupied with the care of increasing the extent of 
his collections, Ordericus had not the leisure required for 
digesting them into a consistent whole, and arranging them 
on a regular and methodical plan. In consequence, his his- 
tory exhibits a state of confusion, of which M. Gruizot" has 
given a most exact idea : " The materials seem thrown 
together pell-mell, as chance or opportunity brought them 
into the author's power ; sometimes he interrupts the course 

1 Vol. i. 3,4; [ii. 112.] 

•^ Vol. ii. 423. 

' See his Notice on Ordericus Vitalis, published in the Collection dca 
Memoir es relatifs d VHistoire de France^ and translated as an intro- 
duction to this work, vol. i. p. xi. — Ed. 



Xl ON THE LirE, WOEK, AND TIMES 

of his narrative by dividing the account of a particular event 
into distinct portions, separated by long intervals ; and, at 
others, he repeats the same story in different parts of his 
work, 'so that the reader is continually surprised by the 
strange manner in which times, places, and subjects, 
the most distant and the most incongruous, are brought 
together. No sort of art or method appears to have been 
used in combining this prodigious mass of facts, and when 
the work is considered as a whole, from a single pomt of 
view, one cannot avoid, on a first impression, being most 
sensible of this striking confusion." ^ ^ v -j j 

The Ecclesiastical History, as we now possess it, is divided 
into thirteen books, the subjects of which are given m the 
following short summary : — 

Book I. Life of Jesus Christ. An Abridgment of TJni- 
versal Historv since Jesus Christ, to the year 1141. ^ 

Book II. Lives of the Apostles, of the principal disciples, 
and of St. Martial. History of the Popes. Ordericus ap- 
pears to have intended to divide this book into two. 

Book HI. Summary of the principal events m the his- 
tory of Normandy, down to the middle of the eleventh 
century Eoundation or restoration of monasteries. Ee- 
establishment of the abbey of St. Evroult in 1050; lives of 
the four first abbots. History of the family of Giroie. 
foundation of the priory of Neuf-Marche. Intestine dis- 
turbances during the minority of Duke William. War 
between the Angevins and the Manceaux. Conquest ot 
England. Establishment of the Normans m Italy. Di- 
gression on the life and miracles of Saint Josse. 

Book IV. Events in the reign of William the Conqueror, 
from 1066 to 1080, or thereabouts. Biography of the most 
celebrated abbots during that period. Summary of the 
monastic history of England. Life of St. Guthlac. His- 
tory of the abbey of Croyland. 

Book Y. Events in the reign of Wilham the Conqueror 
after 1075. Life of St. Taurinus. Chronology of the arch- 
bishops of Eouen, harmonized with that of the popes, the 
most celebrated bishops, and kings, &c. Administration of 

' Vol. i. 238. 



OP OEDEEICTJS VITALIS. xli 

Maimer, abbot of St. Evroult. History of the priory of 
Maule. 

Book YI. Endowments bestowed on tlie abbey of St. 
Evroult at the end of the eleventh and the beginning of the 
twelfth centuries. Profession of different monks. Foun- 
dation of the priory of Aufai, with the genealogy of the 
founders. Life of St. Evroult, and the history of his relics. 
A miracle wrought by the intercession of St. Benedict, on 
behalf of a man belonging to the church of Ely. 

Book VII. Abridgment of the History of France, under 
the Carlovingian and Capet kings. Genealogy of Edward 
the Confessor. Various events in the reign of William the 
Conqueror: — the battles of Val-des-Dunes and Mortemer; 
arrest of Odo, bishop of Bayeux ; death of Queen Matilda ; 
expedition against Hubert, viscount of Maine ; death and 
funeral of the king. Campaigns of the emperor Henry IV. in 
Italy. "Wars of E-obert Gruiscard against Alexis Comnenes, 
and Eobert's death. Assassination of Canute IV., king of 
Denmark. History of the relics of St. Nicholas. 

Book VIII. Events in the reign of William Eufus. 

Book IX. History of the first Crusade. 

Book X. Events at the close of the reign of WiUiam 
Eufus, and the commencement of the reign of Henry I. 

Book XI. Events in the reign of Henry I. to about the 
year 1114. 

Book XII. Events in the reign of Henry I. down to 
1131. Merlin's prophecies. 

Book XIII. Close of the reign of Henry I. ; and the 
reign of Stephen, as far as 1141. 

These thirteen books were not composed in the order in 
which we now find them : I shall attempt to fix the period 
at which each of them was written. 

The first book was composed after books III., IV., and 
V.,^ after the death of King Henry I. (1135) ;- before that 
of abbot Warin des Essarts (1137) ;' before that of the Anti- 
pope Anaelete, (1138) ;^ and before the accession of Lewis 
le Jeune (1137) !' These facts enable us to assign the com- 

» Vol. ii. 112. 2 Vol. i. 130, 131. 

* Vol. i. 4. * Vol. i. 130, 158. 

* Vol. i. 143. 154. 



xlii ON THE LIFE, WOEK, AND TIMES 

pilation of the first book to the year 1136. The paragraph 
relating to the wars which ensued on the death of Henry 
I./ was added afterwards, probably in 1141. 

The last lines of the second^- book were probably also 
written in 1141. I conjecture that the substance of the 
book was composed in 1136 or 1137. 

The third book was written in the lifetime of Eobert 
Giroie, who died about 1124.^ The prologue of this book 
was added at a later period.* 

The fourth is, at most, as early as 1125,^ and anterior to 
the book following ; which is of 1127.^ We may assume its 
date to be 1125, from the passage in which it is stated, that 
Turgis had been bishop of Avranches for thirty years.' 

The ffth book must be posterior to July 13, 1127,^ but 
only by a very few months, since it was composed in the 
twenty-seventh year of Henry I.,^ forty-two years after 
Ordericus became a monk,^*^ and seventeen years after 
the accession of Geoffrey, archbishop of Eouen/^ 

The sixth book was composed, there is no doubt, after the 
journey of the abbot of St. Evroult to Eebais ; that is, 
about 1131.^- The close of the book, from the history of 
Geofirey the Breton, was a new iasertion after the death of 
Abbot "Wariu,^^ and after the completion of the seven last 
books of the work." 

A passage in the seventh book is posterior to the death of 
Henry I.^^ 

The eighth book was composed during the life of Henry I.,^^ 
thirty-three years after the accession of that king,^'' and 
thirty-seven years after the foundation of Citeaux.^^ These 
indications agree with 1133 or 1134. 

Ordericus was sixty years old when he commenced his 



^ Vol. i. 157. ^ Vol. i. 373. 

' Vol. i. 394. * Vol. i. 374—376. 

* Vol. ii. 3,72. s Vol. ii. 113. 

' Vol. ii. 8,9. 8 Vol. ii. 113. 

» Vol. ii. 168. "> Vol. ii. 114. 

1' Vol. ii. 169. " Vol. ii. 318. 

'=> Vol. ii. 321—332. '* Vol. ii. 223. 

'5 Vol. ii. 331. '« Vol. ii. 348, 349. 

^' Vol. ii. 429. '8 Yoi^ ij_ 431 432, 
19 Vol. iii, 47. 



OF OEDEEICUS VITALIS. xliii 

ninth book.^ He entered upon his sixtj-first year on Febru- 
ary 16, 1135. 

The tenth book was composed after the ninth,'^ and sub- 
sequently to the death of Henry I. (1135) ;' at least, if the 
passage from whence this indication is drawn was not added 
to the body of the work : a circumstance which the state of 
the manuscript of St. Evroult rather suggests. 

The eleventh book must belong to the commencement of 
the year 1136, a period when Ordericus had not yet reached 
the age of sixty-one years,* when the reign of Louis le Grros 
had lasted twenty-seven years,^ and when King Stephen had 
just ascended the throne.^ The passages referring to the 
length of the administration of Koger, abbot of Eecamp,^ 
and John, bishop of Lisieux,^ which seem to belong to 1138, 
and even 11 41, must have been subsequent interpolations. 

The twelfth book was composed in 1136 or 1137, ten years 
after the accession of the emperor Lothaire," six years after 
Fulk of Anjou was raised to the throne of Jerusalem,'" and 
shortly after the death of Eustace de Breteuil, which hap- 
pened in 1136.'^ A chapter which would seem to have been 
written in the lifetime of Henry I.,^^ must have been a frag- 
ment prepared beforehand, which Ordericus omitted to 
retouch when he inserted it in its place. 

The thirteenth book was finished when the author was in 
the course of his sixty-seventh year ; that is, before February 
16, 1142, and after the month of June, 1141.^^ 

The following table gives the result of the preceding 
observations : — 

Book I. composed in 1136; retouched in 1141. 
II. „ about 1136; „ 1141. 

III. „ about 1123, except the prologue. 
lY. „ in 1125. 

Y. „ in 1127. 

YI. „ about 1131; retouched in 1141. 

I Vol. iii. 60. 2 Vol. iii. 191, 192. 
» Vol. iii. 267. * Vol. iii. 323. 

^ Vol. iii. 355. • Vol. iii. 346. 

' Vol. iii. 414, 415. ® Vol. iii. 417. 

° Vol. iv. 84. " Vol. iv. 107. 

II Vol. iv. 19, 157. " Vol. iv. chap, xxviii. pp. 43, 44. 
»B Vol. iv. 222. 



Xliv ON THE LIFE, WORK, AND TIMES 

Book YII. composed after 1135. 

YIII „ in 1133 or 1134. 

IX. „ in 1135. 

X. „ in 1135. 

XI. „ in 1136. 

XII. „ in 1136 or 1137. 

XIII. „ in 1141. 

By combining these dates with other indications we are 
able, under the'present form of the Ecclesiastical History 
to discover the original plan pursued by Ordericus. At that 
time Books I. II. and YII. were not in existence ; the work 
consisted of only ten books^ namely :— 

Book I. which is now Book III. 

II. „ ,> i^. 
III. „ .. J- 

" ■ • ^i 

YI. „ „ I|- 

YII. „ „ ^. 

YIII. „ „ ^I- 

X. „ „ 3:111. 

On the original manuscript, which we shaU have presently 
to describe, traces of the numbers first employed are to 
be found in more than one of the titles placed at the 
beginning or ending of books. In these places the new 
numbers are substituted for the former ones by the same 
hand which wrote the manuscript ; but sometimes the altera^ 
tion was omitted in the body of the work Thus in 
one place, the third book is called primus IMlus; in 
another, Books IX. and X. are counted as the sixth and 

^%Ye may hazard a conjecture that the manuscript of the 
Ecclesiastical History was originally bound m two volumes: 
the first, containing the six first books ; the f^ond, the 
seven last. Ordericus himself seems to allude to this divi- 
sion ^ But very shortly afterwards it was found convement 
to make it into four volumes, in wHch state it appears in 
1 Vol. i. 495. ' Vol. iii. 60, 192. ' Vol. 11. 331. 



OF OEDEEICUS YITALIS. llv 

the catalogue oi tlie library of St. Evroult, made in the 
twelfth century.^ 

According to this division, of which the original manu- 
script stiR exhibits some traces, each part was thus com- 
posed : — 

Part I. - - Books I. and II. 

II. - - VII. and VIII. 

III. - - IX. to XIII. 

IV. - - III. to VI. 

There is a chasm in the seventh book of the Ecclesiastical 
History which we have reason to regret. In chapter iv. 
Ordericus announces his intention of giving a genealogy of 
Edward the Confessor, from Shem the son of Noah. He, 
accordingly, commences this genealogy, but in our manu- 
scripts and printed editions, it is abruptly broken at Odin.^ 
However, a fortunate accident has enabled me to complete it. 
In one of the manuscripts of St. Evroult, now preserved in 
the library at Alen9on,^ there is found a genealogy of the 
English kings, the earlier part of which exactly corresponds 

1 See before, p. xiv> 

2 Odin or Woden. See vol. ii. chap. iii. p. 350, and the note. 

^ This manuscript, a large folio of 111 leaves, copied about 1203, and 
numbered 122 of St. Evroult in the Imp. Lib. at Paris, is unusually rich 
in historical documents. Its contents are : — 

1. The Ecclesiastical History of Hugh de Fleuri. 

2. An account of the cities of Gaul. 

3. A catalogue of the kings of France, as far as, and including, Louis VIII. 

4. A catalogue of the emperors, as far as, and including, Lothaire II. 

5. The prophecies of Merlin. 

6. A catalogue of the archbishops of Rouen to Walter de Coutances. 

7. Genealogy of the descendants of Japhet to Francus, Romanus, 
Almanius, &c. 

8. On the degrees of kindred. 

9. Explanation of the names of some of the heathen goddesses. 
10. The genealogy of the English Tcings. 

,11. Names of the seventy-two disciples. 
' 12. Catalogue of the popes to Innocent III. 

1 3. Chronological notes on some events of the fourteenth century. [Printed 
at the end of this volume, pp. 229—268.] 

14. Dudo de St. Quentin. 

15. Books v., vi., and vii. of William de Jumi^ges. 

16. Abridgment of the Sacred History, with genealogical tables, &c. 
— Notes on Ancient History. 

17. A calendar. 



Xlvi OK THE LIFE, WOEK, AND TIMES 

with that given by Ordericus. There is no douht but our 
author incorporated in his work this summary of the history 
of the kings of England, in the same manner as he had 
already ins^erted an abridged account of the kings of Prance, 
literally copied from a former writer. The document from 
which Ordericus adopted the genealogy/ and from which he 
also borrowed on other occasions, runs as follows :— 

THE GENEALOGY OF THE KINGS OE ENGLAND. 

I. Shem. 

II. Beadvuig. 

III. Wala. 

IV. Hatra. 
Y. Itermod. 

VI. Heremod. 

VII. Scelduvea. 

VIII. Beavu. 

IX. Cetuva. ^ ^ 

X. Geata. This Geta was long ago worshipped by the Pagans as a 
god. 

XI. Findgoldvulf. 

XII. Fridhupulf. 

XIII. Frealap. 

XIV. Frithovuald. „. ^ , ^ 

XV. Woden. From him the English call the fourth day Woden s-day. 
He begat four sons, from whom the race of the English [kings] sprung. 

XVI. Wehta, from whom are the Kentish [kings]. 
Casere, from whom are the East Anglians. 
Weothelgeat, from whom are the Mercians. 
Weagdeag, from whom are the Deiri. 
Bealdeag, from whom are the West Saxons. 
Wilgels, from whom are the Bernicii. 
Winta, from whom are the Lindiffari. 



1 This genealogy nearly corresponds with that given in the Saxon 
Chronicle, and used by Henry of Huntingdon in his History. These, like 
the copy employed by Ordericus, confine the line of descent after Woden 
to the West Saxon kings, of whom Cerdic was the founder. In the 
Chronicle of Florence of Worcester, there is an exactly similar genealogy 
of the descent to Woden, with tables of the descent of all the kings of the 
Heptarchy from that stock. See the edition in the Antiq. Lib., pp. 332, 
&c. It appears that Ordericus saw this manuscript when he was at Wor- 
cester, and he may have extracted the genealogy ; but the better opinion 
seems to be that there were many copies extant of an original document of 
this description, one of them being that now deposited in the Imperial 
Librarv, which M. Delisle concludes was used by Ordericus, I have not 
attempted to correct the orthography of the Anglo-Saxon names, which 
varv in all MSS. and editions. — Ed. 



OF ORDEEICTJS YITALIS. xlvii 

XVII. [Bealdeag] begat Brand, from whom the royal race is descended. 

XVIII. He begat Freodegar; who begat 

XIX. Frevuine ; who begat 

XX. Wig ; who begat 

XXI. Gewis, from whom the Britons call that whole race Gewis 

XXII. Esla. 

XXIII. Elesa. 

XXIV. Cerdic. He and his son Ciric slew Nathanleod, king of the 
Britons, with five thousand men; and having gained the victory in four 
battles, reigned six years. 

XXV. Ciric. 

XXVI. Creoda. 

XXVII. Cenric. He reigned xxvi. years. ' 

XXVIII. Ceaulin, xxx. 

XXIX. Cuthwine. 

XXX. Cuthg. 

These two [Cuthwine and Cutha] slew three British kings, Commeail- 
Condidau, and Fannmel, with many others, and took from them three 
cities, Glavecestre, Cirencestre, and Bathancestre. 

XXXI. Cedwald. 

XXXII. Coenred. 

XXXIII. Ingels and Ine, brothers. These two greatly loved God 
and built the abbey of Glastonbury. ' 

XXXIV. Eopa, 

XXXV. Eafe. 

XXXVI. Ealhmund. 

XXXVII. Egbert. He begat 

XXXVIII. Adelwulf, clerk and king. He begat 

XXXIX. Edred and Alfred. These two brothers fought against the 
Danes at Escesdun [Ashdown], and slew Hagseg, the king, and four 
counts, Sidroc, Osbem, Frena, and Harold. Then the kings of the Danes, 
Guthrum, Oskitel, Amund, Halfdene, Inguar, and Huba, cruelly ravaged 
England ; and Edmund, king of the East Angles, and two other kin^s 
were slain by them. 

XL. He [Alfred] begat Egelfleda, Edelgeovu, Edelvuard the Scholar 
llitei-atumj, and Edward the elder. 

XLI. He [Edward] begat Edelstan, Edred, Edmund 

XLII. He [Edmund] begat Edwy, Edgar. 

XLIII. He [Edgar] begat Edward, of Wilstrida, and Egelred, of Elf- 
streda. They were slain. 

XLIV. He [Egelred] begat Edvuard, Alfred, Edmund Irneside. 

XLV. He [Edmund] begat Edmund, Edward. 

XLVI He [Edward] begat Edgar Adeline; and Margaret, queen of 
bcots, and Christiana, a nun. 

XLVII. She [Margaret] bore Melcom, kins of Scots, three sons and 
two daughters: Edgar, Alexander, David; Edit, or Mathilda, and 
Mary. ' 

^'iK^l^M-. ^^,® '^^^'^ "'■ ^lathilda] bore to King Henry, William Adeline 
and Mathilda the empress. 

XLIX. Henry, William, and Geoffrey. 



Xlviii OS THE LIFE, WOEK, A.SB TIMES 

L. [Henry begat] Henry and Richard, and Geoffrey, the father of 
Arthur, and John ; who now reigns in his seventh year.i 

"When St. Edward was slain by the before-named heathen, Edred, the 
surviving king of the Gewissae, tried to defend the kingdom against the 
enemy with all the force he could muster. 

On the death of Edred, his brother Alfred succeeded to the kingdom. 
In the strength of God, he either slaughtered, drove out, or forced to 
submission the enemy, and first of all the English kings held alone the 
monarchy of all England. He excelled, as I think, all preceding and 
subsequent kings of England in worth, liberality, and laudable prudence, 
and reigned xxix. years. 

By his wife Ealsvuda, he had Edward the elder, Edelwald the 
literate, Egelfrede, the wife of Elthered, earl of Mercia, and Edelgeovu, a 

Edward the elder, Alfred's son,"with his sister Egelfreda, lady of the 
Mercians, reigned long and nobly. After his death, his three sons suc- 
ceeded him in order — Edelstan, Edmund, and Edred. 

After them reigned Edwin, son of Edmund. He was weak and wicked, 
and the English rebelled against him and slew him, and, by God's authority, 
the kingdom was given to his brother Edgar, because he had reigned long 
and prosperously, both to himself, the people, and the church of God. 

After him reigned his brother Edward, a man of good disposition, whom 
he begat of the noble lady Wilstrida, and who was brother of St. Edgith; 
but he was shortly afterwards treacherously slain by Queen Elfstrida, the 
daughter of Ordgar and mother of King Egelred, his step-mother. 

During Egelred's reign many misfortunes arose in the realm of England. 
For Swevn, king of the Danes, invaded England with an immense fleet, 
and the English going over to him, Kmg Ethelred, and his wife and sons, 
fled to Normandy ; for his wife Emma was the sister of Richard, son of 
Gunnor, duke of Normandy, and of Robert, archbishop of Rouen. Not 
long afterwards Swevn was' killed by St. Edmund, king and martyr, and 
his bodv carried to Denmark. King Ethelred, as soon as he heard of his 
death, "returned to England ; but Canute, son of Sweyn, with Lacman, 
king of Sweden, and Olave, king of Norway, came to England and besieged 

Ethelred being dead, his son Edmund, surnamed Imeside, then reigned. 
He had two sons, Edward and Edmund, who after their father's death 
were delivered as hostages to the king of Hungary by Sweyn, king of Den- 
mark, at the instance of his brother Canute. There Edmund Clito 
[Athelin] died, and Edward, marrying the kmg's daughter, had by her 
Margaret, queen of Scots, and Christiana, a nun. 

Queen Emma married Canute, who had now become a chnstian, and 
bore him Hardecanute and Gunnilde ; but he sent Edward and Alfred, her 
sons by her former husband, into exile in Normandy. 

Edmund having been treasonably murdered in a privy by Edric Streon, 



1 The last few entries were probably inserted subsequently to the com- 
pilation, or transcript, of the original genealogy.— Ed. 



OF OEDEEICTJS TITALIS. xlix 

Canute reigned over all England, and sent Edmund's sons into exile in 
Denmark. 

After the death of Canute, Harold, his son by the concubine Effgiva, 
reigned in England. He caused Alfred, who was betrayed to him by Earl 
Godwin, to be deprived of sight ; but he only lived a short time, and on 
his death unwillingly left his kingdom to Hardecanute. 

Hardecanute recalled Edward, his half-brother, from Normandy, and 
after two years perished from poison given him by Emma at the feast made 
by Osgood Clappa, when he married his daughter to Tovi the Dane. 

Then Edward, the right heir, reigned twenty-three years, and recalling 
the infant children of his nephew Edward from Hungary, gave Margaret to 
Malcolm, king of Scots, who bore him three children, namely, Edgar, 
Alexander, and David, who were all kings of Scotland ; and also Edith 
Matilda, the wife of King Henry, and Mary. 

Besides the genealogy of the Kings of England, we also 
miss, in the seventh book of Ordericus, one or two episodes 
connected with the abbey of St. Evroult. For we learn 
from a note written in the fifteenth century, that Ordericus, 
in the second part of his work (Books YILand VIII.), gave an 
account of the reasons which induced the bishop of Lisieux 
to refuse consecration to the abbot of St. Evroult. In the 
state we now possess it, the Ecclesiastical History furnishes 
us with no details concerning the election of this abbot. 



lY. 

TALTTE OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF OEDEEICTJS 

THE OBLIVION IX WHICH IT EEMAIIS'ED DUEINQ THE 
MIDDLE AGES. 

If it cannot be disguised that the plan pursued by Orde- 
ricus in his work was very immethodical, it must be acknow- 
ledged that this blemish is redeemed by its great merits. 

Instead of those short and meagre notices, of which the 
greatest part of the chronicles of the Middle Ages consist, 
Ordericus presents us with narratives, groups, portraits, and 
words of living men ; in a word, with history, such as it has 
been understood both in ancient and modern times. Occa- 
sionally, he is even cai-ried out of bounds by his fervour in 
composition. The writer suffers himself to be led away by 
his imagination till he confuses facts with circumstances 
which might have attended them ; he sacrifices everything 
to the desire of affording pleasure and interest, of rounding 

d 



1 ON THE LIFE, WOaK, A^'D TIMES 

his sentences, and giving wliat we should now call local 
colouring, or an air of romance, to his pictures. It cannot, 
however, be denied that there is a great foundation of truth 
even in passages which bear the most evident tokens of art 
and labour. 

Ordericus is not only remarkable for his skill in literary 
composition : he does not merely relate events, he has a 
higher object; he judges and teaches. In the retirement of his 
monastery, " he expects nothing either from the conquerors 
or the conquered ;"^ he censures what he thinks reprehen- 
sible even in his most favourite heroes ; he commiserates the 
misfortunes of the oppressed; ridicules the fashionable follies ; 
and always gives a moral and religious turn to the occur- 
rences which came under his review. 

But the particular merit for which the Ecclesiastical 
History of Ordericus is distinguished, and which makes 
it one of the most original specimens of the literature 
of the Middle Ages, is the extreme care with which the 
author has collected facts appearing at first sight very 
insignificant, and has entered ir.to details which most of the 
chroniclers have thought unworthy of notice. M. Gruizot,- 
therefore, is quite justified in his remark, without the least 
exaggeration, that, " no book contains so much and such 
valuable information on the history of the eleventh and 
twelfth centuries, on the political, civil, and religious state 
of society in the "West, and on the manners of the age, whe- 
ther feudal, monastic, or popular." 

It would be easy to accumulate evidence in support of 
the illustrious critic's assertions, but I will confine myself 
to two facts, whicli have not received the attention they 
deserve. One relates to the Communal Customs ; the other 
to the Truce of God. 

N'ormandy was happily exempt from those sanguinary con- 
tests by which, in several provinces of France, the enfranchise- 
ment of the communes was wrought out in the beginning 
of the twelfth century. Before that period, the rights of 
the inhabitants of the towns, and even of the rural popula- 

^ Vol. i. 495. 

^ Notice, published in the Collection des Memoires relatifs cb VHis- 
toire de France, a translation of which is prefixed to this edition. See 
vol. i. p. xi. 



OF OEDEEICUS YITALIS. 



tions, were secured and Regulated in Normandy, by the 
force of customs which, in many respects, had the same 
objects as the cominunai charters, the domains of the 
lords of Breteuil were governed by one of these bodies of 
customs, which Ordericus calls the law of CormeiUes, ob- 
serving that it was brought into operation in the bourg of 
Aufai, at the close of the eleventh century.^ This remark, in 
itself curious, becomes more valuable when compared with 
a passage in the Domesday-Book, which mentions the intro- 
duction of the customs of Breteuil into a manor in England 
at the same period." I may add that, in all probability, 
these customs much resembled those of Yerneuil, of which 
we possess a digest made in the twelfth century.^ ' 

On several occasions,** Ordericus speaks of levies en masse 
of the population, summoned to arms by the cures, and 
marching to battle under the banners of their respective 
parishes. Our author not only attests the fact, but supplies 
us with the means of explaining the origin and determining 
the character of these movements which, more than once', 
afforded Louis le Oros powerful support in his struggles 
against feudality. They were, in truth, crusades directed 
by the clergy against the disturbers of the public peace. 
They were the natural result of the enactment of what was 
called The Truce of God. This cannot be doubted when we 
read the form of the oath required by the synod of Eouen 
in 1096, to be taken by all christians* of the age of twelve 
years. Every parishioner bound himself to take arms at 
the first summons of the bishop or archdeacon, and to march 
under the prelate's orders against all who broke the truce.^ 
The history of Berri supplies us with an example which 
proves still more clearly, if that be possible, the truth of the 
explanations I offer. In that country, a powerful association 
was formed to secure the preservation of the public peace 
under the name of commune or treve ; the central administra- 

' Vol. ii. 266. 

^ " There (at Rhuddlan) is a new bourg, and in it are xviii. burgesses 
between Count Hugh (Hugh, earl of Chester) and Robert (Robert de 
Rhuddlan). They granted the burgesses the customs and laws which are 
in Hereford and Breiem\."— Domesday, i. 269, col 2. 

' Ordonnances des Rois de France, iv, 638. Cf. vii. 592 

* Vol. iii. 24, 487. 

« Vol. iii. 70. 

d2 



lii OS THE LirE, WOEK, AlfD TIMES 

tion being in the hands of the archbishop, and its action 
being extended efficaciously through all the parishes of the 
diocese. M. Eaynal, T^hose penetration the real character 
of this institution could not escape, has traced its history 
for three centuries with great ability. Referring to his 
work^ those who have any curiosity to study the question, I 
shall content myself with the production of a testimony, as 
yet unpublished, which throws a strong light on the origin 
of the commune of the diocese of Boui-ges. I quote from 
Andr^ de Tleuri, a cotemporary writer.^ 

" At this time (about a. d. 1038), Aymon, archbishop of 
Bourges, was desirous of consolidating the peace of his dio- 
cese, under the sanction of an oath. In consequence, he 
summoned the bishop of his province, and, with the concur- 
rence and support of his suffragans, promulgated a decree 
binding all persons of the age of fifteen years and upwards 
heartily to resist all violators of the common compact, and, 
so far from submitting to have their property plundered, 
to rise in arms, if occasion required, against the marauders. 
'Not even the ministers of religion were exempted, but taking 
the banners from the sanctuary of the Lord, they were to 
join the rest of the population, and have them borne against 
the violators of the sworn peace. In this way they often 
broke up the quarters of the traitors and razed their castles ; 
so that, by Grod's aid, such terror was struck into their 
rebellious hearts that when they heard even vague reports 
scattered through the country of the approach of the faith- 
ful, they deserted their strongholds, leaving the doors open, 
and took to flight in a panic divinely inspired. Tou might 
see the faithful, like another people of Israel, raging furiously 
against the hosts of those who knew not the Lord, and compel- 
ling them by the ardour of their attacks to re-submit to the 
law of peace which they had broken. The sanction of this 

^ Histoire du Berri, vol. ii. 183, 184, See also a docament published 
by Thaumassiere, in hia Coutumes Locales, 717. 

' De Miraculis Sancti Benedicti, lib. ii. (Imp. Lib. fonds des Blancs- 
Manteaux, No. 84, t, iv. fol. 122). It is to be hoped that this treatise on 
the miracles of St. Benedict, one of the most interesting monuments of the 
history of the eleventh century, will soon be published by M. de Certain, 
who has prepared an edition of it from a manuscript in the Vatican. On 
Andre de Fleury, see Memoires de la Societe Archtologiqw deVOrleanais, 
ii. 257. 



OF OEDEEICUS VITALIS. liu 

bond, whicli the archbisliop himself and his suffragan 
bishops made on oath in the following form, is worthy of a 
place in this work : ' I, Aymon, by the grace of God, arch- 
bishop of Bourges, do sincerely promise, with heart and 
mouth, to Grod and his saints, that I will perform what 
follows with my whole soul, without fraud or co\dn ; namely, 
I will join the association in putting down all who lay 
hands on ecclesiastical property ; all who promote robbery, 
or oppress the monks ; and all who molest the nuns and 
clerks of holy mother church. I will not be tempted, either 
by bribes or by any considerations of ajBfinity or relationship, 
to depart from the path of rectitude. But I pledge myself 
to make head with all my might against such as shall ven- 
ture to break the laws of this association, and not to yield 
in any way until the offenders be brought to renew their 
compact.' Having made this affirmation on the relics of 
St. Stephen, the proto-martyr, Aymon exhorted the rest to 
do the same. They obeyed with willing hearts, and all the 
parishioners and provincials, as I have said before, from the 
age of fifteen years and upwards, joining in forming a com- 
mune throughout the several dioceses, sealed their union by 
the same oath. The fear of them, and the terror of them, 
struck such a panic into the hearts of the unbelievers, that the 
multitude of the unarmed common people trembled before 
them as if they were armed bands, and the hearts of the 
delinquents so failed, that, deserting their strongholds, they 
fled before these poor rustics as if they were the troops 
of powerful princes. In this case the prophecy of David 
most fitly applied : ' Thou shalt save the humble, O Lord, 
and cast down the eyes of the proud, for w^ho is Lord, but 
Thou only ! ' And that this saying might be fulfilled : ' The 
Lord smiteth down the proud,' he thus smote down the 
obduracy of the proud with this humble sword, so that, 
though unwillingly, they submitted to the injunctions before 
mentioned, and, of all the multitude, Odo of Dol alone held 
out, being reserved by the judgment of Grod for the punish- 
ment of his evil deeds." 

After this digression, I return to Ordericus. Perfectly 
as our author's genius was suited to the tastes of the Middle 
Ages, he was unnoticed by his cotemporaries, who have 



liv OlS" THE LIFE, TfOEK, AlfD TIMES 

not even named him in their works. Pour centuries were to 
elapse before justice was rendered to one of the most useful 
of our historians. 

Astonishing as may appear the fact which I state, it is 
impossible to raise any doubt respecting it. It is abundantly 
proved, both by the silence of writers, and by the extreme 
rarity of ancient manuscripts of the Ecclesiastical Histor3^ 
In consequence, the list oF the authors who in the Middle 
Age made use of this work is soon drawn. 

Passages borrowed from Ordericus are found : — 

1. In the additions which Eobert du Mont made to Sige- 
bert's Chronicle.^ 

2. In the tracts of the same author intitled : De immu- 
tatione ordinis monacliorum : de ahhatihus et abhatiis Nor- 
mannoritm, et oedificationibus eorum? 

3. In the interpolations made by some monk, probably 
this same Bobert du Mont, in the history of William de 
Jumieges. 

4. In the chronicle of Bec,^ the date and origin of which 
would involve a discussion too long for this place. 

5. In the lists of the bishops of different churches in 
England and Normandy, drawn up by an anonymous author, 
at the end of the fourteenth century.* 

y. 

THE SYSTEM OF CHEOTTOLOGT ADOPTED {Y ORDERICUS 
VITALIS. 

Before I refer to the passages in Ordericus Vitalis which 
enable us to ascertain the chronological system he generally 
followed, I think it right to call attention to a document 

^ M. Bethrnann has marked in his excellent edition of Sigebert, the 
passages which Robert du Mont has borrowed from Ordericus. See Pertz, 
SS. vi. 481, &c. 

' These tracts have been published by D'Achery, Guiherti Opera, 811 
— 818, and in the MonaM. Anglic, vi. 1061, from a Bodleian MS. I do 
not coincide in opinion with M. Berthmann (Pertz, SS. vi. 475, 479), who 
thinks that the tract, De immutatione ordinis monachorum, was partly- 
derived from a little work on the origin of the Cistercian order, published 
in the Monast. Anglic, v. 220. See afterwards, § vi. 18. 

' Published by D'Achery, in the Appendix to Lanfranc, and reprinted 
by Pr. Giles, in his edition of that author's work?. 

* Imp. Lib. fonds St. Victor, No. 900, fol. 102, &c. 



OE ORDEEICUS TITALIS. iv 

which may throw some light on this important question. It 
is a table compiled at the abbey of St. Evroult at the begin- 
ning of the twelfth century,^ and marking the indiction, the 
epact, the concurrents, the paschal term, and the lunar cycles 
in each of the fifteen hundred years which had elapsed since 
the birth of Jesus Christ. I have compared the figures con- 
tained in the columns of these tables with those given by 
the authors of VArt de verifier les dates, and I find that 
they exactly agree. Besides this, amongst the notices 
which are prefixed to the table, we have the followiug rules : 
"The lunar epacts commence on the 1st September; the 
cycle of nineteen years changes on the 1st March ; the 
indictions, on the 2ith September;^ the years of the world, 
on the 22nd March ; those of the incarnation, on the 25th 
December."^ 

We find, then, in a manuscript of St. Evroult, the com- 
mencement of the year very clearly assigned to the 25th 
December, and the commencement of the indiction fixed on 
the 24th September. Let us see if these two rules were 
followed by Ordericus. 

On the one hand, the manner in which this author has 
dated many events which happened in the months of 
January and February* proves that he did not reckon the 
commencement of the year either from Easter or the feast 
of the Annunciation [25th March]. 

On the other hand, to come to conclusive facts, as he 
places in the year 1067 the Christmas-day which followed 
the battle of Hastings (October, 1066),^ and in the year 
1136 the Christmas-day which followed the death of 

I Imp. Lib. Supp!. Lat. No. 801, fol. 138—160. 

* The versifier who composed a tract on calculations, called Massa 
compoti, of which there is a MS, of the twelfth century in the Library at 
Alen9on which came from St. Evroult, also makes the 24th of September 
the starting-point of the indiction. — MS. Alenjon, No. 25, fol. 135. v. 

=* MS. last referred to, fol. 131. 

* The 16th of February, 1075 (vol. ii. 112), answers to the 16th of 
February, 1075. Feb. 1106 (vol. ii. 223), to Feb. 1106. The 15th of 
January, 1089 (vol. ii. 464), to the 15th of January, 1089. Januarv, 1091 
(vol. ii. 507, 520), to January, 1091. The 9th of February, 1110 (vol. iii. 
437, 438), [where correct a misprint], to the 9th of February, 1110. The 
2nd of February, 1113 (vol. iii. 439), to the 2nd of February, 1113. The 
29th of Januarv, 1119 (vol. iii. 464), to the 29th of January, 1119. 

^ Vol. i. 49 O! 



lyi ON THE LIFE, WOEK, AND TI:MES 

Henry I (1st December, 1135)/ it may be considered as 
positively clear tliat he reckoned the year as beginning from 
Christmas. There is one passage \vhich even seems to indi- 
cate that he counted its commencement from the eve ot 

that feast .'^ . 

With respect to the indiction, we cannot arrive at so 
decisive a result. I am disposed, however, to gather from 
two instances^ that Ordericus made the revolution ot a 
year of the incarnation exactly coincide with the revolution 
of an indiction. 

Having laid down these two general rules, 1 have to 
remark that errors in chronology are very common m our 
author's work. The same fact is sometimes referred to two 
or three different dates. The events of several years are 
often inverted or confounded one with the other ; and m 
many places the numbers given for the indiction are mani- 
festly incorrect. . ,, -o ^ a 

Ordericus sometimes forgot that in the Eoman calendar 
the last days of the month belong to the calends of the 
month following. Thus he fixes on the 2nd of the calends 
of May^ the execution of Waltheof, which took place on 
the 2nd of the calends of June— that is to say on the last 
of May ' In another place,« he gives the 8th of the calends 
of February as the day of the death of Avicia ^e Sauque- 
ville: but we know, from an authentic epitaph, that this 
lady died on the feast of St. Peter's chair, m February 
which carries the date back to the 8th of the calends of 
March. The same observation may be made on the date ol 
InaruK's death.^ . ^ ^, 

The error to which I direct attention was probably com- 
mon in the Middle Ages, and I think that it should be kept 



1 Vol. iii. 346. 

2 Vol. iii. 446. 



■^ The 27th of September, 1098, belongs to the sixth indiction, and the 
25th of December following to the seventh, vol. m. 193. The 1.5th of 
July and 13th of November, 1099, are attributed to the seventh mdiction, 
vol.'ii. 168, IPl. 

5 SeVthe epitaph on Waltheof, vol. ii. 103. Cf. ii. 100. 

c Vol. ii. 269. 

7 Vol. ii. 269. 

8 Vol. ii. 101. 



OF OEDEEICUS VITALIS. Ivil 

in mind when we wish to explain a certain number of false 
dates. To confine myself to one example, I will mention a 
bull of Benedict YII.^ relating to the abbey of Lerins. It 
bears date on the 10th of the calends of May, the fourth 
year of Benedict's pontificate, the eleventh of the reign of 
the Emperor Otho, in the month of May, the sixteenth 
indiction.^ The words 10^^ of the calends of May are, 
without doubt, an error for the 10th of the calends of June, 
so that the instrument was made on the 23rd May, 978, 
and not, as the learned Jaffe supposed, on the 22nd April.^ 

YI. 

WOEKS CONSULTED BY OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. 

I NOW come to an examination of the sources from which 
the Ecclesiastical History was derived ; and having already 
spoken of the materials which Ordericus drew from oral 
traditions,* shall now only pass in review the written docu- 
ments. 

1. The Holy Scriptures. — Without speaking of the texts 
of scripture which we find quoted, with more or less cor- 
rectness, throughout our author's pages, I will only remark 
that the New Testament furnished him the elements for the 
lives of Jesus Christ^ and the apostles.® Eor this part of 
his work he consulted not only the Vulgate, but the Poem 
of Arator on the Acts of the Apostles,'' and the Treatise of 
St. Augustine on the Harmony of the evangelists.^ 

' This bull has been published several times, and last in Dom Bouquet, 
ix. 245, and in the Ent. Patrice Monum. SS. ii. 301. There is a copy of 
it, made as early as the eleventh century, in the Imperial Library, among 
the charters of the abbey of Cluni. 

^ From the copy in the Imp. Lib. 

^ Hegesta Pontif., p. 333, n. 2906. 

* Before, p. xxxiv. xxxv. 

" Vol. i. 5-73. 

« Vol. i. 160—186. 

7 Vol. i. 161, 197. 

® Vol. i. 74, 83. The copy of St. Augustine used by Ordericus is 
probably that formerly in the catalogue of the Library of St. Evroult (see 
before, p. xi.), and now in the Library of Alen9on, No. 78. It is a 
quarto of 213 leaves, written in the twelfth century. Besides the treatise 
of St. Augustine, which is incomplete, the manuscript contains (fol. 1 — 
158) Haimo's Commentary on the Prophet Isaiah. 



Iviii 0-^ THE LIFE, WOEK, AlfD TIMES 

2. Apostolical History, and other documents relating to 
tlie apostles. — The legends of St. James the Great/ St. 
Andrew," St. Philip,^ St. Bartholomew,^ St. Matthew,^ and 
St. Simon,^ which hll a large space in the second volume of 
our author, were borrowed from an apocryphal work knowTi 
by the name of Historice ApostoliccB lihri decern'' Ordericus 
accepted this history as an authentic document without the 
slightest misgiving, believing, as it professes in the preface, 
that it was composed in Hebrew by Abdias, a disciple 
of the apostles, and translated, first into Greek by Eutro- 
pius, and afterwards into Latin by Julius Africanus.® 

To complete the details of the false Abdias, Ordericus 
employed various minor works, whose authenticity is 
scarcely better established. For St. Peter and St. Paul,^ 
he had recourse to the Recognitions of St. Clement ;^'' the 
Acts of St. ISTereus and St. Achilleus ;" those of St. Processus 
and St. Martinian ;^" and two narratives, the authors of 
which took the names of St. Linus and St. Marcellus.^^ Por 
St. John the EvangeHst,^* he used the pretended history of 
Mellitus ;^^ for St. Thomas,^^ a legend derived from the 
stories of Abdias : for St. Barnabas,^' Acts attributed to 



1 Vol. i. 176. 

» Vol. i. 223. 

3 Vol. i. 250. 

* Vol. i. 265. 

5 Vol. i. 270. 

« Vol. i. 276. 

' I only quote this work from the edition published by John le Fe'vre 
(Joannes Faber), with this title: Ahdut, Babylonice primi episcopi, ab 
apostolis constituti, de historid certaminis apostolici, libri x.^ Julio 
Africano interprete. Paris, 1571. 8vo. 

'" Vol. i. 277. 

^ Vol. i. 189. 

1° This is, without doubt, the work called Historia dementis in the 
catalogue of the Library of St. Evroult. See before, p. xi. 

^1 Acta Sanctorum, May iii. 6. Cf. the note in § vi., No. 6, on a 
manuscript in the Library at Aleiifon, formerly belonging to St. Evroult. 

^^ Acta Sanctorum, July, i. 303. 

*=* Bibliotheca patrum, ed. of 1677, ii. 67. 

^* Vol. i. 238. 

^= See Fabricius, Bihl. medics et infimce Latinitatis, ed. cf 1754, v. 68 

1" Vol. i. 252. 

17 Vol. i. 286. 



OF OEDEEICTJS TITALI3. Hx 

John Mark, his disciple / and for St. Mark," an ancient 
life,^ to Tvhich our author joined the history of the holy 
evangehst's mission to Laodicea.* 

3. Euselius and Hegesipjjus- — Even if Ordericus himself 
had not informed us,^ we should have had no doubt of his 
having consulted the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius, 
one of the historical works most common in the libraries of 
the Middle Age. 

He was also acquainted with the five books of Hegesippus 
on the Jewish war and the destruction of Jerusalem.^ 

4. Anastasius the Librarian. — It was principally by the 
aid of the Lives of the Popes by Anastasius the Librarian, 
that the seventeenth chapter of Book II. was compiled. The 
copy used by our author in his labours is, to all appearance,'^ 
the manuscript now numbered 18 in the library of Alen9on.^ 
Like many writers of the Middle Ages, Ordericus attributes 

* See Acta Sanctorum, June, ii. 431. 
'^ Vol. i. 290, &c. 

^ This Life is added to the edition of Abdias, published at Paris in 1571. 

* Acta Sanctorum, April, iii. 346. 

5 Vol. i. 1, G, 12, 93, 174, 248; ii. 139. 

® Vol. i. 248. The work of Hegesippus is published in the Maxima 
Bihliotheca Patrum, ed. of 1677, v. 1120. 

7 Vol. ii. 296—312. 

® This manuscript, a small folio on parchment of 259 leaves, and written 
about the year 1025, is in the ancient catalogue of the Library of St, 
Evroult. See before, p. xiv. It contains — besides several lives and 
passions of saints — 

No. 4. (fol. 7) "The Verses of Ademar, servant of God, to Rohon, 
bishop of Christ." It is from this acrostic, published by Mabillon (Analecta, 
fol. ed. 432), that the manuscript was executed about 1025 by order of 
Rohon, bishop of Angouleme. 

No. 5. (fol. 7, V.) Letter of St. Jerom to St. Damasus, on the subject of 
the Acts of the Popes, with the answer of Damasus. See the next note. 

No. 6. (fol. 8) History of the Popes, with the length of their pontificates, 
from St. Peter to Stephen V. 

No. 7. (fol. 9) " Gesta pontificum." There is a note on the top signed 
F. L. D. (Frere Luc D'Achery), stating that the manuscript was sent to 
him at Paris on the 27th of March, 1655, from the monastery of St. 
Evroult, and that this "History of the Popes" had been published at 
Paris in 1649, under the name of Anastasius the Librarian; continued to 
Stephen VI. 

No. 8. (fol. 183) The History of the Lombards. It is the work of Paul 
the Deacon. 

No. 10, (fol. 259) The epitaph on Mabel de Belesme, who died in 1082; 
the same which Ordericus inserted in his fifth book, vol. ii. 194. 



IX ON THE LIFE, WOEK, AND TIMES 

the Lives of the Popes to Sfc. Damasus. In fact, the text 
^Yhich he had under his eyes is preceded by a Letter 
from St. Jerom requesting Pope Damasus to furnish him 
with particulars respecting his predecessors ; and to this 
letter is added the reply of Damasus, who readily commu- 
nicated to St. Jerom such documents as he had teen able 
to collect.^ 

In addition to the text of Anastasius, Ordericus mentions 
several pontifical constitutions, extracted from a collection 
of canons which included the false decretals. 

5. List of the Popes. — Ordericus gathers what he says of 
Benedict III. and his successors to Stephen Y.- from a list 
of the Popes from St. Peter to Stephen Y. copied in a ' 
manuscript of St. E\TOult.^ 

G, Gregory of Tours. — Ordericus quotes only his treatise 
on the Glory of the Martyrs.^ 

7. Paul the Deacon. — Part of the details which our 
author gives respecting the Lombard kings may have been 
directly gathered from Paul the Deacon ; as he mentions 
this author,^ and there was a copy of his works at the abbey 
of St. Evroult, in the twelfth century,^ which is now pre- 
served in the library at Alen9on.'' 

8. PecWs ivories. — Ordericas has borrowed the thirty- 
third chapter of his first book^ from the treatise of Bede, 
entitled : De sex cetatihus mimdi,^ without introducing modi- 
fications of any importance ; only adding the succession of 
the kings of the Franks, notices of some eminent prelates 
or abbots, details respecting St. Cuthbert, &c. 

Ordericus must also have been acquainted with Bede's 

1 The reply of Damasus is not given in the Regesta of Jaffe, nor among 
the authentic, or supposititious, letters of this Pope. It was, however, 
published in the St. Jerom of the Benedictines (v. 5), from the manuscript 
of St. Evroult and another which belonged to St. Martin de Seez. 

2 Vol. ii. 371. 

^ No. 6 in the manuscript of Alen9on, described in a recent note. 
* Vol. i. 263. 
^ Vol. i. 2, 130. 

^ See the catalogue, before, p. xiv. 
' See before, p, lix. 
8 Vol. i. 84—130. 

' Bedce opera, Basle, 1653, ii. 183, &c. Ordericus calls this work 
** Liber de Temporibus." 



OF OEDEKICUS YITALIS. ixi 

Ecclesiastical History, as the library at St. Erroult possessed 
a copy/ 

9. The work of Gildas. — This work, copies of which were 
very scarce in the Middle Ages,' had been perused by 
OrdericQS ;^ probably in the manuscript preserved at Bec.^ 

10. Chronicles of Ilarianus Scotus and Sigelert. — Orderi- 
cus saw at Worcester a copy of the Chronicle of Marianus 
Scotus,^ continued by a monk whom he calls John, who is 
no other than Florence of Worcester.^ But he had no 
opportunity of using it in compiling his work. 

He was not more fortunate in regard to the Chronicle oi 
Sigebert of Gremblours,^ of which Eulbert, abbot of St. 
Sepulchre at Cambrai, showed him a copy.** 

11. Annals of St. EvrouU. — The Annals of St. Evroult 
often served for a guide to Ordericus Vitalis. He followed 
the chronology of this chronicle, and drew from it materials 
for a considerable part of the first book of his History. 

These Annals are original from the time of William the 
Conqueror's death. Almost all the entries before that 
period are copied literally from the Annals of Eouen. 

This last compilation was much in vogue in Normandy 
during the middle ages. To prove this, we need only refer 
to the use made of it by the compilers of the Annals of St. 
Evroult, the .Annals of Caen,^ the Annals of St. Wan- 

' See the catalogue. Ordericus (vol. iv. 97) alludes very distinctly to 
Bede's History. See before, p. xiii. 

^ See Schoel, De Ecclesiasticoe Britonum Scotorumque historice fonti- 
hus. Berlin, 1851. 8vo. 

3 Vol. iv. 97. 

* Ravaisson, Rapports, 385, 386. 

s Vol. i. 493, 494. 

« See Pertz, SS. v. 495. [Cf. the note in vol. i. p. 493 of this edition, 
and the preface to the Chronicle of Florence of Worcester, in Bohn's 
Antiquarian Library, pp. vi. — x. Ed.] 
See Pertz, SS. vi. 268. 

Vol. i. 494. Ordericus, deceived no doubt by his memory, called 
him Engelbert instead of Sigebert. 

^ There ought to be a manuscript of the Annals of Caen, which ended 
in 1328, in the Library of the Vatican, in the department of the Queen 
of Sweden, but I am only acquainted with the extracts published by 
Duchesne {Hist. Norm. Script. 1015), after an ancient MS. which brought 
them down to 1293. Some articles from these Annals, taken from Duchesne 
and the MS. at Rome, have been inserted in Dom Bouquet, xi. 379; xii. 
779: xviii. 348. 



Ixii ox THE LIFE, WORK, AXD TlitES 

drille/ Robert du Mont,^ and the author of a list of the arch- 
bishops of Eoueu.^ The only manuscript of the Annals of 
Bouen with which I am acquainted is not older than the six- 
teenth century ; it belongs to the Imperial Library,'* and stops 
at the year 1380. The text of the Annals is interwoven with 
a compilation of the sixteenth century, entitled : Chronicon 
triplex et unum, and preserved in the library at Eouen/ 
"Wyon d'Herouval saw a manuscript of it, which was more 
ancient, as old perhaps as the twelfth century ; and it was 
from this copy that Father Labbe^ published the greatest 
part of the Annals. From this edition the continuators of 
Dom Bouquet inserted some fragments in their collections. 
Lastly, M. Ch^ruel has comprised a small number of the 
entries in the Annals of Eouen in the extracts from the 
Chronicon triplex et iinicm, which he has recently published 
under the title of NormannicB nova Chronica. 

I now return to the Annals of St. Evroult, which I have 
thought it necessary to publish as an appendix to the His- 
tory of Ordericus.'^ The text has been settled by the 
assistance of two manuscripts, namely: — 

a. Imp. Lib. Suppl. Lat. No. 801, fol. 138.' In this ma- 

'^ M. Berthmann (Pertz, S'^. \n. 475) has directed attention to the MSS. 
7815 and 7o21 of Brussels, which contain the Annals of St. Wandriile from 
the birth of Jesus Christ to the year 1110, with a very short continuation for 
the years 1127 — 1204, in another hand-writing. These Annals are partly 
founded on a compilation of the thirteenth century, the original manuscript 
of which is preserved in the Imp. Lib. (Fonds St. Germain, Latin, No. 
580, fol. 88). See an extract from these Annals in D. Bouquet, xii. 771. 

^ See Berthmann, in Pertz, SS. vi. 475, &c. 

^ This catalogue, of which there is a manuscript belon;i;ing to the middle 
of the fifteenth century in the Imp. Library (Ancien fonds. Lathi, No. 
5195), was partly compiled from the Acta Archiepiscoponim Rotomagen- 
sium, which Mabillon published in his Analecta, fol. ed. 222. 

* Ancien fonds Latin, No. 5530. This manuscript enables us to correct 
some passages in the Annals of St. Evroult. 

" See M. Ch^ruel, Normannice nova Chronica, vi., in the Mem. de la 
Soc. des Antiq. de Norniandie. 2nd Series, viii. 

^ Nova JBibliotheca, i. '664:. The version, of which Pere Labbe has 
given extracts, differs in some points from the text copied by Robert (;u 
Mont, and by the Annalists of St. Evroult. It agrees with the MS. 5530 
just mentioned. M. Ch^ruel has confused the Annals of Rouen with the 
Acts of the Archbishops: the two works are independent of each other. 

' [They are printed in this volume, pp. 229 — 2G8.] 

^ See the description of this MS. before t». xxiL 



or OEDEiiicus A^iTALis. Ixiii 

nuscript, which is difficult to decypher, the Auuals are copied 
in the margin of a chronological table. The earlier part, as 
far as the close of the eleventh century, is all written in 
one hand. The rest has been successively added by different 
writers. The last entry is of the year 1503. In several 
articles relating to the reign of Henry I., I have recognized 
the same hand which traced the original manuscript of the 
History of Ordericus. 

I. Imp. Lib. Eesidu Saint- Germain, Paquet 97, Xo. 5, 
fol. 24, &c. It contains twelve sheets of parchment, in large 
folio. The text must have been copied, at the beginning of 
the thirteenth century, from the manuscript jnst mentioned. 
Some articles are omitted, others abridged. The first hand 
stopped at the year 1204 ; another writer inserted afterwards 
the entries relating to the years from 1204 to 1237. The 
manuscript was not continued after this period. The pages 
of this copy are arranged in tables : the first columi^s show 
the bissextiles, the concurrents, the lunar cycle, the Sunday 
letter, and Easter for each of the 532 years of the paschal 
cycle. Two columns are then devoted to events which 
occurred during the first revolution of this cycle (from the 
year 1 to 532) ; two others to the second revolution of this 
cycle (533 — 1064) ; and two others to the events of the 
third revolution, which commenced in 1065. 

A manuscript of the library of St. Genevieve^ contains a 
third text of the Annals of St. Evroult, continued by a 
monk of the abbey of Gatine in Touraine. This text is 
knoTNTi in consequence of detached portions taken from it 
having been printed in the Mecueil des Historiems de 
France,^ some of which have been republished in the collec- 
tion of M. Salmon.^ 

Lastly, a fourth text of the Annals existed in the manu- 
script of St. E\T0ult, numbered 129. It ended with the 
year ] 112.'' 

The Annals of St. Evroult contain a considerable number 
of valuable entries, but they have a defect common to most 
of the chronicles that may be called marginal. It is often 

> BB. 81. 

2 XII. 773; XVIII. 322. 

' Recueil des Chroniques de Touraine, p. 374. 

■* See before, p. xxiii. xxiv., in note. 



Ixiv OK THE LIFE, WOEK, AND TIMES 

difficult to distinguish the year to which an entry applies. 
This difficulty has led Ordericus himself into an error. 
The notice in the Annals concerning the shipwreck of the 
JBlanclie-N'ef is attached to the year 1119 as well as the 
year 1120. Ordericus fixes it as belonging to 1119, which 
is the wrong date. 

12. Sistoria Francorum Setionensis. — The beginning of 
the eighth book of Ordericus^ is only a literal transcript of 
a chronicle often copied by the compilers of the middle ages,^ 
and which M. Waitz has recently published^ under the title 
of " The History of the Pranks of Soissons." 

It has been supposed that this document came under our 
author's notice through Hugh de Eleuri ; a purely gratui- 
tous hypothesis, for the Sistoria Francorum Senonensis is 
not even found in the two manuscripts of St. Evroult con- 
taining the Ecclesiastical History of Hugh de Eleuri.* 

13. Catalogue oftlie Arclibisliops of Rouen. — In arranging 
his chronological series of the archbishops of Eouen,^ Orde- 
ricus doubtless consulted the catalogue of which the library 
of Alencon possesses a copy.^ It gives the time during 
which each prelate filled the see, and their names are accom- 
panied by synchronical details, which somewhat differ from 
those inserted by Ordericus in his fifth book. 

14. Distichs on tJie Arclibisliops of Eouen. — In his chron- 
ology of the archbishops of Rouen, Ordericus gives two 
verses on each of the prelates mentioned.'' This collection 

» Vol. ii. 331—347, line 3. 

2 See Pertz, SS. ix, 339, 340. 

3 Ibid. 364—369. 

* One of these manuscripts is No. 20 of the Library of Alenfon, 
described before, p. xlv. The other is No. 22 in the same library, 
formerly lYo. 54 of the abbey of St. Evroult. It consists of 1 QQ leaves in 
folio, appears to have been copied during the second half of the twelfth 
century, and contains : — 

1. (fol. 1) A commentary on the 77 first Psalms. 

2. (fol. 80) Ecclesiastical History of Hugh de Fleuri, in a hand- 
writing of the thirteenth century. It is improperly attributed to Ive de 
Chartres, as other works of Hugh de Fleuri were. See what M. Waitz 
says on this subject, in Pertz, SS. ix. 338, 339. 

3. (fol. 336) The Commentary of Boethius on Porphyry. . 
*> Vol. ii. 139—169. 

6 MS. No. 20, fol. 55. See before, p. xlv. 

7 Vol. ii. IS'9, 140, &c. 



OF ORDEKICUS YITALIS. IXV 

of disticlis was, no doubfc, composed in tTie course of the 
eleventh century. It is found, with a continuation, in the 
Ivory-book preserved in the library of Houen/ 

15. Verses on St. Medard and St. Godard. — Our author 
attributes to St. Ouen a little work, of which he quotes 
four verses.^ The complete text is found, and attributed to 
the same author, in a chronicle of Rouen,^ and a Life of St. 
Grodard, which may perhaps date as far back as the eleventh, 
or twelfth century.* 

16. Notice on tlie Cities of the second Lyonnaise. — One of 
the minor works consulted by Ordericus, when writing his 
history of the archbishops, must have been a rather remark- 
able notice of the cities of the second Lyonnaise, which 
Duchesne met with at the end of an old manuscript of 
E,aban Maur, and the author of the Acta arcliiepiscoporum 
Rotomagensium has prefixed to his work.^ Prom this source 
was derived the name of Evantici, given to the people of 
Evreux f and of Satarium, given to the city of Seez,' 

17. Dudo de St.Quintin. — Ordericus was acquainted with 
this work,** but he does not appear to have made much use 
ofit.^ 

18. William de Jumieges. — This is one of the authors 
mentioned by Ordericus as having been laid under contri- 
bution by him ;^° but all the corresponding passages which 
we find in these two historians must not be attributed to 
the first without any distinction. In fact, if Ordericus has 
sometimes copied William de Jumieges, one of the con- 
tinuators of the latter has in turn borrowed some things 
from the monk of St. Evroult. In order to find the means 



1 P. 36, &c. 

2 Vol. ii. 143, 144. 

^ Normanniee nova Chronica, ed. Ch^ruel, p. 1. Mem. de la Soc. c-es 
Antiq. de Norm., 2nd Series, t. viii. 

* It is published at the end of the Chronicle (pp. 44 — 47), from a 
Latin MS., 52S6 of the Imp. Lib. 

^ Mabillon, Analecta, fol. ed. p. 222. 

« Vol. ii. 138,139. 

' Vol. ii. 139, and passim. 

8 Vol. i. 375, 298. 

' It was published by Duchesne in the Hist. Norm. Script., and JI. 
Migne has reproduced it in his Patrologie, t. 141. 

I'' Vol. i. 375, 376; ii. 298. 

VOL. lY. e 



Ixvi O^ THE LIPE, WORK, AlfD TIMES 

of drawing this distinction, I propose to gije a succinct 
account of the publication of the work of William de 

^^The^abbe des ThuiUeries,^ the editors of the Becueil des 
Jlistoriens^ and the authors of the Histoire Litteraire have 
reviewed the principal modifications which the text ot 
William has undergone. They have estabhshed beyond all 
controversy that the interpolations and the contmuation are, 
in part at least, the work of Eobert du Mont But it ap- 
peared to me that we might carry it still further ; and the 
collation of twentv-four manuscripts^ has enabled me to 
distinguish four editions of the Gesta Normannorum. _ 

The first of which I have not met with any manuscript, 
was finished in the lifetime of William the Conqueror ; that 
is to say, before 1087, as is proved by an epistle dedicatory 
and an epilogue preserved in some manuscripts of the later 

"""^ThT second, of which we have four manuscripts,^ appeared 
a short time after the death of Wniiam the Conqueror We 
learn this from an addition made to the epilogue, and from 
he passage with which the chapter relating to the marnage 
of that prince,' ends in this second edition. I give the 

1 See Mercxire de France, December, 1723, p. 1311. 

2 Vols, xi., xiv. and 620; xii., xlvi. 

' Vol viii. 169; xiv, 364. ,^ . . , 

4 I am still in wknt of sufficient details of the six followmg manuscnpts:- 
Tmn Lib IParisl. Ancien fonds, Latm, No. 4937. . 

vTi^an; Nof 1832, of the Queen of Sweden (Montfaucon, BM. BM. i. 

^^Librarv of the British Museum, Cotton MSS. Vitellius. 

K ^ SSi;?Su^rSeian Coll, Nos. 3679 and 3742 ; 
both oTthe fifteenth century, according to the prmted catalogue (vol. m. 
51 and 57). 

« ?rp'"ibf fonds* St. Victor, No. 580. Beginning of the thirteenth 

'"^T\"7of Alencon, No. 20; brought from St. Evroult. Beginning of the 
thirtee*n?h centur>" This manuscript contains only books v., v:.. and vn. 
Imp LibrAncien fonds Latin, No. 2769; having belonged to Colbert, 

-LTS, Ant^Ws^LTtll^NrSa.^ It formerly belonged to 
Cardinal Mazarin. Beginning of the fourteenth century. 
' In Duchesne's edition it is chapter xxi. of book vn. 



OF OEDEEICUS YITALIS. Ixvii 

passage which escaped the researches of the continuators of 
Dom Bouquet, although they collated two of the four manu- 
scripts in which I have discovered it : 

" By whom [Matilda], in the course of years, he had sons 
and daughters. Of these, Eobert afterwards succeeded his 
father in the duchy, having been invested with his paternal 
dignity, which I trust he will long enjoy. Eespecting him 
I shall have to dictate more fully in the proper place, should 
life be spared me." 

In taking Duchesne's printed text for the point of com- 
parison, the following differences will be observed in that 
edition : — 

Book I. Chapter ii. is wanting. 

B. II. Chapters ii. — viii. have certain passages substituted 
for them. 

B. VI. Chapter ix. is wanting. 

B. VII. A few lines fill the place of chapters ii. — iv. 
The second part of c. ix., cc. x. — xvi., the passage in c. xvii. 
relating to Odo, bishop of Bayeux, and cc. xix., xx., xxii., and 
xxiii., are wanting: c. xxiv. mentions the retirement of 
Archbishop Mauger, but does not point out Guernsey as 
the place of his exile; cc. xxv., xxvi., xxix., xxx., xxxii., 
xxxiii., the end of c. xxxiv. and c. xxxv. are wanting ; c. xxxvi. 
is less developed than in the printed edition. The book and 
the work end with c. xliii., followed by the epilogue already 
mentioned. 

This second edition is the one which Ordericus must have 
consulted. 

I have found that eight manuscripts^ contain the third 
edition of the Oesta, which it is easy to distinguish from the 
second. In fact, although both stop at chap.xlii. of book VII., 
and if we find in neither c. ii. of book I., nor c. is. of book VI., 
nor c. xxii. of book VII., still the third edition, among other 
particularities, contains the text of cc. ii., iv., x., xvi., xix., xx. 
(in part at least), xxiii,, xxv., xxvi., xxix., xxx., and xxxii. of 
book VII. Several of these chapters having been compiled 
with the aid of the third book of Ordericus, we are led to 

^ Four of these are in the Imperial Library at Paris; one in the Library 
of Rouen; one in the Mazarine Library; and one. belongini; to Saint Sved 
de Braine, is described by St. Palaye, Histoire de V Academic des Inscrip- 
tions, iv. 280.J 

e 2 

t 



Ixviii OK THE LIFE, WORK, AND TIMES 

the conclusion tliat the third edition ofWilliam de Jumiegea 
was published about the year 1125 or 1130. 

The fourth edition is best known, being extant in nume- 
rous manuscripts/ and from it Camden^ and Duchesne^ 
obtained their text. It was compiled from the preceding 
editions by Robert de Thoriugi, then prior of Bee, who 
became, in 1154, abbot of Mount St. Michael. The fourth 
and last edition of the Gesta, published before 1154, is 
principally distinguished by the addition of an eighth book, 
devoted almost entirely to the histoiy of Henry I. 

19. IVilliam of Poitiers. — Ordericus had certainly read 
the history of William the Conqueror, written by "William 
of Poitiers.^ He has given us many details on the life of 
this writer. 

20. The History of Geoffrey Mala^Terra. — Our author 
must have availed himself of the work of Geoffrey Mala- 
Terra^ in relating part of the Norman exploits in Italy .^ 

21. Historians of the first Crusade. — The ninth book of 
the Ecclesiastical History is almost wholly devoted to the 
history of the first crusade.' Ordericus has taken care to 
inform us that he made it his duty to adhere closely to the 
narratives of Fulcher of Chartres, and Baudri de Bourgeuil.® 

22. Life of Waltheof — What Ordericus relates of the life 
of AValcheof® and the translation of his relics,^" must have 
been borrowed from a life of this earl composed at the 
abbey of Croyland in the beginning of the twelfth century. 
The text followed by our author is, perhaps, the same as 
that which M. Francis Michel has published^^ from a manu- 

^ [There are ten in the Imperial Library, references to which are given 
by M. Delisle ; one at Rouen of the thirteenth century ; and one at 
Beauvais, of the fifteenth century.] 

- Anglica, Normannica, Hihernica, Camhrica, &c. (Frankfort, 1603, 
in fol.) 

' Rktorice Norman. Scriptores. 

'' Vol. i. 425, 492; ii. 46. The History of William de Poitiers is pub- 
lished in Duchesne, Hist. Norm. Scriptores. [Cf. note 1, in vol. ii. 46.] 

^ Printed in Muratori, book v. 

« Vol. i. 437. 

7 Vol. iii. 58— l.QO. 

8 Vol. iii. 59, 60, 190, 191. 

9 Vol. ii. 80—86. 

1° Vol. ii. 101—103. 

^* Chroniques Anglo-Norraandes. ii. 111* 



OP OEDEKICUS VITALIS. Ixix 

script at Douai.'' At the same time the version furnished 
by this manuscript probably contains some amendments 
made in tlie original text during the course of the twelfth 
century. 

23. History of the Ahhey of Croyland. — Ordericus informs 
us that the history of the abbey of Croyland was related to 
him by the sub-prior of that monastery.^ The same tra- 
ditions will doubtless be found in the Gesta ahbatum Croy- 
'mdie, of which there is a manuscript in the library of 
Douai.^ It is very remarkable that Ordericus makes not 
the slightest allusion to the history of Ingulf, although he 
speaks at some length of that illustrious abbot.* Can this 
silence support the theory of Sir Erancis Palgrave,^ denying 
the authenticity of the History which has come down to us 
under the name of Ingulf ? 

24. History of Henry V. hy David Scotus. — Ordericus 
quotes a history of the expedition of Henry V. into Italy, 
composed by an author whom he described as Irensis quidam 
scholasticus [a certain Irish scholar]. This was, undoubtedly, 
David the Scotchman, who was first a scholar at Wurtz- 
bourg, and afterwards bishop of Bangor.® 

25. Various Lives of Saints. — The library of St. Evroult 
contained a fine collection of Lives of Saints.''^ The perusal 
of these works must have been an inexhaustible source of 
pleasure to Ordericus,*^ who discovers, by numerous allusions,^ 
how deeply he was versed in this class of literature. In the 
following paragraphs I shaU only notice those lives of which 
he has made some considerable use. 



> No. 801. 
" Vol. ii. 95, &c. 

^ MS. No. 801. See M. Francisque Michel, in the Chroniques Anglo- 
Normandes, ii., xxi. 

* Vol. ii. 100, 102. 

" " Essay on the Sources of Anglo-Saxon History," in the Quarterly 
Review, vol. 34. Cf. " Documents and Records illustrating the History of 
Scotland," by Francis Palgrave. London, 1837, 8vo., i., cvi. [This 
question is impartially discussed by Mr. H. T. Riley in the preface to his 
translation of Ingulf in Bohn's Antiq. Library, pp. ix. — xiv. — Ed.] 

" Vol. iii. 197, 198. See the note of M. Le Prevost on this passage. 

' See the catalogue, pp. xiii, &c. 

« Vol. ii. 114. 

* See particularly vol. iii. 53, 54. 



IxX 05" THE LITE, WOEK, A^T> TIMES 

26. Life of St. Ansehn. — Ordericus quotes in several 
places^ the life of St. Anselm, by Edmer,^ and tells us that it 
was preserved at the abbey of Bec.^ The monks of St. 
Evroult very soon procured a copy of this work, to which 
was added the life of the blessed Herluin.* 

27. Life of St. Ceneri. — The particulars which Ordericus 
gives of the life of St. Ceneri,* are borrowed from a Life of 
this saint, published first by Mabillon,^ afterwards by tlie 
Bollandists ; the text being found in a manuscript once 
belonging to St. Evroult, and now classed under No. 12, 
in the library of Alen9on.^ This life, the author of which is 
unknown, may have been composed in the ninth century. 
In fact, there is some question, on the one hand, relative to 
a residence which Charles, king of the Eranks, made in a 
castle of Maine, near St. Ceneri ; and, on the other, we are led 
to believe that this tract was compiled before the translation 
of the relics of St. Ceneri, which, according to Ordericus,^ took 
place in the reign of Charles the Simple. 

28. Life of St. LJvroidt. — One part of the sixth book of 
Ordericus is occupied with the life of St. Evroult.^° The sub- 
stance of this narrative is copied literally from a Life, of 
which the Imperial Library contains a tolerably good copy, 
of the thirteenth century." Mabillon inserted it in his Acts 

1 Vol. iii. 203, 237, 435, 436. 

^ Published by Dom Gerberon in his edition of Anselm's works. 

3 Vol. iii. 238. Cf. Ravaisson, Rapports, 383. 

* See the catalogue, before, p. xiv. 

^ Vol. ii. 45&. The feast of St. Ceneri was celebrated at St. Evroult 
on the 7th of May, as appears by a calendar of the twelfth century, part of 
the manuscript 105 of the Library at Alen9on, formerly No. 92 at St. 
Evroult. This MS., an 8vo. of 64 leaves, contains : — 

1. (fol. 1, V.) An Epistle of Gregory to Constantius, bishop of Milan. 

2. (fol. 2) Fragment of a table of the Rule of St. Benedict. 

3. (fol. 3) Verses on the twelve degrees of humility. 

4. (fol. 4) The Rule of St. Benedict. 

5. (fol. 44, V.) A calendar. 

6. (fol. 52, V.) Fragments of a Ritual. One of the most curious articles 
is entitled : " The blessing of the beard," {fol. 5-9). 

^ Acta, ii. 572—578. 
' May, ii. 162—166. 
^ See before, p. xxiil. 
••' Vol. ii. 456; iii. 28. 
'° Vol. ii. 273—296. 

" Ancien fonds Latin, No. 18C4. Colbert obtained this manuscript 
fi-om the abbey of Bonport. 



OP OEDEEICUS YITALIS. Ixxi 

of the Saints of the order of St. Benedict/ from two manu- 
scripts of Bee and Conches. This life appears to me to 
have been derived from the text contained in a manuscript, 
No. 11, of the library at Alen9on,^ from which I may bo 
allowed to make a few short extracts in a note.^ Attention 

^ I. 354. 

2 Formerly No. 73 at St. Evroult. This manuscript, a work of the 
twelfth century, besides the Life of St. Evroult, contains only the work of 
St. Augustine, De fide, ad Gratianutn. There are some curious paintings 
on the face and back of the iirst leaf. 

^ UERE BEGINS THE LIFE OF ST. EVROULT. 

" The man of blessed memory, named Evroult, was bom of noble 
parents, citizens of Bayeux, fortunate for being richly endowed with 
temporal wealth, still more, for being deeply imbued with the doctrines of 
the Christian religion. Entrusted by his pious parents to learned masters 
for instruction in this faith, he became remarkable among his fellows 
by his great knowledge of the divine law. Committing this to his 
tenacious memory, when he grew up to the prime of youth among the 
young courtiers, distinguished both by his noble lineage and brilliant 
position, — his exalted reputation, graceful manners, excellent conduct, and 
the virtue of a humility worthy of imitation, gauied for him a high post in 
the palace. 

* « * * * 

" First, he devoted her [his wife] to the service of God, and she took 
the veil : and then he himself, having shaved his head and beard, and 
assumed the religious habit, quitted his country and kindred, and with 
three God-fearing brethren, fled with the utmost speed to a wilderness 
overspread with dense forests in the country of Ouche. Having entered 
the woods, and penetrated into its pathless recesses, seeking some spot 
where they could conveniently fix their abode, at length by God's aid, an 
angel leading the way, they came to a large pond, fed by springs of the 
purest water. On seeing this they greatly rejoiced, and offered thanks- 
givings to God, lauding him who never fails to help his servants who trust 
in him. Falling on their knees, they invoked the name of the Lurd in the 
usual course of Hours, as is the custom of monks. They then made a 
slight enclosure of boughs of trees, and erecting a small hut, laid the first 
foundation of what such a beginning promised in future times. 
***** 

" When the brethren had said the collects, and he went to rest on his 
own pallet, he would quietly call his servitor to his side, and make 

him repeat holy sentences and when he had done hearing or 

reading, he regularly sung the constantly recurring offices of the Hours, 
after the Roman and Galilean usage, or of Benedict and Columban the 
Scot, which he adopted as his rule. Every day, also, he made oblations 
for the priests to consecrate, and on all Sundays he ordered three masses 
to be celebrated in his presence, at which he made the usual offerings. . , 
. . . Thrice in the vear he had his hair shaved. 



Ixxii OI^" THE LIFE, WOEK, AND TIMES 

is drawn to the passage which states that St. Evroult chanted 
his Hours according to the nsage of the Eoman and Gallicau 
churches, or of St. Benedict and St. Columban, to the propor- 

" The man of God was so anxious respecting the habitations of the 
shepherds whom he drew around the monasteries erected by him, that in 
order to be able to pay needful attention to their wp.nts, he frequently 
travelled on a mule or an ass, in a single hard day's-journey, the distance 
of one thousand five hundred paces, [^dexteras} (which make more than six 
stadia and twenty paces,)* in going his rounds. For he had the most 
ardent desire, in his zeal for the Lord, to assemble about him numbers, by 
whose help he designed to erect large dwellings for the monks. In the 
twenty-second vear after he had made the first beginnings of a monastery, 
&c. * ' * * * * 

" Thus, he expired on the fifteenth day before the nativity of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, in the first hour of that day. While, however, some of the 
brethren and the priests were standing round the body of the deceased, 
chanting psalms for him, and the rest of the congregation in the churrh, 
weeping and singing, were commending his soul to God in their prayers, 
the crowd of poor also who had flocked together to receive the customary 
alms, bemoaning his loss with loud wailings, his soul returned to the body. 
Being carried back to his bed, and surviving for ten days, he made his 
usual provision for God's poor, according to his vow, bestowing alms upon 
them according to the utmost of his means at the several monasteries. 
These days, we think, were added to his life by the Divine goodness, both 
that he might fill up the measure of his charitable bounties at that holy 
season, and that the distress under which the brethren had been long 
suffering during his protracted sickness, might be in some measure alleviated 
by his much loved presence with them. The blessed Evroult departed to 
the Lord, and left this troublesome world, between the hours of five and 
six, on the fourth of the calends of January [29th December], in the 
twelfth year of Hildebert, son of King Sigebert, and when Bishop Robert 
presided over the see of the city of S^ez, &c. 

" The venerable father was honourably interred by us in the abbey church 
of St. Peter, Avhich he had built, in a stone coffin ; his deacon lies buried 
near him, also in a coffin." 



* Some light is thrown on this passage by a gloss written in the twelfth 
century, on fol. 1 of the manuscript No, 25 of the Library of Alenjon, 
formerly 64 of that of St. Evroult : — 

" 3 pedes passum faciunt ; passus quoque (?) C 
Viginiti 5 stadium ; si milia des re, 
8 facit stadia ; duplicatum dat tibi leucam." 
Three feet make a pace; 125 paces make a stadium; if you count in 
miles .... makes 8 stadia; if doubled, you have a league. 

[The text and the gloss are both difficult, and perhaps incorrect. There 
are four stadia in an Italian mile, of 125 paces each. It must be imagined 
what the paths through the forest of Ouche were in the time of St. Evroult. 
They are bad enough now. — Ed.] 



OP 0EDEEICT7S YITALIS. Ixxiii 

tion established between yards and stadia, and at the end to 
the mention of silver sous. 

The Life preserved in the Alen9on manuscript was pro- 
bably compiled in the Carlovingian era. At any rate, in 
order to prove that it is much older than the Life pub- 
lished by Mabillon, it suffices to remark that we find two or 
three paragraphs, added to the end of the former in the 
shape of a supplement, embodied in the text which Mabillon 
used. 

It is rather curious to observe what liberties the 
author of the second Life has taken with the original work. 
On the one hand, he has suppressed many circumstances ; 
particularly the too marvellous narrative of the last moments 
of the saint. On the other hand, he gives details which the 
earlier biographer had omitted ; such as the means taken by 
the king to induce Evroult, in his youth, to come to court, 
and St. Evroult' s having entered a monastery, before he 
retired to the district of Ouche. 

Ordericus also, on his part, has not contented himself 
with transcribing, word for word, the second version of this 
life. The edition with which he has supplied us is enriched 
with several new articles ; the most considerable of which 
relate to the foundation of the monastery of the Deux- 
Jumeaux, the antiquity of the castles of Exmes and Grace, 
the miraculous origin of the fountain of St. Evroult, the 
visit^ of King Childebert, and the adventure of the devil 
of Echoufour. 

More scrupulous than many of his cotemporaries, Or- 
dericus has taken care to inform us that he interlarded the 
ancient legend with stories which he had gathered in his 
youth from his conversations with men of advanced age. It 
is impossible to verify on all points the exactness of these 

At the close of the docunaent are three supplementary articles, the second 
of which thus begins : — 

" The person just mentioned paid tribute to God twice a year ; namely, 
on the holy nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and on the day of the 
consecration of the chalice, in which he gave to his disciples the sacrament 
of his body and blood. On these days he bestowed a hundred silver 
sous on the poor ; not, that forgetting the work of charity at other seasons, 
he was then profuse with a pharisaical ostentation, for it is most certain 
that on all occasions he was not slack in the performance of charitable 
duties." 



Ixxiv ON THE LIFE, WOEK, AND TIMES 

pious traditions, but I feel it incumbent on me to show, by 
a single example, that we must not reject them all with utter 
contempt. 

Ordericus relates from oral tradition the manner in 
which St. Martin de Yertau founded a monastery in the 
Bessin, at a place afterwards called les Deux-Jumeaux. 
Doubts may be raised respecting several circumstances in 
the narrative; but it cannot be disputed that there really 
existed at the Deux-Jumeaux a monastery which had fallen 
to ruin long before the period when Ordericus wrote his 
history. To the proofs which the authors of the Gallia Chns- 
tiana^ have produced afiirming the existence of this monas- 
tery in the Carlovingian era, I beg leave to add one supplied 
by an ancient manuscript of the Novels of Theodosius." A note 
written on the last leaf purports that the book was copied 
by a clerk named Baginardus, at the request of Esau, in the 
nineteenth year of the reign of Louis Pius (a.^d. 832), in 
the time of Erembert, bishop of Bayeux, and of Etichon [?], 
ABBOT OE THE Deux-Jumeatjx.^ We find, then, that tra- 
dition did not mislead Ordericus when it pointed to the 
Deux-Jumeaux as the site of an ancient monastery. 

29. History of the translation of St. Evroult. — A legend, 
preserved in the abbey of Eebais, related how the body of 
St. Evroult was, doubtless in the tenth century, carried off 
from the territory of Ouche. Ordericus, however, did not 
think fit to follow this narrative, and preferred confining 
himself to the local traditions.^ 

30. Miracles of St. Evroult. — Not to speak of a collection 

» Vol. xi. 40C. 

^ Imp. Lib.,ancien fonds Latin, No. 4413. The authors of the Nouveau 
Traite de Diplom. (iii. 54, 139, 3.59) have already drawn attention to this 
manuscript, under the writing of which they have discovered the Epigrams 
of St. Prosper in a still older handwriting. 

' " Ego Ragenardus clericus, Esau rogante, hunc librum scripsi, sub 
tempore Chludovico imperatore, anno xviii. imperii sui, et sub tempore 
Eremberti, urbis Baioeas episcopi, et Etichoni [?] Duos Gemellis abbate, 
et hujus provinciae H . . . comite. 

" I . . um fuit tunc tempore pubertatis predicto Esau." 
The Benedictines did not publish this note; and they read it in a different 
manner. They say, in effect {Nouveau Traite, iii. 54, 55), that the 
manuscript was made " when Henry was count of tlie pioviiice, and -Job 
abbot of the monastery." 

*■ Vol. u. 208, 209." 



OF ORDEETCITS TITALIS. Ixxv 

wliicli perlslied in the flames before the abbey of Ouche was 
restored/ there was no doubt an account of the miracles of 
St. EvroLilt, which supplied Ordericus with the history of 
one Eualed. who miraculously escaped from the dungeon at 
Domfront.^ There is extant another version of the same 
miracle not taken from the Ecclesiastical History.^ 

31. Life of St. William. — The Acts, from which Ordericus 
compiled the life of St. "William, were communicated to him 
by Anthony, a monk of Winchester.'* They are probably 
the same as those published by Mabillon.^ Eespecting the 
ballads on the deeds of William au Court-N'ez, the reader 
will do well to consult the able dissertation of M. Paulin 
Paris. ^ 

32. Life of St. Gutlilac. — During the five weeks spent 
by Ordericus in 1115 at the abbey of Croyland, he com- 
piled an abridgment of the Life of St. Guthlac, which he 
thought it desirable to make known on the continent, and 
for that purpose, introduced into the fourth book of his 
history.' He was deceived in attributing the original Life to 
Felix, the apostle of East Anglia, but the mistake is very 
excusable, seeing that even modern critics are sufficiently 
embarrassed in solving the problem of its authorship. At 
the commencement of the life, such as we have it, we find 
the words : " Felix catliolicce congregationis sancti JBeda 
vernaculus^' Mabillon supposed that the person here men- 
tioned was " a servitor of the congregation of St. Bede," and 
that Athelwold, " king of the East Angles," mentioned by 
Eelix, was Ethelbald, king of the Mercians.^ M. Stapleton, 
in a manuscript note which I have before me, disputes this 
interpretation. He finds fault with Mabillon for having 
substituted a king of Mercia for a king of East- Anglia ; for 
baring considered the name of "Beda" as indeclinable, and 

1 Vol. ii. 289. 

2 Vol. hi. 2, 3. 

^ In a ;^jS. in the Imperial Library, Lat. 18G4, fol. 191, at the end of 
the Life of St. Evroult. [M. Delisle has published it in the Appendix to 
Ordericus Vitalis, vol. v. pp. 181, 182.] 

* Vol. ii. 243. 

' Acta, sect. iv. part i. p. 72, &c. 

^ Les Maiiuscrits Franpois de la Bibliotheque du Roi, iii. 1 1 3, &c. 

' Vol. ii. 86—95. 

* Acta, sect. iii. part i. p. 264. 



Ixxvi ox THE LIFE, WORK, AND TIMES 

Bupposing that the epithet of saint could be given to Bede, m 
the middle of the eighth century. He contends that the 
Athelwaldus of the legend is a king of East Anglia, who died 
in 749, and is called Ethelwold in the Mores Historiarum, and 
Elfwald, by Simeon of Durham. Eelying on the exact corre- 
spondence of the Latin word vernaculus with the Saxon 
word heoda or horda, he proposes to read, Felix catholicce 
congregationis (Sa.ronice, hedd) vernaculus. On this hypo- 
thesis, the words Saxonice heda would be a gloss introduced 
into the text. This explanation seems to me very ingenious ; 
but it would be necessary to ascertain if there is any autho- 
rity for it in the ancient manuscripts. 

33. Life of St Josse. — The work consulted by Ordericus/ 
and of which the library of St. Evroult possessed a copy,^ 
was either the Life published by Mabillon^ (which is found 
in a collection already noticed, and was either copied at the 
abbey of St. Evroult, or, at least, from a manuscript belonging 
to that monastery*), or another Life supposed to have been 
compiled by Isembard de Eleuri,^ of which there is a copy 
in the Imperial Library.^ 

34. History of the invention and translation of the hody of 
St. Josse. — The account which Ordericus has given of the 
discovery of the relics of St. Josse and the attending mira- 
cles,^ was borrowed, as he informs us, from a little work 
addressed by Isembard, a monk of Eleuri, at the request of 
the monk Adelelm, to Herboud, abbot of Eleuri.^ Accord- 
ing to all probability, this is the narrative of which Mabillon 
has only published a few lines f but the entire text is found 
in a manuscript collection formed at St. Grermain des Pres.^" 

^ Vol. i. 472, 474. 

* See before, p. xiii. (Life of St. Judoc.) 
3 Acta,il565—57\. 

* See before, p. Ixx., note. 

^ Mabillon, Acta, v. 5i5.—Hist. Litt. vi. 439. 

® VitcB et Acta Sanctorum (Residu Saint-Germain, pp. 135, 136, No. 1 
—9), vii. 343. 

' "Vol. i. p. 472 — 477. Mabillon has inserted the narrative of Ordericus 
in his Acta, v. 545. 

8 Vol. i. 575, 477. 

^ Acta, ii. 571; v. 545. 

^° VitceetActa Sanctorum, Imp. Lib. Reoidu St, Germain, p. 135, 13b', 
Nos. 1—9, vii. 346. 



OF ORDERICITS TITALIS. Ixxvii 

As for the liistory of the translation of St. Josse to the 
church of Parnes, composed bj William de Merlerault, we 
know nothing of it but what we learn from Ordericus.^ 

35. Life of St. Martial— The life of St. Martial, inserted 
bj Ordericus in the second book of his history,^ is an 
abridgment of the Acts of St. Martial, bearing the name of 
Aurelian, one of his disciples, which Thomas Beaulx-Amis 
printed in 1571, at the end of the Apostolical History of 
Abdias.^ 

36. Translation of St. Nicholas. — An account of the trans- 
lation of the body of St. Nicholas to Bari, in 1087 ; was 
drawn up by John, archdeacon of that church.* What, 
doubtless, induced Ordericus to give such long extracts from 
this narrative,^ was the circumstance of William Pantulf, 
one of the benefactors to St. Evroult, having undertaken a 
journey to Italy for the purpose of procuring some of the 
relics of the saint of Myra, which he deposited in the priory 
of Noron.^ The details given in the Ecclesiastical History 
exhibit the astonishing rapidity Avith which the worship of 
this saint was propagated in the West, and especially in 
Normandy. There is still extant a tract, of the age of 
Ordericus, attesting the lively faith placed by our fathers in 
the merits of St. Nicholas. It contains an account of the 
miracles wrought by the saint's intercession; particularly in 
several churches of Normandy. This tract, composed by a 
monk of Bee, is preserved in the library of Evreux,' and 
some portions of it are to be found in that of Alencjon. It 
deserves to be published. 

37. Life of St. Tauriniis. — One chapter in the fifth book 
is entirely devoted to the life of St. Tauriuus. It is a faith- 
ful transcript of a more ancient Life, of which several 



1 Vol. i. 478, 479. 

2 Vol. i. 296—312. 
« Pp. 154, &c. 

* This little work lias been published by Surius. [See M. Le Prevost's 
note, ii. 384. 

s Vol. ii. 384—394. 

^ Vol. ii. 211, 396. 

' MS. No. 132. The same volume contains the work of John de 
Bari. 



ixxviii ON THE LIFE, WORK, AND TIMES 

versions are extant -^ but it would be superfluous to offer 
any remarks upon it after the able work of M. Lenormaut. 

38. Acts of councils. — Ordericus gives us tbe text of the 
decrees made by different councils in the eleventh and 
twelfth centuries.' Without him, we should not even have 
known the existence of several of these assemblies. Nothing 
can better prove the confidence we may place in the text 
of the documents which he has transmitted to us, than the 
fact that the canons of the council [synod] of Lillebonne, 
given in the fifth book of the Ecclesiastical History,^ corre- 
spond with the original act, under the seal of William the 
Conqueror, preserved among the archives of the empire.* 
The decrees of the council of Clermont inserted in the ninth 
book^ were obtained from an act which we find rather 
incorrectly copied in a manuscript belojiging to the library 
of Alengon.*^ 

39. Archives of the ahbei/. — In compiling the history of 
his abbey and the priories depending upon it, Ordericus has 
drawn largely on the archives jf the monastery. He often 
confines himself to making transcripts of the charters or 
records of the endowments.' Of these archives, vre still 
possess some valuable relics, wi)ich enable us to test the 
historian's correctness. For instance, among the archives 

^ One of these versions was published by the Bollandists, August, ii. 
639, &c.; another by M. Lenormant, under the title of Decouverte dun 
Cimetiere Mtrovingien a la chapelle St. Eloi (Paris, 1864, 8vo.), after the 
MS., Latin 989, in the Imperial Library. 

2 [Synods] of Rouen, in 1072, h. fil; of Lillebonne in 1080, ii. 124; 
Council of Clermont in 1095, iii. 63; [Syno.d] of Rouen in 1096, iii. C9; 
Council of Rheims in 1119, iv. 1 : [Synod] of Rouen in 1128, iv. 29. 

» Vol. ii. 184. 

* Trtsor des Charles, Normandie, No. 1, carton J. 210. 
^ Vol. iii. 64, h5. 

° This manuscript. No. 10 of the library at Alen9on, formerly 72 at St. 
EvToult, is a small folio on parchment of 124 leaves. The writing is oi 
the twelfth century. It contains sixteen articles, mostly lives and passions 
of saints. We find, however, among the rest : — 

No. 1. The Hexameron of St. Ambrose. 

4. A terier of the rents of St. Evroult in Englaud. 

5 and 6. A fragment of Priscian, and fragments of grammar, 

7. Verses on the death of Charlemagne. 

10 A treatise on the seven arts; published by M. Ravaisson, Rapiwrts, 
p. 404. 

* See the General Index, at the word ChaHers. 



OF OEDEEICUS VITALIS. lixix 

of the department of the Orne is the original charter of 
Fulk, son of Gerard, inserted in the fifth book.^ A roll of the 
same age, which has been kindly communicated to me by M. 
Jules BouUe, formerly a student in the School of Charters, 
contains a piece which Ordericus has copied literally in the 
chapter devoted to the biography of Eobert de Rhuddlan.^ 
A chartulary, recently obtained for the Imperial Library, 
also puts us in possession of several records which perfectly 
agree with many passages in tlie Ecclesiastical History.^ 

Ordericus cannot be supposed to have neglected the 
Obituaries. There can be no doubt about it, when we find 
him so often giving the precise day of a person's death, 
though without fixing the year. "Unfortunately, we have 
neither the Obituary used by the monks of St. Evroult 
during the twelfth century, nor the long EoU inscribed with 
the names of the faithful departed who were associated in 
their prayers.* The deficiency is supplied, to a certain ex- 
tent, by an Obituary written in the thirteenth century,* and 
an account of the conventual establishments, of a date a« 
early as the first half of the twelfth century.^ 

40. Various Poems. — It is difiicult to imagine what a flood 
of poetry the most trifling occurrences drew from the Latin 
poets of the twelfth century. One is almost tempted to 
believe that Ordericus made a collection of these fugitiv^e 
pieces. He mentions [or quotes] a considerable number, 
which are now either lost or little known. The}' are enu- 
merated in the following list : — 

Yerses of a " modern poet" on the parable of the house- 
holder who had paid the labourers in his vineyard,'' 

Poem of Guy, bishop of Amiens^ on the battle of Hastings:^ 

* Vol. ii. 504, 505. 
» Vol. ii. 443. 

^ This chartulary, 2 vols, in 4to. (No. 185 in the class of chartularies), 
was written in the thirteenth century. There is another chartulary of St. 
Evroult (No. 166 in the same class) in the Imperial Library, also written 
in the thirteenth century, but much less curious. [Several of these charters 
are p'inted as an appendix to vol. v. of the edition of Ordericus, Paris, 18.55.1 

* Vol. i. 447, 469. 

^ Imp. Lib., Suppl. Lat. No. 801, ful. 1. See before, p. xxxii. 
' Ibid, fol. 77 \°. and 81. 
' Vol. i. 40, 41. 
« Vol. i. 492; ij. 17 



IXXX OK THE LIFE, WOUK, AND TIMES 

the same, probably, -which M, Francisque Michel has pub- 
lished from a manuscript in the library at Brussels.^ 

Book of the AYonders of the world.- 

A poem of St. Anselm, on Lanfranc ;^ published by Ma- 
billon.^ 

A sort of satire composed by Griroie Grossif,^ and ad- 
dressed to Grilbert Maminot, bishop of Lisieux.^ 

Poem of Blittero the Fleming, on the emperor Henry lY. 
or Henry Y.'' 

Poem of Paganus Bolotinus, canon of Chartres.^ It is 
written in Adonic verse, andintitled, " Vei^sus defalsis liere- 
mitis qui vagando discurruntr There is a copy in the 
Imperial Library.^ 

Yerses of Eegnald, bishop of Langres.^^ 

Yerses of Peter Leo, on Urban II. and the anti-pope 
Guibert.^^ 

Anonymous verses on Urban 11.^- 

Lines on the shipwreck of the Blanclie-Nef}^ 

In this list I have not comprised the Epitaphs preserved 
in such great numbers in the Ecclesiastical History.^* In 
giving one of these, Ordericus makes a remark which may 
serve to account for the multiplicity of epitaphs we find in 
the twelfth century. It is this : On the death of any person 
of note, a sort of poetical contest was instituted, and the 
best piece was selected for the official epitaph, and painted or 
engraved on the tomb."^ 



1 " Anglo-Norman Chronicles," iii. 1 — 38. 

* Vol. ii. 439. 
3 Vol. ii. 4ti5. 

* Acta, sec. vi. part ii. p. 659. 

^ Or Grossin, according to a reading supplied by the MS. of La Porte 
du Theil, v. 215. 
« Vol. ii. 479. 
"> Vol. ii. 480. 
» Vol. iii. 48. 

« MS. Latin, No. 8433, fol. 112. 
" Vol. iii 40. 
»» Vol. iii. 193, 194. 
^2 Vol. iii. 194. 
" Vol. iv. 38, 39. 

^* See the General Index, at the word Epitaph, 
^* Vol. iii. 413. 



OE OEDEEICUS YITALIS. Ixxxi 

The Funeral Eolls^ were also among the means through 
which new pieces of poetry came to the knowledge of Orderi- 
cus : he has transcribed in his work the verses which Adelelm, 
a monk of St. Grermer, had inscribed on the roll of William 
de Eos, abbot of Fecamp.^ 

41. Oesfa Bomanorum. — There was extant in the Middle 
Ages a History of the Eoman Emperors, which has probably 
perished long ago. Echoing the popular traditions, it made 
Julius CsDsar the founder of the principal cities of Graul. 
Ordericus gives us a pretty clear insight into the nature of 
this species of romance : he had perused the exploits of 
Caesar in what he calls the Acts of the Eomans (Anfiqua 
Bomanorum Gesta ;^ frisccB Quiritum Historicd).^ Thence 
he drew the accounts of the sieges of Gace and Exmes,^ of 
the destruction of the capital of the Caletes,^ of the defeat 
of the tyrant Eutubus,'' and of the foundation of Lillebonne 
and Eouen.^ It is perhaps also from the same compilation 
that Ordericus attributes to Constantino Chlorus the foun- 
dation of the city of Coutances f and he is not the only his- 
torian of the twelfth century who gave credit to these 
fabulous narratives. John of Marmoutier,^° and, more es- 
pecially the author of the book on the foundation of the 
castle of Amboise,^^ have borrowed largely from the Gesta 
Bomanorum. These traditions were not extinct in the four- 
teenth century, and Eroissart^^ gave them vogue when de- 
scribing " the strong and noble castle of Cherbourg, which 
Julius Csesar first founded when he conquered England. 

42. Brophecies of Merlin. — I shall add nothing to the 
able commentary of M. Le Prevost, on the chapter in the 

' On these records, see the BibliotJieque de VEcole des Chartes, 2nd 
series, iii. 361, &c. 
2 Vol. iii. 414. 
=* Vol. ii. 130. 
* Vol. iv. 20. 
^ Vol. ii. 276. 
^ Vol. ii. 130; iv. 21. 
" Vol. iv. 22. 

" Vol. ii. 130, 131; iv, 21, 22. 
" Vol. ii. 139. 

'"^ Historia Gaufridi, ducis A^ormannice, ed. Bochel, pp. 112 — 114. 
^' D'Achery, S2ncil, fol. ed,, iii. 266. 
'■- Book i. ii. c. 391, ed. of the Pantheon, i. 718. 
VOL. lY. / 



Ixxxii 02^ THE LIFE, ^VOEK, AND TlilES 

twelfth book, containing one of the oldest texts we have of 
Merlin's prophecies/ 

YII. 

MAJS'USCEIPTS, EDITIONS, AND TEANSLATIONS OF THE 
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

Ancient manuscripts of Ordericus Yitalis are exceedingly 
rare ; or, to speak more correctly, there is only one extant, 
of whicli all the rest are copies. They can only serve there- 
fore to supply passages whicli no longer exist in the original 
manuscript. I shall describe all that have come to my 
knowledge. 

1. Manuscript of St Evroult. — In tlie state in which this 
MS. is now preserved in the Imperial Library, it forms two 
volumes, quarto, of which, 

Yol. I., (No. 4207 D; 3761 de Colbert), contains the 
prologue, with Books I. and II. At the beginning it has 
this title, written in the hand of the thirteenth, perhaps 
even of the twelfth century, " The first part of Yitalis." At 
the end we find this notice : " In the year 1514, at a general 
chapter of St. Evroult, it was forbidden, on pain of excom- 
munication, to alienate all or any of the old books [libvres 
de viel oj)inion~\. 

YoL II. (No. 4207, E ; 3762 de Colbert), contains Books 
III., lY., Y., and YI. At the beginning, there is written in 
a hand of the thirteenth century, " This book is from the 
chest at St. E\T:"oult. The fourth part of Yitalis;" at the 
end, in writing of the fifteenth century: "Here ends the 
fourth part of Yitalis." 

Yol. III., (Suppl. Lat. No. 1135). This volume was pre- 
served as No. 125, in the library at St. Evroult till the 
suppression of the monastery. Having been temporarily 
deposited at Laigle, it was conveyed in 1799, by the care of 
M. Louis Dubois, to Aleneon, where it remained till, in 
1847, it was obtained for the Hoyal Library. The volume, of 
502 pp., comprises the beginning of Book YII. to the words, 
" Leoterico per consilium,'^ inclusively;" and Books IX., X., 

» Vol. iv. 97. 

2 Of this edition, vol. il p. 346, lines 25, 26. 



OF OEDEEICL'S YITALIS. kxxili 

XI., XII., and XIII. There are two chasms towards the end 
of the last book.^ 

This Yoliime, III., represents in fact two volumes : one of 
these, of which only four leaves remain, contained Books A'^II. 
and VIII.; the other included the last five books. The old 
paging, marked in red ink at the back of the leaves, makes 
it plain that the prologue to Book YII. commenced a volume, 
and, consequently, Books VII. and VIII- formed a separate 
volume. 

The manuscript which I am describing has no embellish- 
ments, but was executed wdth remarkable care and correct- 
ness ; it belongs to the first half of the twelfth century, and 
appears in the old catalogue of the library of St. Evroult.^ 
The age and the purity of this manuscript, and the know- 
ledge we have of its antecedents, are not the only e\ddence 
in favour of its being considered the original document, 
containing the author's last touches, of the Ecclesiastical 
History. I have remarked in it, with my excellent master, 
M. "Wailly, corrections afiecting the substance of the 
narrative, such as no mere copyist would have made. There 
are blanks reserved to receive additions, passages re-written 
on places which had been erased, and in several titles new 
entries, showing, under the present paging, traces of the 
former numbers, which the insertion of Books I., II., and VII., 
required to be altered.^ Besides, it is very easy to dis- 
tinguish passages which the author added after the work 
was finished. Such are — a paragraph at the end of the first 
book, two lines at the end of the second, a prologue prefixed 
to the third, connecting it with the second, and the end of 
the sixth book. "We may also remark the additions made in 
the margin of several leaves. All these particulars denote 
that this was the manuscript on which Ordericus worked 
when he gave his History the form under which we now 
possess it. 

These considerations place it beyond doubt, that in the 
manuscript of St. Evroult we have the identical leaves on 

1 Vol. iv. p. 207, line 9 to p. 212, line 23, and also the whole of ch. 
xlv. pp. 222 — 225. The parts lost from the manuscript of St. Evroult are 
supplied from the text of the manuscript of M. Dupuy 

^ See before, p. xiv. 

' See before, p. xliv. 

/2 



kxxiv OK THE LIFE; WOEK, AND TIMES 

which the Ecclesiastical History was originally penned. 
"Whether the manuscript is the autograph of Ordericus, is a 
question more difficult to decide.^ 

Two passages have been quoted to prove that Ordericus 
did not write his History with his own hand, but dictated it 
to copyists. But, even admitting this to have been the case, 
we might still suppose that the author made a fair copy of 
what he had originally dictated. Let us see, however, 
whether the construction put on these passages be not 
forced. Take the first : 

Dum caute de his cogito, 
Et quaedam chartis insero, 
Caute resistens otio, 
Sic dictans me exerceo.^ 

It appears to me that no such conclusion can be drawn from 
these verses, particularly when it is recollected that in the 
Middle Ages to dictate, w^as synonymous with, to compose.*' 
In the second passage Ordericus complains of the obstacles 
which age presented to his labours ; he could no longer 
write without fatigue, and he was in want of penmen to 
take down his words.* This passage needs no commentary. 
It does not, more than the former one, prevent our con- 
cluding that Ordericus wrote his own work.^ It is, therefore, 
possible that we are in possession of the autograph manu- 
script. This opinion is confirmed in some degree by our 
finding that several articles in the Annals of St. Evroult, 
relating to the reign of Henry I./ are traced by the same 

1 See vol. i. pp. 12 — 14. 
= Vol. ii . 204. 

While on affairs I shrewdly muse, 

And some things on my parchment write, 

To yield to sloth I still refuse, 
And carefully my work indite. 

2 See Du Cange, at the word Dictare. Ordericus uses this word again 
in speaking of his master, John of Rheims (ii. 214). See also the passage 
in William de Jumieges, quoted before, p. Ixvii, 

* Vol. iii. 60. 

5 [Does not ovir author's language expressly convey the idea that he did 
write his work with his own hand, until the fatigue of his task, and in- 
creasing infirmities, rendered' it necessary that he should resort to assistance, 
which unfortunately was not to be procured % See our notes on this passage, 
iii. 60.— Ed.] 

^ See before, p. Ixiii. 



OF OEDEEICUS TITALIS. IxxXT 

hand as tlie Ecclesiastical History. I have also recognized 
the same handwriting in the manuscripts No. 14^ and No. 6,' 
in the library at Alengon, containing Lives of Saints, — 
compositions highly esteemed by Ordericus^. Still, I 
would not positively affirm that the manuscript of which 
I am speaking was executed by the hand of Ordericus 
VitaHs.* 

2. Manuscript of St. Stephen of Caen, or the Queen of 
Stoeden's. — (Vatican Lib., section of the Queen of Sweden, 
No. 703.) This manuscript, a quarto of 49 leaves, in 
parchment, belonged to the abbey of St. Stephen at Caen, and 
was transferred to Paris during the French Eevolution. I am 
indebted for the description of this volume to my confrere, 
M. Andre Salmon. There is a copy of it in the Imperial 
Library (at Paris) ,^ which La Porte du Theil brought from 
Eome at the close of the 18th century. 

The Vatican manuscript contains the end of Book VII. of 
of the Ecclesiastical History, from the words, " In the year 
of our Lord 1084, the seventh indiction, when Henry was 
king of Germany,"® and also the whole of Book VIII. At 
the end of the MS. there are some notes of events in the 

^ This manuscript has been already described, p. x. note 6. 

' MS. of Alen9on,*No. 6, formerly 88 of St. Evroult, a folio on parch- 
ment of 161 leaves, the writing of the twelfth century. This manuscript 
may be divided into two parts. The first, containing fol. 1 — 133, is perhaps 
older than the other. In several passages of the second, the hand 
employed on the MS. of the Ecclesiastical History may be recognized. 
See among others, fol. 134, 139 v°, &c., 150, &c. The volume contains : — 

1 (fol. 1). St. Gregory's Homilies on Ezekiel. 

2 (fol. 108). St. Jerom's Prologue on the Prophet Ezekiel; with the 
lives of St. Laumer and St. Odo, and the martyrdoms of SS. Nereus and 
Achilleus, and St. Peregrinus, bishop. 

' " I would much prefer," he says, '' to write about the histories and 
miracles of the saints," ii. 480. 

* The Benedictine who, in 1582, drew up the catalogue of the manu- 
scripts of St. Evroult (Imp. Lib., residu St. Germain, paq. 166), makes 
this observation on the volume of Ordericus which belonged to the abbey 
of St. Evroult : " There are four volumes of Vitalis entered in the old 
catalogue of the library at St. Evroult, of Avhich I regret this is the only 
one left. But, as that catalogue, which was made about the year 1140, 
contains this volume, written indeed with paler ink, but by the same hand, 
it is not improbable that it is the author's autograph, completed when he 
was near his end,'* 

^ Collection Du Thiel, Notices et Extraits des 3ISS. de R9me, vol. xvi. 

" Vol. ii. 350. 



IxXXvi 0^' THE LIFE, TVORK, A^^D TIMES 

years 1134 — 1147, and a Homily in honour of St. Michael, 
the archangel. • 

As Book VII., with the exception of the first eight leaves, 
and Book VIII., are wanting in the manuscript of St. Evroult, 
I should not be much surprised if the Vatican manuscript 
should prove to consist of some sheets detached from that of 
St. Evroult. "Whether this conjecture be founded or not, 
the manuscript at Eome ought to furnish a correct text. 

3. Manuscript of St. Germain. — (Imp. Lib. Eonds St, 
Germain Latin, No. 462, formerly 258). This volume was 
successively the property of Eobert TuUone, of Laubespine- 
Goulet, first captain-commandant in the regiment of the 
Sieur de Cheronnes (1591) — of Groulet, canon of Chartres, of 
the chancellor Seguier, and of Coislin, bishop of Metz. It 
is a parchment folio, of 150 leaves ; the writing, in two 
columns, is of the sixteenth century, and imitates Eoman 
printed letters ; the initials are coloured. The manuscript 
contains the two first books of Ordericus. Book II., is in 
two parts : the first, from the beginning as far as the life 
of St. Martial, inclusively, is rubricked : " E. Orderici 
Vitalis, liber secundus, Historise Ecclesiasticse de actibus 
apostolorum ;" the last part, comprising the histc^^y of the 
popes : " Historise Ecclesiasticae, Orderici Vitalis, monachi 
Ebrulfiani, liber tertius." Prefixed to the volume is an 
epistle addressed to Eelix de Brie, abbot of EvroLilt,^ by the 
monk "WiUiam Vallin, who had prepared an edition of Orde- 
ricus Vitalis. 

4. Ifanuscript of Sir Thomas Phillipps. — (Library of 
Sir Thomas Phillipps, Bart., at Middlehill, InTo. 1836.) This 
manuscript, which probably belonged to the college of the 
Jesuits of Clermont, at Paris, is thus noticed in the catalogue 
published by the learned English bibho. " Ordericus Vitalis, 
veil. s. XY." 

There is this short description of it in the catalogue of 
Meer man's manuscripts -} 

"No. 723: Books IV., v., VL, and VIL, of the Ecclesiasti- 
cal History of Ordericus Vitalis, with an index. In parts, 

* At the head are emblazoned the arms of Brie ; on a shield vaire 
argent and azwige, a lion rampant 
■■^ Page 125. 



OF OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. Ixxxvii 

sect. XV. fol. 100 ; in two columns, the initial letters in 
gold." 

The correctness of these details is confirmed by a letter, 
under date of the 24th ^February, 1855, which M. Thomas 
Porester has been kind enough to address to me.^ 

I am inclined to believe that tliis volume belongs to the 
same copy as the preceding []N"o. 3], and the one I shall 
next mention, and that it contains books III. — VI. 

5. Ilanuscript de Menars. — (Imp. Lib. Collection Dupuy, 
No. 875.) This is one of the volumes which the president 
de Menars added to the collection of Dupuy. Every one 
knows that this collection, purchased in 1720 by Joly de 
Fleury, was transferred to the king in 1754. The manu- 
script is a parchment folio of 118 leaves. The writing is in 
two columns, of the 16th century, imitating Roman printed 
characters, with the initials coloured. This volume, which 
had formerly the title " Orderici Yitalis Historise Ecclesi- 
asticse, tertia pars," contains the text of the five last books, 
probably prepared by Vallin. Instead of being numbered 
IX. — XIII., as in the editions, these five books are numbered 
YIII. — XII. At the end there is a little table of contents, as 
in the manuscript of Sir Thomas Phillipps. I have abeady 

* [As far as I have been able to ascertain, Sir Thomas Phillipps's is the 
only manuscript of Ordericus Vitalis in the English libraries. Sir Thomas 
having favoured me with a fuller description, it may be added to the 
details given by M. Delisle of the foreign manuscripts. 

"My MS. of Ordericus Vitalis came from the Jesuits' College of Cler- 
mont at Paris, and passed from their library about 1762 to Baron Meer- 
man at the Hague, and from thence into mine in 1824. 

" It is a folio, about fourteen inches by ten, bound in white vellum, and 
contains just one hundred written leaves of vellum. The initial letters are 
illuminated, and at the commencement of each book they are much larger 
than the rest. The manuscript contains only four books, viz., IV., V., 
VI,, VII. At the end is an index of matters, persons, and places. At 
fol. 52 there are these Vv'ords : Vitalis nionachi origo et instructio. 

" The manuscript is beautifully written in imitation of printing, and at 
first view you might deem it to have been written in Italy ; but I am 
inclined to think it was written in France or Flanders, in the printed 
character which, I believe, was common in the latter part of the fifteenth, 
and the first part of the sixteenth century, and of which I have several 
other specimens. A red rubricked running-title heads every leaf, and the 
headings of every book and chapter are rubricked, as well as the colo- 
phon of each book. This MS. was formerly No. 652 in the Jesuits' of 
Clermont catalogue." — Ed.'\ 



Ixxxviii ON THE LIFE, WORK, A:N'D TIMES 

observed that these two volumes must have formed part of 
the copy employed by Yallin. 

6. Manuscript of Bigot. — (Imp. lib., ancien fonds Latin, 
No. 5122, formerly 4207, 3 ; JSTo. 180, de Bigot). In folio, 
on paper, 620 leaves. "Writing of the 16th century, perhaps 
of the year 1536.^ This manuscript contains the entire 
work of Ordericus, except the end of Book YII., from the 
words, " great power,"^ and the whole of Book VIII. 

7. Manuscript of Mareste cVAlge. — (Imp. lib., anc. fonds 
Latin, No. 5123, formerly 4207 A, and 4207 B ; No. 760, 
de Colbert.) This is incontestably the copy which appears 
in the list of the manuscripts of M. Mareste d'Alge, and 
was sent by the first president Pelot, in 1677, to the library 
of Colbert ; for, on the first leaf of the two volumes, the 
signature of the president Mareste d'Alge may still be 
decyphered, although it has been carefully erased. The 
manuscript is in two volumes, folio, on paper, of 340 and 
342 leaves, not including the tables. The Avriting is of the 
16th century, perhaps of the year 1539.^ It appears to 
be a transcript of Bigot's manuscript, and has the same 
omissions. In the margins some articles are added from 
the Annals of Rouen. At the end of the second volume 
there are two charters of Henry I., king of England, in 
favour of the canons of Bayeux, taken from the Liber Ande- 
gavinus. 

8. Manuscript of Baluze. — (Imp. lib., anc. fonds Latin, 
No. 5124, formerly 4207, 3.3, and 4207, 3.3.3 ; No. 184 de 
Baluz), Two volumes, in folio, on paper. The writing of 
the 16th century. The end of book YII., all book YIIL, 
and two or three leaves, containing the end of book XIII., 
are wanting. The copyist has omitted parts which did 
not concern the history of Normandy, and were collected 
by Ordericus from former writers.* 

9. Manuscript of St. Ouen at Rouen. — (Library of Eouen, 
No. 3, 4, of the manuscripts relating to Normandy.) This 
manuscript belonged first to P. Groulart, who enriched it 

^ See the note on the back of fol. 301. 
* Vol. ii. 350. 
a Sect. ii. f. 40. 

'» On this MS. see M. Lechaudd, Extndt dcs chartcs dio Calvados, ii. 
458. 



or OEDEEICTJS TITALIS. Ixxxix 

with notes, and afterwards to the abbey of St. Ouen. Two 
volumes, in folio, on paper ; each volume of 494 pages. The 
writing of the 16th century. The first volume contains 
Books yi. — X., the second, Books XI. — XIII. In Books 
YII. and YIII., there are the same omissions as in the 
manuscripts of Bigot, Mareste d'Alge, and Baluze. These 
details have been communicated to me by M. Charles de 
Baurepaire, keeper of the archives of la Seine-Infericure. 

10. Manuscript of Berne. — (Library of Berne, No. 555, 
in quarto. I borrow' the description of this manuscript, 
which I have not seen, from J. E. Sinner.^ 

" A manuscript on parchment, formerly belonging to 
Bongarsius ; of the 15th century. Odorici, sc. Orderici Vi- 
talis, Historige Ecclesiasticae, lib. IX. — XIII. It was pub- 
lished by Duchesne. He lived, as he tells us himself, in the 
reign of Stephen, king of England, about the year 1141, 
when his history ends. See Fabricius and others. Antony 
Page, quoted by Fabricius, affirms that but few manuscripts 
of Ordericus are extant. Ordencus being an Englishman by 
birth, his history contains many details of affairs in Eng- 
land ; and he is reckoned one of the most eminent writers 
of his age." 

11. 31amiscript of Glanfeuil. — In 1717, Charles du Jar- 
din, prior of St. Evroult,^ mentioned two volumes of Or- 
dericus preserved in the abbey of Glenfeuil. I have not 
been able to discover what has become of them. 

12. Manuscri'pt of St. Taurinus. — (Imp, lib., anc. fonds 
Latin, JN'o. 48G1, formerly 5217, 2, Bigot, l^o. 185.) This 
manuscript belonged to St. Taurinus of Evreux, and, per- 
haps, was executed in the abbey of Eecamp. In folio, parch- 
ment, 159 leaves. The writing of the time of Philip Augustus. 
It contains three passages from Ordericus : 1, (fol. 123), the 
synod of Lillebonne ; 2, (fol. 124), the synod of Eouen ; 
3, (fol. 124, v.), the origiu of the order of Citeaux, &c. I 
shall not dwell on this volume, which is accurately described 
in the printed catalogue of the manuscripts in the Imperial 



^ Catalogiis codinim MSS. hibUotJiecce Bernensis, in. 546. 
^ See the remarks of M. Dubois in M. Guizot's Notice, vol. i. of this 
work, p. xiii. ; also Biographie Universelle, xxxii. 57. 



XC ON THE LITE, WOEK, AND TIMES 

library (iv. 9). I will only remark, that it omits any notice 
in fol: 127 of some extracts from a tract of Hamelin de 
Yerulam, a disciple of Lanfranc, of which Martene^ has 
published some fragments. This piece is followed (fol. 
129, V.) by some verses, the most curious of which are, ou 
the cocks of church towers, and on unworthy pastors. 

In the 16th century William Yallin, a monk of St. 
Evroult,^ and Lacroix du Maine,^ formed the intention of 
having the work of Ordericus Yitalis printed ; but neither 
the one nor the other was able to realize the design. 

The first edition of the Ecclesiastical History was not 
published till 1619, when Andi'ew Duchesne printed it in 
his collection, intitled, Histoi^ice N'ormannorum Scriptores 
(pp. 321 — 392). Duchesne made use of the manuscripts of 
St. Evroult, St. Stephen of Caen, and Bigot. 

Dom Bessin, known by his collection of the councils 
of Normandy, intended, at the beginning of the 18th cen- 
tury, to publish a new edition of Duchesne's collection : 
Charles du Jardin, prior of St. Evroult, assisted him in 
settling the text of Ordericus Yitalis ; but the undertaking 
failed.^ The Hbrary of Eouen is in possession of the tran- 
script executed by the copyists employed by Duchesne, and 
on which Dom Bessin made his notes. 

The continuators of Dom Bouquet have inserted in their 
collection the greatest part of the Ecclesiastical History. 
Tome IX., pp. 10 — 18, contains extracts from Books I., III., 
Y., YI. and YII. ; tome X., pp. 234—236, extracts of 
Books I., III., and YII. ; tome XI., pp. 221—248, extracts 
from Books L, III., lY., Y., YI., and YII. ; tome XII., 
pp. 585—770, extracts from Books I., lY, Y., YI., YII., 
YIII., IX., X., XI., XII., and XIII. The manuscripts of 
St. Evroult, St, Ouen, and the Queen of Sweden, were 
employed for this edition. 

Some fragments of Ordericus were comprised in the 

^ Thes. Anecd.,x. 1453. 

2 See before, p. Ixxxvi., and M. Guizot's Notice, vol. i. p. xiii. 

3 See the Hist. Litteraire de la France, xii. 203. 

* Hist. Litteraire de la Congregation de St. Maur, 481; and Blogra- 
phie Universelle, xxxii. 55. 



01" OEDERICUS YITALIS. ZCl 

extracts from Duchesne's collection, published in 1807 by 
M. Francis Maseres.^ 

In 1825 appeared a Frencli translation of the Ecclesias- 
tical History, in the Collection des Memoires relatifs a 
VHistoire de France, published by M. Guizot. The trans- 
lation was made by M. Louis Dubois, who, at first, intended 
to give an edition of the Latin text, revised from the manu- 
scripts, as he announced in 1822 in the Sio^rtpJiie Tlni- 
verselle? 

In 1853 and 1854, M. Thomas Forester published the 
three first volumes of an English translation of the Ecclesi- 
astical History (TJie JEcclesiastical History of England and 
Normandy, by Ordericus Vitalis, translated, with notes, and 
the Introduction of Gruizot, by Thomas Eorester, M.A. ; 
London, Bohn, 1853 and 1854, in 12mo.) ; one volume has 
still to appear. This translation is made from the text of 
the edition of the Societe de Vllistoire de France. 

"While these Eemarks were in the press, M. 1' Abbe Migne 
has published the 148th volume of his Patrologie, which 
contains the work of Ordericus Vitalis. It would appear 
ti-om the preliminary notice, that this edition is only a re- 
production of the texts of Duchesne and Dom Bouquet. 

Yalognes, April 10, 1855. L. D. 

P.S. The suggestions which M. Le Prevost has been kind 
enough to offer me, during the printing of this Notice, 
have afforded me signal aid in the accomplishment of my 
task. At the same time, typographical exigences have not 
always permitted me to profit by observations, the justice of 
which it was impossible to deny. In giving expression to 
this regret, I cannot forbear quoting the letter in which M. 
Le Prevost brings into view one aspect of the character of 
Ordericus Vitalis, which I have too much left in the shade. 
After administering a friendly rebuke for my not having 
sufficiently directed attention to the merit of certain his- 
torical compositions of the very highest order, such as the 

* " Historiee Anglicanse circa tempus conquestus Angllae," &c. London, 
1807, 4to. 

'■^ Vol. xxxii. 57. [And see a note in M. Guizot's Notice, vol. i. p. xii. 
of this edition.] 



XCll OIT THE LIFE OF OEDEEICTJS VITALIS. 

life of Peter de Maule, tlie last Moments of William the 
Conqueror, the death of Thierri de Mathonville, and that of 
Serlo, bishop of Seez, my accomplished master, adds : — 

" Our author most excels in pourtrayiug the 

inspirations of religious faith — of a faith both fervent and 
pure, and sometimes even enlightened — ^just as they ex- 
isted in his own bosom. I think that no preceding writer, 
none of his cotemporaries, nor even of his successors, have 
better drawn the character of the true Christian. Else- 
where, he too often falls into pedantry and exaggeration, 
and betrays his ignorance of political principles ; but there 
he is on his own ground, and the inspiration flows from its 



THE 

ECCLESIASTICAL HISTOET 

OF 

ORDERICUS VITALIS. 



BOOK XII. 

Ch. XXI. Tlie council of Rheims — The pope's visit to the 
emperor — Proceedings of the council — The decrees. 

In the middle of October Pope Callxtus came to Eheims ^ 
with the cardinals of the Eoman church, and staying there 
fifteen days held a council,'^ in which he concerted measures 
with the shepherds of the Lord's flock for the good of the 
church. There were assembled at Eheims fifteen arch- 
bishops, more than two hundred bishops, with many abbots 
and other ecclesiastical dignitaries. These prelates, sum- 
moned by an apostolical precept from Italy and Germany, 
France and Spain, Brittany and England, the islands of the 
Ocean, and all the provinces of the West, met together for 
the love of the Saviour, and ready to pay a willing obedience 
to his commands. The archbishop of Mayence ^ hastened 
to be present at the council of Eheims, accompanied by 
seven bishops ; and an escort of five hundred men-at-arms 
watched over their safety during the journey. The pope 

* The reader's attention is particularly called to the account of the 
council of Rheims given by our author in this chapter. The proceedings 
are described in such detail, and with so much fidelity, that there is reason 
to believe he was present himself, perhaps in attendance on his superior, 
the abbot of St. Evroult. 

' The council was opened on the 20th October, 1119, and closed on the 
30th. The pope arrived at Rheims on the 19th October, went to Mouzon 
on the 2"2nd, returned to Rheims on the 26th, and staid there until the 
10th November. 

^ Albert, or Aldebert, the first archbishop of Mayence of that name, 
vas the son of Sigebert, count of Saarbruch. (1109 — 14th July, 1 137.) 
VOL. IV. B 



2 OEDEEICrS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXI. 

received the intelligence of their near approach with lively 
joy, and sent Hugh, count of Troyes,^ to meet and congra- 
tulate them, at the head of some troops of horse. 

The king of England permitted the prelates of his king- 
dom to attend the council,^ but positively forbade their 
bringing before it any sort of grievance ; for he said to the 
bishops : " I will render full justice to every one who prefers 
a complaint to me, in my o^n land ; I discharge yearly the 
payments paid by my predecessors to the Eoman church, 
but at the same time I maintain the privileges which were 
granted in ancient times and belong to me. Go then, and 
salute our lord the pope on my behalf, and listen with hu- 
mility to the apostolical precepts, but see that no superflu- 
ous novelties are introduced into my kingdom."' 

The council was held in the metropolitan church. There 
the pope celebrated mass on the fourteenth of the calends 
of November,* and consecrated Thurstan of Bayeux arch- 
bishop of York,^ conferring on him the privilege of not being 

' Hugh I., count of Champagne, the eldest brother of Stephen, Count 
de Blois, made three pilgrimages to the Holy Land, where he ended his 
days in the habit of a Knight Templar. 

'2 Florence of Worcester informs us that only the bishops of Exeter, 
Durham, St. David's, and Llandaff, who were then in Normandy, attended 
the council, and they arrived late. The archbishop of Canterbury was 
prevented, it is said, by illness from being present. 

3 An injunction worthy of an English king, but Henry's policy and 
personal ambition did not permit him to act up to it; and we shall 
presently find him on good terms with Calixtus after a flagrant invasion of 
the liberties of the English church. 

* Sunday, 19th October. 

^ This consecration, obtained, Florence of Worcester states, by bribing 
" the Romans," involved questions of the greatest importance. Thurstan, 
who was the eldest brother of Ouen, bishop of Bayeux, after having been 
chaplain to Henry, was elevated to the archbishopric of York as long 
before as 1113, but, like most of his predecessors, he refused to submit to 
the primacy of the see of Canterbury, rather than which he was ready to 
relinquish his preferment, and deferred his consecration. With some 
difficulty, as Florence of Worcester and Roger of Wendover inform us, 
he obtained the king's licence to attend the council of Rheims, but under 
a solemn promise that he would not accept consecration from the pope. 
Henry had also sent to Calixtus requesting him not to consecrate Thurstan, 
and had received a reply which it is at least very difficult to reconcile ^ath 
his subsequent conduct. The king was so incensed at the double breach 
of the pledges thus given, that he prohibited Thurstan from returning to 
England, or residing in any part of his continental dominions. 



A.D. 1119.] OPENING OF COTJNCIL OF RHEIMS. 3 

subject to tlie metropolitan see of Canterbury, but of hold- 
ing equal rank in his own province. On the Sunday follow- 
ing, the pope consecrated to the bishopric of Liege, Frede- 
rick, brother of Herman, count of Namur.^ This prelate 
died within three years from poison given him by his rivals, 
and his sanctity is now rendered conspicuous by the 
splendid miracles wrought at his tomb. 

On the twelfth of the calends of November [21st Octo- 
ber^], the chairs of the bishops were placed in the church of 
St. Mary the virgin, before the crucifix, and the several me- 
tropolitans took theii' seats in the order of precedence to 
which they were entitled according to the ancient decrees of 
the Eoman popes. Ealph, surnamed Le Yert, archbishop of 
Eheims,^ Leothric archbishop of Bourges, Thirstan arch- 
bishop of York, Humbert archbishop of Lyons, and Geoffrey 
archbishop of Eouen, Daimbert archbishop of Sens, Grilbert 
archbishop of Tours, and his successor, Hildebert of Mans,* 
Baudri archbishop of Dol, and eight other archbishops, with 
their suffragans, and the deputies of those who were absent, 
as well as many abbots and a great concourse of monks and 
clergy composed this assembly, prefiguring the last judg- 
ment, in reference to which Isaiah, in the spirit of prophecy 
and as it were pointing to it with his finger, exclaimed in 
the fulness of his awe and exultation : " The Lord will come 
to judgment with the elders of his people and the princes 
thereof."^ 

The apostolical throne was placed on a raised plat- 
form facing the doors of the church ; and when mass had 
ended Pope Calixtus took his seat upon it, having before 

1 Frederick, the second son of Albert, count of Namur. He died by 
poison on the 30th June, 1120, or the 27th March, 1121. 

- We think that our author has made a mistake of a day, and that the 
council was not actually opened till Monday, October 20. It sat in the 
nave of the cathedral, from the great crucifix at the entrance of the choir 
to the west door. 

^ He is mentioned before, b. viii. c. 20 (vol. iii. p. 5, of this edition), 
where a literal error in the archbishop's surname crept into the text. It is 
correctly spelt in the note. 

* Gilbert did not die till 1124, and it was not till some months after- 
wards that he was replaced by Hildebert, bishop of Mans, so that if, as 
our author states, he took his seat at the council among the archbishops, it 
was only by courtesy. 

* Isaiah iii. 14. 

B 2 



4 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH. XXI. 

him tlie cardinals from E-ome, in the first rank; namely 
Conon bishop of Proeneste, Boson bishop of Porto, Lam- 
bert bishop of Ostia, John of Crema/ and Haton bishop of 
Viviers.^ These cardinals discussed all questions with more 
address than any other member of the council, and their 
extensive learning admirably fitted them for making full re- 
plies. The deacon Chrysogonus, \A'earing a dalmatic, stood 
near the pope, with the volume of the canons in his hand, 
ready to cite from it the authentic decrees of the fathers of 
the church as occasion required. Six other deacons, wear- 
ing tunics or dalmatics, stood around, and imposed silence 
when, as often occurred, the dissentients pressed their argu- 
ments with disorderly vehemence. 

First however, as soon as the litany and public prayers 
were ended, the pope began to explain in a Latin discourse, 
with great simplicity and piety the gospel in which Jesus 
commanded his disciples to go before him to the other side 
of the sea of Galilee.^ On this he eloquently commented, 
showing that as when the evening came the wind was con- 
trary, so the ship of the holy church is exposed to peril in 
the waves of this troublesome world, and tossed with the 
storms of trials and tribulations of various kinds ; but, not- 
withstanding, at our Lord's approach, the furious blasts of 
the wicked are suddenly calmed, and the children of peace 
are restored to the state of tranquillity which is the object 
of their desires. The pope having concluded his sermon, 
the cardinal-archbishop, Conon, rose and gave an eloquent 
admonition to the reverend abbots on their pastoral duties. 



* John of Crema was not bishop, but a native, of that city. A further 
notice of this per.-'on will be found in the course of the present chapter. 

* Atton, or Hatton, bishop of Viviers. Notwithstanding the eminent 
qualities of this prelate, and the important part he took in several councils, 
the information we possess respecting him is very scanty. All we can add 
to what is said of him by our author in a subsequent part of this chapter 
is, that he was named to the episcopal see of Viviers (Ard^che) in 1117; 
that in the month of October in the same year he assisted at a council in 
Rome ; that on February 27, 1119, he had the honour to entertain Pope 
Calixtus XVII., his former metropolitan, when he consecrated his 
cathedral of St. Vincent at Viviers; and then in 1124 we find him 
succeeded, by Jaucerand, or Gaucerand, the first bishop of Viviers of that 
name. 

' Mark vi. 45; perhaps the gospel for the day. 



A.D. 1119.] lewis's appeal to the council. 5 

Quoting the words of Jacob from the book of Gi-enesis/ be 
declared that the prelates of the church ought to exercise 
the same diligence in the care of the Lord's flock in spiri- 
tual things which Jacob exhibited in his management ol the 
sheep of his uncle Laban. 

King Lewis now entered the council, attended by the 
chief lords of France, and ascending the platform where the 
pope was seated in state above the rest of the assembly, he 
opened his complaint and supported it by reasonable argu- 
ments. The king was fluent of speech, his face was pale,^ 
and he was tall in stature and corpulent. "I come," he 
said, " to this sacred council, with my barons, to demand in- 
quiry and advice ; and I pray you, my lord pope, and you, 
fathers, to listen to what I have to say. The king of Eng- 
land, with whom I have been long in alliance, has inflicted 
many serious injuries on me and my subjects. He has 
seized .N; ormandy, a fief of my crown, with force and arms ; 
and contrary to all right and reason has treated E-obert, the 
duke of Normandy, in a most scandalous manner. For 
although the duke was my vassal, and his own brother and 
liege-lord, after molesting him in every sort of way, at 
last he made him prisoner, and has detained him in^ a 
long captivity to the present day. See how he has disin- 
herited and driven into hopeless exile AVilliam, the duke's 
son and heir apparent, who now presents himself to this 
assembly in my com-pany. I have sent bishops and counts, 
and other suitable persons to claim from the king of Eng- 
land the restoration of the captive duke, but I have obtained 
no satisfaction from him in this aftair. He caused to be 
arrested in his own court,^ Eobert de Belesme, the envoy 
who was entrusted by me to convey my message to hina, 
and put him in fetters in a cruel dungeon, where he is 
confined to this hour. Count Theobald * is my vassal, but 



* See Genesis xxix. and xxx. 

'-' This pallor was the effect of the poison which had been administered 
to Lewis through the means of his step -mother Bel trade. See vol. iu. 
p. 354. 

3 At Bonneville-sur-Touque. See vol. iii. p. 442. The choice of 
Robert de Belesme for this mission to his suzerain, already irritated 
against him, was not a happv one. 

* Theobald, Count de Blois. 



6 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.XII. CH. XXI. 

at liis uncle's instigation he lias iniquitously revolted from 
me, and, supported by bis wealtb and power, bas taken up 
arms, and, breaking bis fealty, engaged in atrocious bosti- 
lities against me, and troubled my kingdom to tbe detri- 
ment of many persons. He seized, and to tbis day keeps in 
prison, William Count de Nevers,^ a good and loyal man, 
wbom you well know, as be was returning from tbe siege of 
a castle belonging to an excommunicated robber, wbicb be 
made a real den of tbieves and devil's dyke. Tbe reverend 
prelates bad justly opposed tbe enterprises of Tbomas de 
Marie,- wbo made plundering expeditions tbrougb tbe 
wbole province. Tbey therefore engaged me to besiege tbis 
common enemy of pilgrims and all bonest folk, and u^iaitiug 
with tbe barons of France to put do^Ti tbe outlaws, raising 
en masse tbe w^bole Cbristian population to engage in tbe 
contest witb godly zeal. It was in returning peaceably from 
tbis siege, witb my permission, tbat tbis lord was made pri- 
soner, and be is still kept in captivity by Count Theobald, 
although many nobles have from time to time earnestly be- 
sought him, on my part, to liberate tbe count ; and all bis 
territories have been laid under excommunication by tbe 
bishops." 

The king, having made these statements and others of the 
like sort, which were confirmed by tbe allegations of all the 
French wbo were present at tbe council, Greofl'rey, archbishop 
of Eouen, witb bis suffragan bishops and abbots, rose, and 
began to rebut the charges and advocate the cause- of the 
king of England. But be was interrupted by the clamours 
of the opposite party, and could not obtain a hearing ; for a 
great number of adversaries were present, wbo took um- 
brage at bis defence of tbe victorious prince. 

^ William II., Count de Nevers. It was in 1116 that he had been 
made prisoner by the count de Blois, while he was returning from an 
expedition against Thomas de Marie, undertaken at the instance of Lewis- 
le-Gros. 

2 Thomas I. de Marie, Count d' Amiens, Baron de Boves, and Sire de 
Couci, by the grace of God. The domain of Marie, of which he bore the 
name during the life of his father Enguerrand de Couci, came to the 
family through Ada de Marie, countess of Rouci, his mother. He joined 
the first crusade, and distinguished himself at the sieges of Nice and Jeru- 
salem. Notwithstanding this, he was a very bad man, and especially a 
cruel enemy of the monks. 



A.D. 1119.] VAEIOUS APPEALS TO THE COUNCIL. 7 

Meanwhile, Hildegarde, countess of Poictiers/ came for- 
ward with her attendants, and eloquently pleaded her cause, 
speaking loud and very distinctly ; and the whole council 
listened to her complaint with deep attention. She stated 
that she had been repudiated by her husband, who had taken 
to his bed, in defiance of her marriage rights, Malberge, the 
wife of the viscount of Chatellerault -^ and the pope having 
inquired whether AVilliam count of Poictiers had come to 
the council according to his order, a young prelate, William, 
bishop of Saintes, and several other bishops and abbots from 
Aquitaine, stood up and excused their duke, alleging that 
he had set out on his journey to attend the council, but had 
fallen sick and was detained on the road. It ended in the 
pope's admittiug the excuse of the count's illness, adjourn- 
ing the case, and appointing a certain day on which the 
count should appear and plead to the charge in the papal 
court, and either take back his lawful wdfe, or undergo the 
sentence of excommunication for having unjustly repudi- 
ated her. 

Next, Ouen the Bearded,^ bishop of Evreux, preferred a 
charge against Amalric, for having shamefully expelled him 
from his see, and abominably burnt his episcopal residence. 
Thereupon, Amalric' s chaplain immediately started up, and 
had the insolence to meet the accusation by loudly and 
publicly asserting in the presence of the whole assembly, 
that the bishop was a liar. "It was not by Amalric," he 
said, " but by your own iniquity, that you were justly 
expelled and your palace burnt. He indeed, having been 
disinherited by the king through your false and malicious 
intrigues, recovered the territories that were his own, like a 

1 Hildegarde was the second wife of William VII., count of Poictiers, a 
nobleman distinguished for his profligacy. His first wife, Philippa, sepa- 
rated from him, and retired to Fontevrault, in 1116. The result of 
Hildegarde's appeal is not known. 

' Aimeri, Viscount de Chatellerault, had, in 1109, a wife named Dan- 
gerosa, and there is no record of a second marriage with Mauberge. It 
was probably the portrait of this lady that the count of Poictiers wore on 
his breastplate. 

^ This prelate suffered his beard to grow as a sign of mourning. See 
vol. ii. p. 461. He had nothing to reply to the charge of falsehood made 
against him by Amalric's chaplain, and his imprudent appeal to the council 
could only expose him to humiliation. 



8 OEDEEICUS VITALTS. [b.XII. CH.XXI, 

brave knigM, by tbe power of his arms and tbe support of 
his friends. Thereupon, the king laid siege to the city at 
the head of large bodies of his troops, and by your order set 
the place on fire, and burnt to the ground all the churches 
and houses. This holy synod will perceive and judge 
whether Ouen or Amalric deserves most condemnation for 
the burning of the churches." 

As the Erench took the side of Amalric against the 
Normans, a violent altercation ensued between them, but, 
silence being at length obtained, the pope spoke as follows : 

" My dearly beloved : do not, I pray you, multiply words, 
and contend to no purpose, but as God's children strive to 
the utmost to maintain peace. The Son of God, we know, 
descended from heaven to bring peace on earth, and in his 
mercy took a human body in the womb of the immaculate 
Virgin Mary, in order to allay the mortal conflict which 
originated in the sin of our first parent, and restore through 
his mediation peace between God and man, and reconcile 
the angelic with human nature. It is the bounden duty of 
us who are his vicars on earth to follow his steps in all 
things. As the ministers and stewards of the dispensations 
of God, we must endeavour to promote the peace and 
welfare of all his members ; for I call Christian people the 
members of Christ, inasmuch as he has redeemed them with 
his precious blood. Amidst the tumults of war and the 
troubles of the world, who can give himself up worthily to 
spiritual contemplations, or meditate as he ought on the love 
of the Lord ? Hostile movements distract and loosen the 
ties of the people, and drive them to wander and fall head- 
long to destruction in the gulf of sin. The churches are 
violated, sacred things polluted, and all sorts of iniquities 
abound. The clergy are grievously harassed, and called off 
from religious pursuits in a variety of ways. Those who are 
steadfast in the worship of God are filled with alarms, are 
exposed to cruel persecutions, and become faint-hearted, not 
knowing what to do. Eegular discipline is interrupted and 
dissolved, and those who are set free are hurried into all 
sorts of crimes. Ecclesiastical rigour is relaxed, a fatal dis- 
solution takes place every where, and modesty and chastity 
are lamentably exposed. The fury of the wicked stalks 
abroad without shame, and numbers of sinners are daily 



A.D. 1119.] DISCOUSSE OF THE POPE. 9 

swept into perdition. We ought therefore on all occasions 
to embrace fervently what we plainly see to be the nurse of 
all good people, to preserve it incessantly, to enjoin it on all, 
to preach it both by word and example. Christ himself, 
when his passion was near, bequeathed it to his disciples, 
saying : * Peace I leave with you ; my peace I give unto 
you.' When he rose again from the dead, he again re- 
minded them of it, saying : ' Peace be unto you.' Where 
peace reigns there is great quiet and tranquillity, while 
sorrow and tribulation harass and torment all who are 
corroded by anger and stimulated by discord. Peace is the 
gentle and kindly tie of those who dwell together, the 
common good of all rational creatures. The inhabitants of 
heaven rejoice in their indissoluble union in this bond, and 
mortals are in constant need of being thus united, for W'ith- 
out it the wicked both fear and are feared, and being never 
secure, are in trouble and grief. 

" This virtue then which I earnestly covet, and, from the 
authority of the Holy Scriptures and considerations of 
general utility, highly commend, I shall use my utmost 
endeavours to search out, and to propagate, by God's help, 
throughout his church. I enjoin the observance of the 
Truce of God, as Pope Urban, of blessed memory, decreed 
it at the council of Clermont ; and I confirm by the authority 
of God, St. Peter the Apostle, and all the saints, the otlier 
decrees which were there sanctioned by the holy fathers. 
The emperor of Germany has invited me to meet him at the 
castle of Mouzon,^ and make peace with him to the advan- 
tage of holy mother church. I shall therefore proceed there 
to labour for peace, taking with me my brothers, the bishops 
of Eheims and Eouen, and some others of my brethren and 
fellow bishops, who I think may be of especial service in 
this treaty. I command all other bishops and abbots to 
wait our return, which by God's help shall be as speedy as 
possible. I enjoin then all to remain in attendance here, 
nor do I even permit Geoffrey, abbot of St. Theodoric,'* to 

^ Mouzon stands on the river Meuse, near Sedan, in the Ardennes. 

'^ Saiut-Thiery, eight leagues from Rheims. There were former relations 
between the pope and this abbey ; William, who was abbot of it in 1117, 
having given him important assistance in founding the abbey of Bonnevul, 
the first house of the Cistercian order in Dauphiny. 



10 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXI. 

depart, altliougli his monastery is very near this city. Pray 
for us, that our Lord Grod would vouchsafe to grant us a 
prosperous journey, and mercifully overrule all our efforts 
for the peace and welfare of the universal church. 

" On my return, I will carefully discuss all your complaints 
and arguments, Giod helping me, in the best manner I can, 
that this holy assembly may be dismissed, and return home 
with peace and joy. After that, I will go to the king of 
England, my spiritual son, and also my cousin by the ties of 
consanguinity,^ and by my entreaties and exhortations will 
engage him and Count Theobald, his nephew, with the 
others who are at variance, to do justice to all the world, 
and to receive the same from all in the love of God ; and, 
having made peace according to Grod's law, refrain from all 
hostile enterprises, and rejoice in peace and security, with 
the people under their rule. As for those who refuse to 
yield to my remonstrances and obstinately persevere in their 
unruly course, against all right and the public peace, I will 
inflict on them the terrible sentence of excommunication, 
unless they repent of their wickedness and make satisfaction 
for their past crimes according to the canons." Having said 
this, the assembly of the faithful was dissolved. 

On the morrow, being "Wednesday,^ the pope journeyed to 
Mouzon with a noble retinue, and on the Sunday following^ 
he returned to Eheims, weary and sick with fatigue and 
fear. Meanwhile, the vast number of magistrates assembled 
at the council anxiously expected the pope's return. Many 
of them w^hom the apostolical summons had convoked from 
distant countries, having nothing to do at Eheims, spent 
their money without profit, and grieved at the neglect to 
which their affairs at home were exposed in the interval. 
When at length the pope returned, he held sittings of the 
council for four days, and dealt with various matters relating 
to the different churches. 

On the Monday, as soon as the pope had taken his seat, 
John of Crema, a learned and eloquent priest, rose, and gave 
a detailed account of the occurrences which happened in the 

^ Calixtus was, through his grandmother, Alice of Normandy, cousin- 
german of Henry I. 

' Wednesday, October 22. 

' Sunday, October 26. : 



A.D. 1119.] THE pope's JOURNEY TO MOUZON. 11 

journey they had just completed. " Tour holiness," he said, 
"knows that we reached Mouzon in safety; but we met 
with adverse circumstances which prevented our reaping any 
profit. We lost no time on our journey, but we returned 
still faster than we went.^ In fact we found that the 
emperor had come to the place of meeting with a great 
army, and, as if he was about to fight a battle, was at the 
head of nearly thirty thousand men. On learning this, we 
shut up our lord the pope in the castle already mentioned, 
which stands on the domains of the archbishop of Eheims, 
and we would not allow him to quit the castle, though we 
went from it to the appointed conference. "We often sought 
opportunities of speaking with the emperor in private, but as 
soon as we had separated from the crowd and had drawn 
aside with him for a little space, we were surrounded by 
numbers of his retainers, who, privy to his wishes and 
deceit, brandished their swords and lances, and caused us 
great alarm ; for we were not come in arms to wage war, 
but were men of peace, whose object was to procure tran- 
quillity for the universal church. The crafty emperor spoke 
to us perfidiously, and put us off* with a variety of subter- 
fuges, but most of all he desired the presence of the pope, 
in order that he might make him prisoner. Thus we spent 
the day to no purpose, but carefully kept from him the holy 
father, remembering with what treachery this same emperor 
entered Rome and captured Pope Paschal before the very 
altar in the basilica of St. Peter the Apostle. At last the 
shades of night separated us, and each returned to his own 
quarters. Apprehensive however that some greater mis- 
fortune might befall us, we resolved on retracing our steps 
to Eheims, or rather betaking ourselves to flight in all haste ; 
for we greatly feared that this formidable tyrant might 
follow in pursuit of us with his numberless legions. I have 
now said enough on this matter." 

The archbishop of Cologne ^ sent envoys vdth letters to 

^ Mouzon lies at least twenty-five leagues from Rheims. It must have 
been a harassing journey under the circumstances, and considering what 
the roads must have been in those days when crossing the Ardennes. The 
place was well chosen for the conference with the emperor, it belonging to 
the archbishop of Rheims, and lying on the frontier between France and 
Germany. 

^ Frederick, brother of Engelbert. marquis of Frioul, and duke of 
Carinthia (1090— October 25, 1151). ' 



12 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXI. 

our lord the pope, and having offered his submission con- 
cluded a treaty of peace and alliance with him ; he also 
truly surrendered, as a mark of his friendship, the son of 
Peter de Leon,^ whom he held as an hostage. Having an- 
nounced this, as a cause of especial satisfaction and extra- 
ordinary joy, he pointed ^vith his finger to a young man of 
a dark but pallid complexion, looking more like a Jew or a 
Saracen than a Christian, and who, though splendidly 
dressed, was deformed in person. The French and many 
others, perceiving him seated near the pope, treated him 
with derision, and imprecated shame upon him and sudden 
ruin, on account of the odium attached to his father, whom 
they regarded as a most iniquitous usurer. 

After this the archbishop of Lyons stood up with his 
suffragans and thus addressed the council : — " The bishop 
of Macon makes complaint to this holy synod, that Pons de 
Cluni has inflicted much loss and injury on himself and his 
church, having forcibly deprived him of his churches and 
tithes, and the services due to him, and refused him fitting 
honours, and the ordination of his clergy." As soon as the 
primate of Lyons had finished his plaint, many bishops, 
monks, and clerks, followed it up, and with loud clamours 

1 Peter de Leon, the third of that name, and afterwards antipope, by 
the name of Anaclete, on the death of Henorius II. He was the grandson 
of another Peter de L^on, originally a Jew, but converted and baptized by 
Pope Leo IX. This person was very rich and powerful, and a man of 
great ability. He rendered important services to the Roman church ; as 
did his son Peter de Leon, the second of that name, particularly in the 
wars Avhich arose out of the question of investitures. Pascal II. entrusted 
him with the com.mand of the tower of Crescentius, row called the castle 
of St. Angelo. Distinguished, like his father, by his influence and talents, 
he gave hospitable entertainment in his palace at Rome to Urban II , who 
there ended his days. Peter de Leon wrote his epitaph, which is pre- 
served. See vol. iii. p. 194, and the note. He also used his powerful 
interest to confirm the election of Calixtus II. His son, the third of the 
same name, after completing his studies at Cluni, was created cardinal- 
deacon by Pascal II., and cardinal-priest by Calixtus IL, and is the person 
mentioned in the text as given up to the pope by the archbishop of 
Cologne. At a subsequent period he was sent to France as legate, having 
for his colleague his future competitor, Cardinal Gregory, of the family of 
the Papi. We shall find them arrive together at Sdez, at the close of the 
year 1122. 

This illustrious family assumed hereditarily the name of Leon in honour 
of Pope Leo IX. Our author does wrong in stigmatizing them as greedy 
usurers ; but he probably thought that he could not throw too great a slur 
on the person and family of a future antipope. 



A.D. 1119.] APPEAL AGAINST THE MONKS OF CLITNI. 13 

complained of the many losses thej had incurred, and the 
unjust usurpations by the monks of Cluni. Several of them 
made a great tumult, and for a long time poured forth in a 
torrent of abuse all the bitterness they entertained in their 
thoughts. 

At length silence being restored, the abbot of Cluni 
rose, with a great number of his monks, and by a short 
reply, speaking with a modest and gentle voice, refuted the 
charges of his accusers. This illustrious abbot had been a 
monk of Vallombrose, and was son of the count of Melguil, 
and godson of Pope Paschal, by whose order he was edu- 
cated among the monks of Cluni. He was still youug and 
short in stature, but, docile from his earliest youth, he had 
become firmly established in virtuous practices,^ and was 
extremely affable to those with whom he lived. He had a 
fair complexion and handsome features, and, as we have 
already said, was distinguished both for his manners and his 
birth, nearly related to kings and emperors ; pious and 
learned, with so many endowments and advantages he stood 
firm and inflexible against the attacks of his rivals. To the 
many charges with which he was so clamorously assailed in 
the council, he replied : " The abbey of Cluni is subject 
only to the Eoman church, and depends upon the pope, 
and from the time of its foundation it has obtained from the 
sovereign pontiffs privileges which these complainants are 
endeavouring to suppress and annul by their violence. But 
be it known to you, holy fathers here present, that I and 
my brethren contend for the preservation of the rights and 
possessions of our monastery, as they were held by the 
venerable Hugh and our other predecessors, and have been 
handed down to us. We have done wrong or injury to 
no one; we have neither despoiled others of their pos- 
sessions, nor do we covet those belonging to others ; but 
because we firmly defend the endowments which have been 
made to us by faithful men for the love of God, we are 
called usurpers, and suffer many unjust reproaches. Por 
myself, I am not over-anxious in this matter ; let my lord 
the pope defend, if he will, the church which is his own 

^ From the remarks made in a former note, vol. iii. p. 437, it will 
appear that Ponce, abbot of Cluni, was quite unworthy of the praise here 
given him by our author. 



14 OEDEEICrS TIT ALTS. [e.XII. CH.XXr. 

peculiar ; it is for him to guard and protect the churches, 
tithes, and other possessions, which he himself committed 
to my charge." 

The pope commanded that the judgment, on what he had 
heard on both sides, should be deferred until the next day. 
On the morrow John of Crema rose and commenced the 
exordium of his discourse in this manner : — " Inasmuch as 
it is right that our lord the pope should attentively listen 
to your complaints, and should succour you faithfully on all 
occasions, as a father does with regard to his children, and 
he ought to render you this service, not once only, but from 
time to time, it is fitting and just that he should himself 
have some footing in your dioceses, some religious house or 
other residence, or possession, held freely, either by his own 
choice, or bestowed on him by the offerings of the faithful." 

This having been conceded with universal consent, John 
thus proceeded with his discourse : — " It is now two hun- 
dred years and more since the monastery of Cluni^ was 
founded ; and from its very foundation it was given to the 
pope of Eome, by whom it was endowed with many signal 
privileges in an assembly of the cardinals, and before many 
witnesses of different dignities. It is weU known, and is 
quite clear, to those who have read the charters, that 
Gerald of Aquitaine erected the monastery of Cluni on his 
own fief, and going to Rome devoutly granted it to the 
pope ; nor did he intend that the act should be nugatory, 
for he then made an offering of twelve gold pieces to the 
pope, and appointed that the like sum should be paid by the 
monks annually. This monastery has therefore never been 
subject to any prince or prelate to the present day, except 
the pope ; and, through the divine mercy, bountifully be- 
stowed upon it, both its revenues and the number of the 
monks have continually increased, and hence the sweet 
savour of its good report has been shed abroad throughout 
the world, and the example of its sanctity has a wide influ- 
^ Cluni was founded in 940 by William I., count of Auvergne, and duke 
of Aquitaine. The charter of foundation is preserved in the Acta SS. ord. 
S. Benedicti, t. v. p. 78. We find in it no clause precisely enjoining direct 
subjection to the see of Rome, nor reserving an annual rent of twelve 
pieces of gold, but only ten for five years. It is well known that the 
Roman chancery was not scrupulous in the means it used for extending its 
rights. 



A.D. 1119.] CASE 0? THE MONKS OE CLTJNI. 15 

ence among those who with devout minds aspire to a life of 
regular discipline. The monks assembled in chapter elect 
their abbot according to the rule of our holy father St. 
Benedict ; thej send the abbot-elect to the pope with letters 
testimonial ; and the pope consecrates him and gives him 
the benediction according to the ecclesiastical canons. 

" The whole body of the faithful believe and confess that 
he who, by the ordinance of Grod, fills the apostolical see, 
has the power of binding and loosing ; for he is the vicar of 
the prince of the apostles, to whom it was said by our divine 
Master : ' Thou art Peter ; and upon this rock 1 will build 
my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. 
And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, 
and whomsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound 
in heaven.' The apostolic see is therefore the hinge and 
the head of all churches, established as such by the Lord 
himself, and by no other. As the door is directed by the 
hinge, so all the churches are, by the disposition of Grod, 
governed by the authority of the apostolical see. You see 
that the pre-eminence over the other apostles was conferred 
on St. Peter by the Son of God. Hence he is called Cephas, 
because he is the chief and first of all the apostles ; and 
it is fitting that the members should follow the impulse 
given by the head. "Who can resist him whom the Lord 
has invested with so great a power ? "Who shall presume 
to loose one whom Peter has bound, or to bind one whom 
Peter has loosed ? "Wherefore, since the abbey of Cluni is 
subject to the pope only, and that he, who by God's decree 
is above all others upon earth, grants it his protection, the 
authority of Pome confirms the privileges of the monks of 
Cluni, and in the name of God prohibits all the sons of the 
church from violating the ancient immunities of the monks, 
despoiling them of the possessions long since bestowed upon 
them, or oppressing them by new and unusual exactions. 
Let them possess in peace all they have, in order that they 
may always serve God with tranquil minds." 

While John of Crema was thus addressing them, 
many of the bishops, and other persons who were neighbours 
of the monks of Cluni, started up and created great disorder 
in the assembly, and although they did not venture openly 
to impugn the pope's commands, they were far from admit- 



16 OEDEKICUS TITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXI. 

ting all the assertions wliich the cardinal had so resolutely 
made. In the altercations which took place various opinions 
were freely thrown out, emanating in copious streams from 
the clear fountains of a profound wisdom ; but it is impos- 
sible for me to report in detail all that passed in the council. 
Acute reasoners discussed a vast number of questions con- 
cerning ecclesiastical affairs with consummate ability, and 
quoted many authorities which made them clear to attentive 
hearers. There Grerard bishop of Angouleme,^ Haton 
bishop of Viviers, Greoifrey bishop of Chartres," and William 
bishop of Chalons,^ took the lead in the council by their 
powerful language, echoing lii^e thunder, and poured forth 
torrents of an eloquence which was the envy of the most 
accomplished scholars and the most ardent votaries of learn- 
ing. Meanwhile, the decease of the cardinal bishop of 
Frascati,* who had died on his journey, was announced to 
the council by a special messenger ; and a letter was read 
from Clemence, the pope's sister,^ on behalf of her son 
Baldwin, count of Flanders. For these, and for all the 
faithful departed, the afflicted chief shepherd, with the 
venerable council, made intercession to God. 

On the last day on which the council sat, the bishop of 
Barcelona,'' who, though short in stature and reduced to a 
skeleton, was a model of learning, eloquence, and piety, 
preached an able and profound sermon on the royal and 

^ Gerard, bishop of Angouleme, was a Norman and native of the Bessin, 
being the son of a man of obscure station. Gerard was made bishop of 
Angouleme in 1101, legate from 1106 — 1130, played an important part at 
the council of Lateran, and fulfilled a mission of no small danger at the court 
of the emperor respecting the great question of investitures in 1112. He 
was a partisan of the antipnpe Anaclete, and became his legate; was arf^h- 
bishop of Bourdeaux from 1132 — 1135, when he returned to his bishopric 
of Angouleme, and died there in the beginning of the year following. He 
is accused of having been bribed by Henry I. to oppose his legantine 
authority to the marriage of Robert, the young heir of the duchy of Nor- 
mandy. Haton, bishop of Viviers, has been mentioned in a former note. 

2 Geoffrev de L^ves, bishop of Chartres, 1116— January 24, 1149; 
legate, 1132—1143 

' The famous William de Champeaux, bishop of Chalons-sur-Mame, 
1113— January 18, 1121. 

* This cardinal, named Divitius, survived till 1122. 

^ Clemence, countess of Flanders, the pope's sii<ter, and mother of Count 
Baldwin-a-la-Hache, died at Roslar, June 17, in the preceding summer. 

" St. Oldegaire, bishop of Barcelona, was raised to the see in 1116, 



A.D. 1119.] DECREES OF THE COUNCIL AT EHEIMS. 17 

sacerdotal authorities, to which all who were able to hear it 
listened with intense eagerness. After this, the pope pro- 
nounced with grief the sentence of excommunication against 
Charles Henry, the emperor, and the Enemy of God,^ Burdin, 
the anti-pope, and their abettors, associating with them certain 
other criminals, who although often openly censured, had 
continued impenitent ; against these he launched the same 
anathema, until such time as they amended their lives. 
Finally, he commanded the decrees of the council of Eheims 
to be published. John of Crema dictated them under the 
direction of the Eoman cardinals ; John of Eouen, a monk 
of St. Ouen, wrote them on parchment ; and Chrysogonus, 
deacon of the holy Eoman church, read them publicly with 
an audible voice. The following is a copy of the decrees of 
the council : — 

" Bv the judgment of the Holy Ghost, and the authority 
of the apostolical see, we confirm the decisions of the holy 
fathers, respecting the crime of simony. AVherefore, if any 
one shall, either by himself or by another person employed 
by him, buy or sell any bishopric, abbey, deanery, or arch- 
deaconry, cure of souls, provostship, prebend, altar, or any 
other ecclesiastical benefice, or promotions, ordinations, con- 
secrations, dedication of churches, clerical tonsure, astall in the 
choir, or any ecclesiastical ofiice or function, both the buyer 
and seller shall forfeit his dignity, office, or benefice : and 
if he do not repent, he shall be excommunicated and cut off 
in all respects from the church of God which he has injured. 

" We utterly prohibit the investiture of bishoprics and 
abbeys by lay hands. Wherefore every layman who shall 
hereafter presume to give investiture shall be subject to the 
penalty of excommunication. Moreover, the person invested 
shall be deprived of the dignity with which he was invested, 
without any hope of recovering it. 

"We decree that the possessions of all the churches, 

made archbishop of Tarragona by Count Raimond, January 23, 1117, 
received the pallium and the apostolical confirmation from Gelasius II. at 
Gaieta, Marcli 24, 1118. It would, therefore, have been more correct to 
call him archbishop of Tarragona. This pious and learned prelate died, 
March 6, 11.37, at the age of seventy-six years. He had filled the 
functions of legate since the month of April, 1123. We shall hear of 
him again in our author's thirteenth book. 

* Imperatorem, Theomackum, one who fights against God. 

TOL. IV C 



18 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXII. 

which have been given to them by the munificence of kings, 
the bounty of princes, or the offerings of any of the faithful, 
shall continue for ever undisturbed and inviolate. Whoever 
invades or usurps them or retains them by tyrannical power 
shall be punished with perpetual excommunication, accord- 
ing to the decree of St. Symmachus : ' No bishop, or 
priest, or any other of the clergy shall devise his eccle- 
siastical dignities or benefices to any one as heritable 
possessions.' 

" "We command, in addition, that no sort of fee or reward 
be exacted for baptisms, chrisms, administering the holy oil, 
or the rites of burial, visiting the sick, or extreme unction. 

" "We utterly interdict all priests, deacons, andsubdeacons 
from cohabitation with concubines or wives. If any are 
found to offend in this respect, they shall be deprived of 
their ecclesiastical offices and benefices; and moreover, if they 
are not thus corrected of their impurity, they shall be cut 
off" from Christian communion."^ 

On the third of the calends of November [October 30] 
Pope Calixtus II., as well as the whole council, adopted these 
decrees;" and the pope having given his benediction to all 
who were there assembled, in the name of the Father, and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Grhost, the sacred congregation was 
dissolved, and every one returned home, giving praise to God. 

Ch. XXII. Evreux surrenders — Eustace of Breteuil and 

StepJien, count d^Aumale, submit to King Henry. 
Meanwhile, King Henry pressed vigorously the siege of 
Evreux, and his nephew Theobald, count palatine,^ endea- 

•■ This last canon caused great fermentation amongst the clergy in Ger- 
many and England. We shall presently find what tumults it caused in 
Normandy. It was on this occasion that the Leonine verses were composed, 
which commenced thus: 

bone Calliste, nunc clerus odit te ; 
Olim presbyteri poterant uxoribus uti ; 
Hoc sustulisti, quando tu Papa fuisti. . . . 
^ The decrees of the council of Rheims are also preserved by Roger de 
Wendover, nearly totidem verbis as they are found in the text of 
Ordericus ; but the English chronicler's account of the proceedings is very 
meagre. He gives a different version of the pope's visit to the emperor, 
and states that the decrees were submitted to him, and that he concurred 
in all of them except that relating to investitures. 

' The counts of Champagne took the title of counts-palatine in right of 



AUTUMN, 1.119.] EUSTACE DE BEETEUIL SUBMITS. 19 

voured to restore peace between tlie hostile parties, and by 
his wise counsels and the confidence placed in him, brought 
Amalric to the king, and he, being reconciled with that prince, 
made a voluntary surrender of the fortress, and received 
with joy the whole county of his uncle. Besides this, 
Eustace,^ with his wife Juliana, having been reconciled with 
their friends, hastened by their advice to the camp of the 
besiegers, and entering the king's tent barefooted, fell 
at his knees. Upon this the king said sharply : " How have 
you dared, without my safe-conduct, to introduce yourself 
into my presence, when you have exasperated me against 
you by so many and such violent outrages?" Eustace 
replied : " You are my liege lord ; I, therefore, present 
myself to you as such in full security, being resolved to 
observe for the future the fealty I owe you, and to do right 
in all things in expiation of my delinquencies, according as 
you in your mercy shall determine." Eriends interfered to 
supplicate the king on behalf of his son-in-law ; and Eichard, 
the king's son, joined in imploring favour for his sister. In 
consequence, the king's heart was softened towards his son- 
in-law and daughter, and kindly feelings returning, the 
relenting father-in-law said to his son-in-law : " Let Juliana 
return to Pacy, and for you, come with me to Eouen, where 
you shall hear my decision." The king's command was 
immediately fulfilled, and he then said to Eustace : • " I will 
give you in England three hundred silver marks every year 
as a recompense for the loss of the fief of Breteuil, which I 
have granted to your cousin Ealph the Breton, whom I have 
always found loyal, and who has distinguished himself by 
his valour against the enemy whenever I required his 
service." After this the Lord Eustace, in time of peace, 
fortified Pacy with walls and outworks, and lived in great 
wealth more than twenty years. As for Juliana, she some- 
time afterwards abandoned her loose mode of life, and 
changing her habit, became a nun in the new monastery of 
Eontevrault, where she served Grod. 

the jurisdiction which they exercised over the officers of the palace of the 
French kings. The emperors of the West having created a similar office 
in their court, the counts of Champagne distinguished themselves by the 
title of counts-palatine of France. 

^ Eustace de Breteuil. See vol. iii. p. 344. 
c 2 



20 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [e.XII. CH. XXIII. 

Hugh de Gournai, Eobert d-e Neubourg, and the other 
rebels, finding themselves deserted by their most powerful 
accomplices, and that the king's courage and prudence raised 
him above all opposition, as soon as they learned the defec- 
tion of their allies, expressed penitence for their past con- 
duct, and, either in person and through their friends, implored 
the royal clemency. Thereupon the king, who feared Grod 
and loved peace and justice, pardoned the offences of his 
suppliant barons, and restored them to his favour with great 
kindness. 

Against Stephen, count d'Aumale,^ who still persisted in 
his rebellion, the king assembled an army, and began to 
construct a fortified camp at a place called Old Eouen ; and 
he named it Mate-Putain, which signifies, " the whore's 
match," ^ meaning it as a slur on the Countess Havise ;^ for 
it was at her instigation that the earl had taken arms against 
his kinsman and sovereign, and harbouring William, the 
late duke's heir, and Baldwin of Elanders in his castles, had 
long espoused their cause. But Avhen he learned that the 
king was marching against him at the head of an army, he 
tendered him, by the advice of his friends, a humble apology, 
and, the king having pardoned him as well as all the rest, 
returned in peace and triumph. 

Ch. XXIII. Traditionary accounts of the foundation of 
Mouen — Story of tlie freebooter, Hutubus. 

Having here mentioned Old Eouen,^ I will shortly quote 
what is said about it in the old Eoman histories. Caius 

^ This person has been often mentioned before, particularly in b. \'iii. c. 
9 (vol. ii. p. 473), where some errors crept into a note, which we take this 
opportunity of correcting. Stephen d'Aumale was the grandson, not the 
8on, of Adeliza, William the Conqueror's sister ; who had only one 
husband, having been married to Enguerrand, count de Ponthieu, who was 
killed under the walls of Arques in 1053. It was her daughter Adeliza 
who married Odo of Champagne. 

Stephen d'Aumale was never raised to the throne, though he was set up 
as a pretender to it in the rebellion of Robert Mowbray, described in 
b. viii. c. 23. See the note, vol. iii. p. 20. 

^ " Mata-Putenam, id est : devincens meretricem." So mate and stale- 
mate, in the game of chess. 

2 Havise de Mortimer, daughter of Ralph de Mortimer. 

* Ordericus appears to have gathered the account of the origin of 
Rouen, contained in this chapter, from some of those romances which 



TEADITIOIS" or THE ORIGIN OF EOUET«". 21 

Julius Csesar laid siege to Calet, from whence the district 
of Caux derives the name which it still preserves, and 
attacked it for a long time with his whole force. It was 
there that his most implacable enemies had assembled from 
every part of G-aul, and as they had offended Csesar and 
irritated him beyond measure by their slaughters, and fires, 
and frequent outrages, he pressed the siege of the place 
with the utmost vigour, and taking it and all who were in 
it, razed it to the ground. Still, in order that the province 
might not remain defenceless, he built on the spot a fortress, 
which he called Julia Bona, after his daughter Julia, a name 
which was corrupted in the barbarian tongue, and turned 

were current in his times under the name of Gesta Romanorum, of Avhich 
he made use on other occasions, as he acknowledges with his habitual 
candour. Some of the details are full of absurdity. 

The nine rivers here mentioned are the Durdan (under its Norsk name 
of the White-River, which is preserved in that of the commune of 
Vittefleurs) ; the Tale, or Dun, which has given its name to the 
Talon ; the Seine; the Vienne, here called the river of Beaunai (which is 
also the name of a commune on its banks); the Sie ; the Varenne, or the 
river of Arques ; the Dieppe, which gave its name to the town at its 
mouth, and is now called the Bethune ; the Eaulne ; the Y6re ; and the 
Bresle, or river of Eu. He has omitted the river of Fecamp, Fluvius 
Fiscanus. 

It is difficult to arrive at anything satisfactory respecting this name of 
Old-Rouen. There is another place of the same name in the department 
of I'Eure, and jNI. Le Prevost considers that it ia not improbable that 
the name is a contraction for "the Old Road to Rouen." He remarks 
that the word vieux might often be interpreted vadum ; so that perhaps the 
ford on the road to Rouen might be intended, and he inclines to that opinion. 

With respect to the story of the tyrant Rutubus, and his having built a 
fort on the Seine, to which he gave his name, it appeared to M.Le Prevost 
so absurd a fiction that it was not worth while to inquire whether any such 
place existed. Bede, however, who is copied by Henry of Huntingdon, 
tells us (b. i. c. 1), that "as you pass" along the nearest coast of Belgic 
Gaul, the first place in Britain which opens to the eye is Rutubi Partus, 
by the English corrupted into Reptuacester (Puchborough in Kent) ; and 
M. Delisle conjectures that this may have served the old romancer for the 
foundation of his story of the tyrant Rutubus. Still our author describes 
so exactly the wooded heights above Rouen commanding the navigpition of 
the Seine at several points, and so suited for the stronghold of a freebooter, 
and he appeals so confidently to the local knowledge of the inhabitants of 
the neighbourhood as to ruins existing hi his day, that it is difficult to 
think there was not some foundation for this part of the tale. 

As to the story of the foundation by Julius Caesar of Illebonne, or 
Lillebone, which stands on the banks of the Seine, above Havre, see the 
note in vol. iii. p. 130. 



22 OEDEEICUS TETALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXIV. 

into lUcbone. Thence he crossed nine rivers, the Gruite- 
flucle, the Tale, now called the Dun, the Seine, the Yienne, 
the Sie, the Yarenne, the Dieppe, and the Eaulne ; he then 
traversed the shores of the ocean as far as the river Ane, 
commonly called the Eu. The skilful commander, perceiv- 
ing the advantages which the country offered, resolved on 
turning them to the advantage of his people, and founding 
a city for the protection of the Eomans, which he named 
Eodomus, or the seat of the Eomans. Having assembled 
workmen for this purpose, and marked out a, sufficient space 
of ground, and employed masons and stonecutters to carry 
on the work, he continued his march. Meanwhile, Eutubus, 
a powerful and cruel tyrant, was master of a strong castle, 
deemed impregnable, and which, standing on a height above 
the Seine, commanded the neighbouring country and the ships 
which navigated the river beneath. C^sar, being informed 
of this, after a rapid march, assaulted and took the castle, 
which was called Eutubi Portus. Those who live in the 
neighbourhood, and are well informed, have no difficulty, in 
tracing out its site and ruins. Upon this, Caesar withdrew 
the masons and other labourers from the spot first men- 
tioned, and, founding the noble metropolis Eouen, on the 
river Seine, left nothing but the name to the former place 
on the banks of the Eu, which is preserved by a village there 
to the present day. 

I have collected from the accounts of ancient "WTiters, for 
the benefit of posterity, these details respecting Old Eouen, 
where King Henry began to form a camp against his 
enemies ; but, peace being soon restored, he soon aban- 
doned the undertaking. I now return to recent events of 
which I had commenced the narrative, and follovdng former 
writers, as far as lies in my power, I ofi'er the fruits of my 
labours to posterity. 

Ch. XXIY. Conference letween JPo])e Calixtus II. and 
Henry I at Gisors. 

All the Normans who had revolted against the king, as we 
have already mentioned, finding him more powerful in all 
respects than they had supposed, and being better advised 
than they were on a former occasion, sued for pardon, either 
in person or through their friends, and their submission 



JTOY. 1119.] CONFERENCE OF CALIXTUS II. AND HENRY I. 23 

being accepted, the king forgave their offences. It was with 
great reluctance, indeed, that they left William, the young 
prince, and his guardian, Elias, still in exile, but they could 
obtain peace from the all-powerful king on no other terms. 

In the month of November,^ Pope Calixtus came into 
Normandy, and had a conference with the king at Grisors 
concerning peace. The magnificent king received him with 
the highest honours, threw himself at his feet, and paid the 
greatest reverence to one who was not only the chief pastor 
of the universal church, but united to him by the ties of 
consanguinity.^ The pope raised him up with great benig- 
nity, gave him the benediction and the kiss of peace, and 
they mutually embraced with great satisfaction. They 
afterwards met in conference at a fitting opportunity, and 
the pope thus addressed the king : 

" In the council of Rheims I have been occupied in pro- 
viding for the welfare of the faithful in concert with holy 
bishops, and other prelates and sons of the church, and I 
have engaged to use my utmost efibrts to promote a general 
peace. In consequence, I have made all haste, my glorious 
son, to come into these parts, and I pray Almighty God, 
in his mercy, to look favourably on my endeavours, and 
to direct them to the common benefit of the universal 
church. And first, I beseech your majesty kindly to second 
our efforts, and, like a worthy successor of Solomon, show 
yourself placable to your enemies, and grant them the peace 
for which they sue through my mediation," 

The king having promised to submit willingly to the apos- 
tolical injunctions, the pope resumed his discourse to the 
following purport : " The law of Grod, which makes careful 
provision for the welfare of all, commands that every one 

* The pope staid at Rheims till the 10th November. He then pro- 
ceeded to Gisors by way of Laon and Beauvais, from which place he 
dated bulls on the 20th. 

' This was not the first opportunity that Calixtus and Henry had 
of becoming personally acquainted. They met before in England in 
1100, when Calixtus, then archbishop of Vienne, was sent there by 
Paschal II. as his legate. This mission had no success in a country which 
had hitherto seen no other legates than the archbishops of Canterbury. 
St. Anselm returned the welcome which he had received from Calixtus at 
Vienne two years before ; but King Henry obliged the legate to re-cross 
the sea without fulfilling his errand. 



24 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXIY. 

shall possess his lawful inheritance, and not covet what 
belongs to another, or do to others what he would not have 
done to himself. AVherefore the synod of the faithful has 
unanimously decreed, and humbly implores your highness, 
that your brother Eobert, whom you have long detained in 
captivity, be set free, and that you restore to him and his 
son the duchy of Normandy, of which you have deprived 
them." 

In reply to this the king said : " I am ready to obey your 
precepts, reverend father, so far as they are reasonable, as 
I promised in the beginning. But now I beg that you will 
hear with attention what I have done, and with what 
motives I have acted. I have not deprived my brother of 
the duchy of Normandy, but I recovered by arms the inhe- 
ritance of our common father, which neither my brother or 
nephew possessed themselves, for it was deplorably devas- 
tated by desperate robbers and sacrilegious criminals. No 
reverence was paid to the priests and other servants of God, 
but almost heathenism prevailed in all parts of Normandy. 
The monasteries, which my predecessors founded for the 
good of their souls, were laid in ruins, and the monks were 
scattered for want of the means of subsistence. The churches 
were pillaged, many of them were burnt, and those who 
took refuge in them were dragged out. The parishioners 
slaughtered each other in the most cruel manner in mutual 
conflicts, and those who survived, having no protector, aban- 
doned themselves to grief amongst so much desolation. 

" Such was the afflicted state of Normandy during nearly 
seven years ;^ nor did it allow any one to enjoy security 
either within or without. Repeated supplications from the 
ministers of religion Avere addressed to me invoking my aid 
to the suffering people, for the love of God, and conjuring 
me with many entreaties, not to suffer cruel robbers to vent 
their fury any longer on the honest inhabitants. Thus com- 
pelled, as it were, I crossed over to Normandy, and being 
well received by those illustrious nobles, AVilliam, count of 

• This calculation is evidently exiiggerated to serve the occasion ; but 
our authoi is s-till more inexact. According to what he sa} s, b. x. c. J 6, 
nearly eight years must have elapsed between tlie month of September, 
1100, the period of Robert's return, and September 28, 1106, when he 
was made prisoner. 



NOT. 1119.] CONFERENCE OF CALIXTUS II. AND HENRY I. 25 

d'Evreux, and Eobert, Count de Mellent, and ofcher loyal 
barons, I was afflicted at witnessing the desolation of the 
territory of my ancestors, but it was impossible for me to 
succour those who were in need, except by having recourse 
to arms.^ My brother protected the authors of all the mis- 
chief, and followed the counsels of those who made him vile 
and contemptible. Gunhier d'Aunai, Eoger de Laci, Eobert 
de Belesme, and other miscreants oppressed the Normans, and 
under an imaginary duke, domineered over the bishops, the 
clergy, and the whole defenceless people. Even those whom 
I had banished from my territories beyond the sea for 
their nefarious plots, he chose for his privy-counsellors, 
and entrusted with the government of honest people. 
Murder and fire were rife in all quarters, and such atrocious 
deeds were done that they would seem almost incredible to 
any one who had not witnessed them. I sent frequent 
messages to my brother, begging him to accept my advice, 
and promising to assist him with all my power; but he 
treated me with contempt, and availed himself of the ser- 
vices of those who were traitors to me. 

" Seeing then that such enormous crimes were perpe- 
trated, I was unwilling to refuse my services to holy mother 
church ; but the duty which was imposed upon me by Divine 
Providence I endeavoured to fulfil for the welfare of the 
people. Engaging resolutely in the conflict with fire and 
sword, I took Bayeaux from Gunhier, and Caen from 
Enguerand Fitz-Ilbert, and, crushing in battle the tyrants 
who held them, I gained possession of other strong places, 
part of my father's domains, which my brother had 
given to perjured flatterers, while he himself was reduced 
to such poverty that he could not pay the wages 
of his retainers. At length I laid siege to Tinchebrai, 
that real cavern of demons, where "William, Count de 
Mortain, brought my brother against me with a large army ; 
and I fought against it on the Starved Field,^ in the name 

* Henry forgets that it was not by his arms only he aided the rebellious* 
subjects of his brother, but that the wealth of JEngland was lavished iu 
corrujiting the Norman lords. 

^ Campo Famelico. This is the second time that our author uses this 
expression ; it must therefore have been generally applied to designate th<i 
field of battle of Tinchebrai. It may perhaps have been derived from the 



26 OEDERICUS VITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXIY. 

of the Lord, and for the defence of my country. There, by 
the aid of God, who knew the purity of my intentions, I 
conquered my enemies, making prisoners both the counts, 
my brotiier and his cousin, with many traitors ; and I have 
detained them in close custody to the present day, for fear 
of their causing some disturbance to me or my kingdom. 
Thus I recovered the inheritance of my father and all his 
domains, and I have steadfastly endeavoured to maintain his 
laws according to the will of God for the security of his 
people. As for my brother,^ I have not caused him to be 
bound in fetters like a captive enemy, but treating him like 
a noble pilgrim worn with long sufferings, I have placed him 
in a royal castle, and supplied his table and wardrobe^ with 
all kinds of luxuries and delicacies in great abundance. His 
son, a boy five years of age, I entrusted to the care of Elias, 
the duke's son-in-law, desiring that he should be so brought up 
that in wisdom, worthiness, and power he should be in all re- 
spects equal to my own son. But Elias, instigated by his ac- 
complices, surreptitiously carried off my nephew, and aban- 
doning the castle and fief of Saint-Saens, which he possessed, 
sought refuge in foreign parts, and as far as it was in his 
power, harassed me with frequent incursions ; although, not 
having the help of God, he never succeeded. He raised in 
arms against me the French and Burgundians, and other 
nations, but, if I mistake not, he has injured himself more 
than me. I have often invited my nephew to meet me, and 
sent many envoys with friendly messages, assuring him that 
he might come to my court in security, and should be par- 
circumstance of the troops of the Count de Mortain having carried off all 
the crops still standing, some hours before the battle. 

^ King Henry affected on all occasions to call his brother the count of 
IS'ormandy, and that is the title given him in all acts proceeding from his 
chancery. However, a few lines afterwards we find him sutfering the title 
of duke to escape him. 

2 We may form some idea of these luxuries by two entries relating to 
the count of Normandy in the Pipe Rolls for 1131. That year they gave 
him new clothes, but this did not always happen, for we find in Matthew 
Paris's additions to Roger de Wendover's Chronicle a curious story 
respecting a cast-off^ robe which his brother sent to the unhappy captive, 
("Vol. i. p. 482, in Antiq. Lib.) It is even said that notwithstanding the 
affectation of kindness assumed in his language to the pope, Henry caused 
his brother's eyes to be put out, as he did his nephew's the Count de 
Mortain. 



KOV. 1119.] CONFEEElSrCE OF CALIXTTIS II. AKD HET^^RT I. 27 

taker witli my son of my royal vrealth. I even offered him 
three English earldoms, that he might have them under his 
government, and being brought up among my own pri\y 
councillors, might learn the value of wisdom and probity in 
dealing both with the rich and the poor, and how strictly he 
ought to maintain sovereign justice and military discipline. 
Notwithstanding, he has rejected all my offers, and has pre- 
ferred to be a wandering mendicant amongst foreign thieves, 
rather than to partake of the enjoyments of my court. 

" Fields lying uncultivated, houses burnt, villages devas- 
tated, churches in ruins, and people mourning the massacre 
of their friends and the pillage of their substances — all these 
are witnesses of the numerous calamities which I have now 
recounted. Let your holiness, my lord pope, wisely ponder 
on these things, and lay profitable and carefully-considered 
injunctions both on those who rule and those who obey." 

After having heard with attention the king's discourse, 
the pope was struck with astonishment, and approved his 
conduct according to what he had related. " We have now 
heard enough," he said, "of the duke and his son. Let us 
say no more of them, but turn to other matters. The king 
of France complains that the treaty between you was wrong- 
fully violated, and that your soldiers have unjustly done 
much injury to him and his kingdom." The king replied: 
" Lewis was the first to break the alliance between us. He 
supported my enemies in various ways in their hostilities 
against me, and encouraged my vassals by promises and 
persuasions to revolt from me. ISTotwithstanding, if he will 
amend his ways, and henceforth keep inviolably our treaty 
of alliance, I am ready to obey your admonitions in all 
things relating to it." 

The pope, well pleased at this, added : " King Lewis also 
complains of the injury he received from Count Theobald, 
your nephew, who made prisoner the Count de ]N"evers as he 
was returning from the siege which the king himself and the 
bishops of France undertook against Thomas de Marie, to 
restrain him from the iniquities which he practised against 
innocent men." "I will omit no opportunity," said the 
king, " of conforming to your paternal admonitions in the 
cause of tranquillity and peace ; and I will place Theobald, 
my nephew, under your orders in all that is good, for he is 



28 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXIV. 

a sincere lover of justice. I also admonisli my other nephew, 
"William, to accept the peace, and I renew through your 
highness the same offers which I have already often made 
him through others ; because I both wish to give you satis- 
faction in all things, and desire a general peace for my 
people, and the welfare of my nephew, just as if he were my 
own son." 

In the end,^ the pope sent his legates to the king of 
France and his barons, with information of the replies given 
by the king of England favourable to peace. All therefore 
were full of joy. It appears superfluous for me to enlarge 
on the rejoicings of the people, who had suffered so much 
from frequent hostiUties, upon finding that the storms of 
war were succeeded by the serenity of peace, the object of 
their desires. The concord of the princes being ratified, the 
castles which had been taken by force or fraud were restored 
to their owners, and all the soldiers made prisoners during 
the war on the one side and the other v/ere set at liberty, 
and, released from their dungeons, were sufiered to return to 
their homes rejoicing. 

^ Our author has here omitted several facts. In the first place he does 
not notice the ineffectual attempts, made by Thurstan and seconded by 
the pope, for his reconciliation with the king. Although Henry was by 
no means remarkable for fidelity to his engagements, in this instance he 
exhibited a great deal more honesty than the sovereign pontifl^". The king 
having alleged the oath he had sworn not to admit Thurstan into England, 
if he broke the pledge he gave before he went to Rheims, Calixtus offered 
to give him a dispensation from his oath : " And who," replied the king, 
" will afterwards trust to my word, if I forfeit it with so little compunc- 
tion ?" See Eadmer's Historia Novorum, on this discussion, which he 
treats much more fully than our author. Sufficient to say that the conduct 
of the pope in the transaction was not only discourteous to the king of 
England, but dishonourable. It was the object of the court of Rome to 
denationalize, at any cost, the church of England, by reducing the prepon- 
derance of the archbishops of Canterbury, and sending over legates 
exclusively devoted to their own interest. 

Ordericus forgets to tell us the time when the interview at Gisors closed, 
and the road by which he returned from it. All we know is, that on 
Nov. 27, he was at St. Denis, from whence he went to Paris and Melun, 
where the court of France gave him a magnificent reception notwithstand- 
ing the facility with which he had abandoned its interests. He then took the 
road by Sens and Saulieu, from whence he wrote letters dated December 
22. The pope could have staid only a few days at Gisors, if it be true 
that archbishop Geoffrey held a synod at Rouen on the third week in 
November, as this prelate would not have left Gisors till after the pope. 



NOV. 1119,] STT5-0D AT EOTJEIT. 29 

Ch, XXV. — A synod at Houen — Celibacy of priests enforced 
— Tumult at the synod — Henry returns to England — S}iif- 
wreck of the king's children and their attendants in the 
Blaiiche-Nef 

Meanwhile Satan, tliat malicious and restless spirit who 
deceived the first man by means of the serpent, was filled 
with grief when he saw the kings and great warriors restored 
to peace through the grace of Grod, and began to sow the 
tares of fatal discord among the priests in the Lord's temple. 
G-eoffrey, the archbishop, having returned to Rouen from 
attending the council at Rheims, held a synod in the third 
week of JN'ovember,^ and, stirred up by the late papal decrees, 
dealt sharply and rigorously with the priests of his diocese. 
Among other canons of the counciP which he promulgated, 
was that which interdicted tliem from commerce with fe- 
males of any description, and against such transgressors he 
launched the terrible sentence of excommunication. As the 
priests shrunk from submitting to this grievous burden,^ and 
in loud mutterings among themselves vented their complaints 

1 Between Sunday the 16th and Saturday the 22nd. It is difficult to 
reconcile this date with that of the meeting at Gisors, where the arch- 
bishop's presence was indispensable. There seems no other mode than by 
supposing that for the third week in November we should read the fourth, 

2 We have no other account of the proceedings at this synod than 
what is supplied by our author, and incline to think that the canons here 
mentioned were those decreed by the council of Rheims, the synod being 
convened to hear them promulgated, and record their acceptance by the 
clergy of Normandy. 

^ There is a street at Rouen, near the cathedral, called La Rue des 
Pretresses, which owes its name to the habits which it was the object of 
these canons to extirpate. In order fully to understand tlie extent of the 
revolution in the domestic life of the secular clergy in Normandy which it 
was attempted to effect, we must call to mind the state of affairs then 
existing, as we find it described by the biographer of St. Bernard, abbot 
of Turon. 

" It was the common custom at that time throughout Normandy for 
priests to be openly married, and begetting sons and daughters they left 
them their churches after their death, like an inheritance. When they 
gave their daughters in marriage, they often bestowed on them a church 
for their dowry, if they possessed no other property ; and when they took 
wives, they swore in presence of their parents, before cohabitation, that 
they would never desert them. 

" Hence it happened, that the priests' wives, being under apprehension 
that they should be separated from them, sought to kill St. Bernard, and 



30 OIIDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXV. 

of the struggle between the flesh and the spirit to which 
they were subjected, the archbishop ordered one Albert, a 
man free of speech, who had used some offensive words, I 
know not what, to be arrested on the spot, and he was pre- 
sently thrust into the common prison. This prelate was a 
Breton and guilty of many indiscretions, warm and obstinate 
in temper, and severe in his aspect and manner, harsh in his 
censures, and, withal, indiscreet and a great talker. The 
other priests, witnessing this extraordinary proceeding, were 
utterly confounded ; and when they saw that, without being 
charged with any crime or undergoing any legal examina- 
tion, a priest was dragged, like a thief, from a church to a 
dungeon, they became so exceedingly terrified that they 
knew not how to act, doubting whether they had best 
defend themselves or take to flight. Meanwhile, the arch- 
bishop rose from his seat in a violent rage, and hastily leav- 
ing the synod, summoned his guards, whom he had already 
posted outside, with instructions what they were to do. 
The archbishop's retainers then rushed into the church with 
arms and staves, and began to lay about them, without respect 
of persons, on the assembled clergy, who were conversing 
together. Some of these ecclesiastics ran to their lodgings 
through the muddy streets of the city, though they were 
robed in their albs ; others snatched up some rails and 
stones which they chanced to find, and stood on their 
defence ; whereupon their cowardly assailants betook them- 
selves to flight and sought refuge in the sacristy, followed 
closely by the indignant clergy. The archbishop's people, 
ashamed of having been discomfited by an unarmed, toiisured 
band,^ summoned to their aid, in the extremity of their fury, 
all the cooks, bakers, and scullions they could muster in the 
neighbourhood, and had the effrontery to renew the conflict 
within the sacred precincts. .AJl whom they found in the 

the priests themselves joined in the plot, in order to deter him from 
pleaching." 

At Coutances, an archdeacon, who had a wife and children, asked the 
preacher how that could concern him, who as a monk was dead to the 
world. The saint in reply modestly compared himself to the jaw-bone in 
the hand of Samson ; a speech which was much applauded by the 
people. — Acta SS. mensis Aprilis, t. ii., p. 234. 

^ Inermi coronatorum choro. 



NOY. 1119.] TUMULT AT THE SYNOD. 31 

cliurch or cemetery/ whetlier engaged in the broil or inno- 
cently looking on, they beat and cuffed, or inflicted on them 
some other bodily injury. Then Hugh of LongueviUe and 
Ansquetil of Cropus,^ and some other ecclesiastics of 
advanced age and great piety, happened to be in the church, 
conversing together on confession and other profitable sub- 
jects, or reciting, as was their duty, the service of the hours 
to the praise of Grod. The archbishop's domestics were mad 
enough to fall on these priests, treated them shamefully, and 
so outrageously, that they hardly restrained themselves from 
taking their lives, though they asked for mercy on their 
bended knees. These old priests, being at length dismissed, 
made their escape from the city as soon as they could, to- 
gether with their friends who had before fled, without 
stopping to receive the bishop's licence and benediction. 
They carried the sorrowful tidings to their parishioners and 
concubines, and, to prove the truth of their reports, 
exhibited the wounds and livid bruises on their persons. 
The archdeacons, and canons, and aU quiet citizens, were 
afflicted at this cruel onslaught, and compassionated with 
the servants of Grod who had sufiered such unheard-of 
insults. Thus the blood of her priests was shed in the very 
bosom of holy mother church, and the holy synod was con- 
verted into a scene of riot and mockery. The archbishop, 
overwhelmed with consternation, retired to his private 
apartments, where he concealed himself during the uproar, 
but shortly afterwards, when the ecclesiastics had betaken 
themselves to flight, as we have already related, his wrath 
subsided, and going to the church, he put on his stole, and 
sprinkling holy water, reconciled the church which he had 
polluted and his sorrowing canons. A report of this exe- 
crable tumult came to the king's ears, but he was so much 
occupied by other affairs, that he deferred giving any redress 
to the injured parties.^ 

^ This cemetery is now the Place Notre-Dame at Rouen. 

* Villages near Dieppe, the cur^s of Avhich had been summoned to the 
synod. 

^ The king did not trouble himself about these canons until he had 
discovered means of turning them to the advantage of his exchequer, in 
which he felt a much greater interest than in questions of ecclesiastical 
discipline. A synod was held at London, in 1129, regarding the pro- 



32 OKDEEICUS YITALIS. [e.XTI. CH.XXV. 

King Henry/ having now after great exertions put his 
affairs in Normandy into excellent order, resolved on 
re-crossing the sea and bestowing large rewards on his 
young esquires and most distinguished knights, some of 
whom he proposed to raise to high honours and ample 
wealth in England. Accordingly, he commanded a fleet to 
be immediately fitted out, and a large body of troops of all 
ranks to be ready to accompany him. 

Meanwhile, Ealph de Guader, being apprehensive of the 
disloyalty of the JSTormans, who submitted to him with 
reluctance on account of their attachment to Eustace their 
former lord, and reflecting that he possessed Gruader, 
Montfort,^ and other fortified towns and large domains, his 
own patrimonial inheritance, in Brittany, afiianced his 

hibition of priests having concubines ; and Henry of Huntingdon informs 
us that the king deceived the prelates through the simplicity of William 
the archbishop ; inasmuch as they imprudently gave the king jurisdiction 
in the matter of priests' concubines, as it afterwards appeared, when the 
affair ended disgracefully; for the king received large sums of money from 
the priests for licence to live as before. Then, when it was too late, the 
bishops repented of the concessions they had made, it being apparent to 
all that they had been deceived, and had subjected the clergy to exactions. 
— History, p. 257, in Antiq. Lib. And see what Henry of Huntingdon, 
himself the son of an ecclesiastic, says of these canons, ib. 241 ; and the 
note. 

* Ordericus proceeds to relate the circumstances of Henry I.'s de- 
parture from Normandy, and the shipwreck of the Blanche-Nef, as if they 
formed part of the occurrences of the year 1119, and followed in course 
after the king's interview with Pope Calixtns at Gisors, and the synod of 
Rouen which took place in the month of November of that year. Accord- 
ing, however, to the unanimous testimony of all the other cotemporary 
historians, it was not till December, 1120, that the calamitous event 
occurred, the details of which, preserved by our author alone, give a 
melancholy interest to the remainder of the present chapter. But Orde- 
ricus ornits all the intermediate facts, some of which are important: among 
which may be mentioned the meeting of the two kings, where William, 
the young prince, did homage for Normandy to Lev,is-le-Gros, in the 
presence and by command of his father. A document is preserved which 
leaves no doubt on the true date of the disaster here described ; it is a 
charter of King Henry to the abliey of Cerisi, dated at Barfleur, November 
21, 1120, four days, therefore, before his embarkalion. It is probable that 
our author was led into this serious error on the authority of the chronicle 
of his own abbey of St. Evroult, which appears to have had the entry 
made in it before Ordericus compiled this part of his history. See the 
extracts from the chronicle of St. Evroult appended to this work, 

2 Gael and Montfort-sur-Meu near Rennes. 



DEC. 1120.] SHIPWRECK DP THE BLANCHE-NEP. 33 

daughter to Eichard, the son of king Henry ;^ wlio consented 
to and approved of the alliance, and gave as her dowry 
Breteuil, Gloz, and Lire, and the whole of the fief he held in 
Normandy. But the design was frustrated and came to no- 
thing, God, who rules all things well, having ordained other- 
wise. For the lady^ here mentioned afterwards married 
Eobert earl of Leicester, with whom she lived many years. 

A large fleet having been fitted out in the port of Bar- 
fleur, and the gallant company who were to accompany the 
king, having assembled there, the king and his attendants 
embarked on the seventh of the calends of December [25th 
November], in the first watch of the night, with a south 
wind blowing ; and the sails being hoisted up they put to 
sea, and in the morning those whom God permitted em- 
braced the shore of England. 

In this voyage a sad disaster happened which caused 
much lamentation and innumerable tears to flow. Thomas, 
the son of Stephen, had obtained an audience of the king, 
and offering him a gold mark, said to him, " Stephen, 
the son of Airard,^ was my father, and during his whole 
life he was in your father's service as a mariner. He 
it was who conveyed your father to England in his own 
ship, when he crossed the sea to make war on Harold. 
He was employed by your father in services of this descrip- 
tion as long as he lived, and gave him such satisfaction that 
he honoured him with liberal rewards, so that he lived in 
great credit and prosperity among those of his own class. 
My lord king, I ask you to employ me in the same service, 
having a vessel, called the Blanche-Nef,* which is fitted out 
in the best manner, and perfectly adapted to receive a royal 
retinue." The king replied : " I grant your request ; but I 

^ Malmesbury informs us that Richard was King Henry's son by a 
woman of low rank, born before his accession to the throne ; but that Henry 
had a great regard for him on account of his intrepid character and filial 
obedience. He was, therefore, considerably older than his brother 
William, the heir apparent to the throne. 

2 Amicia de Guader, married to Robert the Hunchback, earl of 
Leicester, son of Robert, Count de Meulan. 

' It is very possible that this mariner was the person described in 
Domesday Book as a tenant i'l capite in Berkshire, under the name of 
Stefanus, Eirardi filius, the grant of lands being part of the rewards men- 
tioned a few lines further on. 

* Candida navis. 

VOL. IV. D 



34 0EDEEICU3 YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXT. 

have already selected a ship which suits me, and I shall not 
change : however, I entrust to you my sons, William and 
Eichard, whom I love as myself, with many of the nobility 
of my realm." 

The mariners were in great glee at hearing this, and 
greeting the king's son with fair words asked him to give 
them something to drink. The prince gave orders that 
they should have three muids. No sooner was the wine 
delivered to them than they had a great drinking bout, and 
pledging their comrades in full cups, indulged too much and 
became intoxicated. By the king's command many barons 
with their sons embarked in the Blanche-Nef, and there 
were in all, as far as I can learn, three hundred souls on 
board the ill-fated ship. But two monks of Tyron, Count 
Stephen/ with two men-at-arms, William de Roumare, Eabel 
the chamberlain,^ Edward of Salisbury,^ and several others 
came on shore, having left the vessel upon observing that it 
was overcrowded with riotous and headstrong youths. The 
crew consisted of fifty experienced rowers, besides an armed 
marine force,* who were very disorderly, and as soon as they 
got on board insolently took possession of the benches ot 
the rowers, and being very drunk forgot their station, and 
scarcely paid respect to any one. Alas ! How many, among 
the company embarked, were without the slightest feelin^if 
of devotion towards God, 

Qui maris immodicas moderatur, et aeris, iras ! 
Who rules the storm, and calms the raging sea. 

They even drove away with contempt, amidst shouts of 

^ Stephen de Blois, count of Mortain. 

^ William de Roumare is mentioned before (vol. iii. p. 482), as present 
with William de Tankerville at the battle of Bremull. Rabel was the 
son of the latter by Matilda d'Arques, and his father still living, M, 
Deville supposed that the title of chamberlain is here given him by 
anticipation. M. Le Prevost, however, remarks that we should rather 
consider the word to be an hereditary designation than a positive title of 
office. Thus the family were called the chamberlains of Tankerville, or 
simply the chamberlains, long after the office had passed into other hands. 
So we have the Butlers, Stewarts, &c. 

' Edward of Salisbury is also mentioned in the place just referred tf) 
and the note subjoined. 

* Schippce, from a German root, whence are derived the German scldffy 
the French esquif, and the English ship, skiff, and shipper. 



DEC. 1120.] SHIPWEECK OF THE BLAITCHE-NEr. 35 

laughter, the priests who came to bless them, with the other 
ministers who carried the holy water ; but they were 
speedily punished for their mockery. Besides the king's 
treasure and some casks of wine, there was no cargo in 
Thomas's ship, which was full of passengers; and they 
urged him to use his utmost endeavours to overtake the 
royal fleet which was already ploughing the waves. In his 
drunken folly, Thomas, confident in his seamanship and 
the skill of his crew, rashly boasted that he would soon 
leave behind him all the ships that had started before them. 
At last, he gave the signal for departure ; the sailors seized 
the oars without a moment's delay, and, unconscious of the 
fate which was imminently impending, joyously handled the 
ropes and sails, and made the ship rush through the water 
at a great rate. But as the drunken rowers exerted them- 
selves to the utmost in pulling the oars, and the luckless pilot 
steered at random and got the ship out of its due course, 
the starboard bow of the Blanche-Nef struck violently on a 
huge rock,^ which is left dry, every day, when the tide is 
out, and covered by the waves at high water. Two planks 
having been shattered by the crash, the ship, alas ! filled ani 
went down. At this fearful moment, the passengers and 
crew raised cries of distress, but their mouths were soon 
stopped by the swelling waves, and all perished together, 
except two who seized hold of the yard from which the sail 
was set. They hung on to it the greater part of the night, 
in earnest hope that they would receive aid in some shape or 
other. One of these men was a butcher of Eouen, of the 
name of Berold ; the other, a young man of gentle birth 
whose name was Greoffrey, the son of Grilbert de I'Aigle.^ 

The moon was at this time in her nineteenth day in the 
constellation of the Bull, and gave light to the world for 

* Historians have preserved the name of the rock on which the ship 
struck ; super scopulos qui dimntur Chaterase. The French editors of 
Ordericus suppose that these rocks are what are now called le Raz de Gat- 
teville (formerly called Catteville), to the north of Baifleur. Chaterase 
they consider to mean the Raz-de-Catteville. Barfleur, near Cherbourg, 
enjoyed a considerable commerce in the middle ayes, and was a common 
port of embarkation for England from that part of Normandy. 

^ See before, b. viii. c. 12. Gilbert de I'Aigle, his father Engenulf, 
and other lords of that family are frequently mentioned in the previous 
history. 

D 2 



36 OEDEEICTJS YTTALTS. [b.XII. CH.XXY. 

nine hours, so that all objects on the surface of the sea were 
clearly visible to the sailors.^ Thomas, the master of this 
vessel, after his first plunge into the sea, gained fresh energy, 
and, recovering his senses, raised his head above the water, 
and perceiving the two men clinging to the yard-arm, 
cried out: "What has become of the king's son?" The 
shipwrecked men replied that he and all who were with him 
had perished. " Then," said he, " it is misery for me to 
live any longer." Having said this, he abandoned himseir 
to his fate in utter despair, preferring to meet it at once, 
rather than face the rage of the king in his indignation for 
the loss of his children, or drag out his existence and 
expiate his crime in a dungeon. Meanwhile, Berold and 
Geoffrey, hanging by the yard-arm over the waters, called 
upon Grod to save them, and encouraging one another, 
waited in fearful anxiety for the end to which it should 
please him to bring their misery. 

The night was bitterly cold and frosty, so that the young 
Geoff'rey, after severe suff*erings from the severity of the 
weather, lost his powers of endurance, and commending his 
companion to God, fell into the sea and disappeared. 
Berold, however, who was the poorest man of all the com- 
pany, and wore a sheep-skin dress, was the only one among 
so many who survived till the dawn of another day. In the 
morning, three fishermen took him into their skiff, and thu» 
he only reached the land. Having a little revived, he 
related all the particulars of the sad event to the crowd of 
anxious inquirers, and lived afterwards for twenty years in 
good health. 

Eoger, bishop of Coutances,^ had conducted on board the 
devoted ship his son AVilliam, who had been just appointed 
by the king one of his four principal chaplains, with his 
brother and three gallant nephews, and had given them his 
episcopal benediction, though they made light of it. The 

1 M. Le Prevost remarks that he is under the painful necessity of 
apprising the reader that this circumstance, which lends so poetical a 
character to our author's narrative, is entirely apocryphal, being inapplica- 
ble either to November 25, 1119, which was not the 19th but the '21st da\ 
of the moon, and when she was not in the sign of Taurus but in that o;' 
Leo ; or to November 25, 1120, which was so near the new moon that 
she was invisible during the greater part of the night. 

* Roger, bishop of Coutances, 1114 — October, 1123. 



DEC. 1120,] KING henet's geief. 37 

bishop aud many others who still lingered with him on 
the sea-shore, as well as the king, and those who accom- 
panied him, though they were a long way out at sea, heard 
the fearful cries of distress raised by the shipwrecked crew 
and passengers, but they did not learn what caused the 
shrieks until the next day, and marvelling what it could 
be, conversed about it, some saying one thing, some 
another. 

The melancholy news soon got abroad among the common 
people, and, spreading along the sea-coast, came to the ears 
of count Theobald ^ and other lords of the court ; but for that 
day no one ventured to make it known to the king, who was 
in a state of great anxiety and made many inquiries. The 
nobles shed many tears in private, and were inconsolable for 
the loss of their friends and relations ; but in the king's 
presence, severe as was the struggle, they concealed their 
grief, lest its cause should be discovered. On the day fol- 
lowing, by a well-devised plan of Count Theobald's, a boy 
threw himself at the king's feet, weeping bitterly, and upon 
his being qaestioned as to the cause of his sorrow, the king 
learnt from him the shipwreck of the Blanche-Nef. So 
sudden was the shock, and so severe his anguish, that he 
instantly fell to the ground, but being raised up by his 
friends, he was conducted to his chamber, and gave free 
course to the bitterness of his grief. Not Jacob was more 
woe-stricken for the loss of Joseph, nor did David give vent 
to more woeful lamentations for the murder of Amnion or 
Absalom. 

"When such was the grief of their sovereign, all the 
servants of the crown no longer strove to conceal their 
sorrow, and their lamentations continued for many days. 
The people also mourned for William the etheling,'^ whom 

1 Theobald, Count de Blois. 

' It does not appear from our own historians that the English felt any 
great regret for the loss of their young prince, apart from the shock which 
80 melancholy a catastrophe must have naturally caused, Henry of 
Huntingdon attributes to him exc«jssive pride and hauteur, and Brompton 
quotes William of Malmesbury as saying that he openly threatened the 
English that " if he came to reign over them, he would make them draw 
the plough like oxen." See Huntingdon's letter to Walter, p, 3U6, and 
Malmesbury 's Mod. Hist, p, 454, in Antiq^. Lib. 



38 OEDEEICUS VITALTS. [b.XII. CH. XXV. 

they considered the lawful heir to the throne of England, 
and who thus suddenly perished with the flower of her 
highest nobility. The young prince had at this time almost 
reached his seventeenth year ; he had just married the lady 
Matilda, who was nearly of his own age ; and lately, by his 
father's command, he had exultingly received the homage of 
all the great men of the realm. On him securely rested his 
father's love, the people's hopes; but short-sighted and sinful 
mortals scan in vain the decrees of the supreme and in- 
fallible Judge respecting his creatures, and the wicked go on 
in their transgressions until, like the fish caught by the 
hook, or the bird ensnared in the toils, they are irretrievably 
involved in endless misery. While such a man promises 
himself length of days, prosperity, and honour, he quickly 
falls into sudden destruction, misery, and ruin, as it has 
happened in daily occurrences from the beginning of the 
world to the present day, and may be clearly proved by the 
testimonies both of ancient and modern writers.^ 

The sorrowful king mourned for his sons, the flower of 
his nobility, and his principal barons, and especially he 
deplored the loss of Ealph the Eed, and Gilbert d'Exmes, 
frequently recounting, with tears in his eyes, their deeds of 
prowess. The nobles as well as the commons lamented 
their superior lords, their children and kingsfolk, their 
acquaintance and friends ; afiianced damsels those to whom 
they were betrothed ; and beloved wives ther loving husbands. 
I desire not to dwell on this mournful theme, and will only 
quote one short poem of a distinguished versifier:^ — 

^ Our author, with his usual discretion, makes only a very slight 
allusion to the prevalent opinion of the times, particularly among the 
clergy, that the shipwreck was a just judgment of Heaven on an unnatural 
vice which was very common among the young nobles who were lost in the 
Blanche-Nef. Henry of Huntingdon makes the charge in direct terms. 
See his History, p. 249, in Antiq. Lib. Duke Robert himself was com- 
monly accused of such practices, as we have before seen, and is said to 
have introduced them into Normandy on his return from the east. 

2 Whoever was the " versifier," perhaps Orderieus himself, even so fine 
a subject failed of inspiring his genius, and his lines are only remarkable 
for their rhymes and antithese3. Henry of Huntingdon, " one of the few 
composers of Latin verse in that age who rose above the common level," 
has some spirited lines on the subject, of which a free version is ^iven in 
his History, p. 249, in the Antiq. Lib, 



DEC. 1120.] ON THE LOSS OF THE BLANCHE-S-EE. 39 

Accidit hora gravis, Thomseque miserrima navis, 

Quam male recta terit, rupe soluta perit. 
Flebilis eventus, dum nobilis ilia juventus 

Est immersa mari, perditione pari. 
Jactatur pelago regum generosa propago, 

Quosque duces plorant monstra marina vorant, 
O dolor immensus ! nee nobilitas, neque census 

Ad vitam revocat, quos maris unda necat. 
Purpura cum bisso liquida putrescit abysso ; 

Rex quoque quem genuit, piscibus esca fuit. 
Sic sibi fidentes ludit Fortuna potentes ; 

Nunc dat, nunc demit ; nunc levat, inde premit. 
Quid numerus procerum, quid opes, quid gloria rerum, 

Quid, Gulielme, tibi forma valebat ibi? 
Marcuit ille decor regalis, et abstulit aequor 

Quod factus fueras, quodque futurus eras. 
Inter aquas istis instat daranatio tristis, 

Ni pietas gratis cselica parcat eis. 
Corporibus mercis animae si dona salutis 

Nactse gauderent, maesta procul fierent. 
Certa salus animae verum dat tripudiare 

His bene, qui caros commemorant proprios. 
Hinc dolor est ingens humana quod inscia fit mens, 

An requies sit eis, quos quatit uda Thetis. 

" The fatal hour is come, and Thomas's ill-fated ship, badly 
eteered, struck on a rock and was wrecked ! Melancholy 
event, when that youthful nobility was engulfed in the sea in 
one common ruin ! The illustrious offspring of kings suffer 
shipwreck, and sea-monsters devour those whom princes 
deplore. boundless grief! neither nobility nor fortune 
can recall to Life those who are drowned in the sea. Purple 
and fine linen rot in its depths, and the children of kings 
are the food of fishes. Thus fortune mocks those who trust 
to its smiles ; it gives, it takes away, it raises up and casts 
down. What availed thee, William! thy numerous retinue 
of nobles, thy wealth, thy glory, or thy grace of form ? — All 
the royal splendour has vanished, and for thee the waves 
have obliterated both the past and the future. Damnation 
pursues them in those dark waters, should not divine mercy 
vouchsafe to spare them. If, at the cost of their lives, their 
souls are saved, they will have reason to rejoice. Those 
may well exult w^ho have a sure hope that the loved 
relatives whom they remember in their prayers have their 
salvation secured. But it is a grievous affliction to have 



40 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXVI. 

no certainty that those who are engulfed in the sea enjoy 
everlasting rest." 

What mortal tongue can fully recount the numbers of 
those who had to mourn this fatal disaster, or the numerous 
domains which were deprived of their lawful heirs, to the 
great detriment of many persons ? As we have already said, 
the king's sons, William and Eichard, were amongst those 
who perished, with their sister Matilda, wife of Eotrou, count 
of Mortain.^ There were also Richard, the young earl of 
Chester, distinguished for his bravery and kindness of heart, 
with his wife Matilda,^ sister of Theobald, count palatine. 
Othere, his brother, son of Hugh, earl of Chester, and 
governor and tutor of the king's youngest son, at the 
moment when the Blanche-Nef went down and the nobles 
were hopelessly buried in the waves, took, as it is reported, 
the young prince in his arms, and sinking with him, they 
were never again seen. Theodoric, the nephew of Henry, 
emperor of Germany,^ a mere boy ; also two beautiful sons 
of Ives de Grantmesnil, with their cousin, William de 
Ehuddlan,^ who was proceeding to England by the king's 
command to take possession of the inheritance of his ances- 

' Malmesbury calls her the countess of Perche. Mortain was the 
capital of Perche, and gave that title to the counts. Rotrou's father 
Geoffrey being still living (see afterwards, b. xiii. c. 1), he may have 
been called count of Perche. Ordericus gives him the title of Count of 
Mortain by anticipation. Malmesbury relates an affecting incident in the 
fate of this lady which, with that mentioned a few lines below of the 
conduct of Othere, Richard's governor, are redeeming traits in the charac- 
ters of two of the sufferers in a group of whom, generally, so little good is 
said. The historian informs us that " the water having washed some of 
the crew overboard and entering the chinks drowned others, the boat was 
launched, and the young prince getting into it might certainly have been 
saved by reaching the shore, had not his illegitimate sister, the countess of 
Perche, now struggling with death in the larger vessel, implored her 
brother's assistance, shrieking out that he should not abandon her so 
barbarously. Touched with pity, he ordered the boat to return to the 
ship, that he might rescue his sister ; and thus the unhappy youth met his 
death through excess of affection ; for the skiff, overcharged by the multi- 
tude who leaped into it, sank, and buried all indiscriminately in the deep." 
Mod. Hist. p. 456, Antiq. Lib. 

^ The king's niece. 

3 Probably a son of Agnes, the emperor's sister, and Frederick, duke of 
Suabia. 

* William de Rhuddlan, son of Robert de Rhuddlan. See b. viii. c. 3. 
(Vol. iii. pp. 443—454.) 



DEC. 1120.] THE SHIPWEECKED. 41 

tors in that country ; "William, surnamed Bigod/ "William 
de Pirou,^ the king's steward ; GreotFery Eidel,^ Hugh de 
Moulins/ Eobert Mauconduit/ and Glisulf, the king's ini- 
quitous secretary; all these, and many other persons of 
distinction were swallowed up by the sea. Relations and 
acquaintances, comrades and friends, wailed their miserable 
fate, when, in different countries, they learnt the desolation 
and bereavements occasioned by their death. It is said of 
those who perished that there were no less than eighteen 
females who were either daughters, sisters, nieces, or wives 
of kings or earls. 

Concern for others has been my only motive in furnishing 
these details, which, having collected from authentic informa- 
tion, I am induced to record for the benefit of future 
ages. For myself, I have none to mourn, except from com- 
mon feelings of pity, as no one of my kindred was swallowed 
up in that horrible gulf, for whom I had to shed the tears 
which flow for the loss of those who are of our own blood. 

The dwellers on the coast, as soon as they ascertained 
that the reports of the disaster was well founded, dragged 
to the shore the wreck of the ship, with the whole of 
the royal treasure ; and almost all that was in the ves- 
sel, the crew and passengers excepted, was recovered. 
Active men were diligently employed on the seventh of the 
calends of December [25th ISovember], while the faithful 
were celebrating the feast of St. Catherine,^ virgin and 

^ Probably a son or brother of Roger Bigod. 

^ William, lord of Pirou, near Lessai, whose family, and probably this 
lord, were benefactors to the abbey of Lessai. They were also re-established 
in England, where they gave their name to Stoke-Pirou, or Pero, in Somer- 
setshire. We find in the Monast. Anglican, ii. p. 7, a charter of Henry I. 
with the subscription, Ego GuUelmus Pirou, dapifei^, which would seem to 
prove that this person escaped the shipwreck, as his signature is preceded 
by that of the queen, Adelaide of Louvaine. 

' He was son-in-law of Hugh d'Avranches, earl of Chester. His widow 
Geva founded the abbey of Canwell in Staffordshire. See Monast. 
Anglic., i. p. 439. Her daughter married Richard Basset, and their son, 
Geoffrey Basset, who lived in the time of Henry II., resumed the name of 
Ridel. 

* Third son of William de Moulins. 
^ In a transaction between the abbey of Fdcamp and Philip de Bra- 
iouse in 1103 {Mon. Anglic, ii. p. 973), we find a GuUelmus Mulut 
Conductus, who was probably father of the person here named, 

" The 23th November is the feast of St. Catherine ; but if the ship wat. 



42 



ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [B-XII. Cn.yXVII. 



martyr, in searching along the coast for the bodies of those 
who were drowned, but finding none, they lost their expected 
rewards. Eich lords caused diligent inquiries to be made 
in all quarters for good swimmers and experienced divers, 
and offered them large sums for any bodies of their deceased 
friends which could be recovered, in order that they might 
be buried with due honour. 

The tenants on the fief of Mortain especially exerted 
themselves, as almost all the lords and men of distinction in 
that county had perished in the wreck of the Blanche-Nef 
The count only, as I have already mentioned, who was 
suffering from diarrhea, with two men-at-arms, Eobert de 
Sauqueville, and one Walter, escaped ; having providentially 
quitted the vessel in which those who remained were lost; and, 
going on board the king's own ship, they crossed the sea in 
safety.^ However, the bodies of earl Eichard and several 
others were found some days after the shipwreck far from the 
spot where the vessel was lost ; having been carried to the 
spot by the force of the currents, as the tide daily ebbed and 
flowed ; and their persons were identified by those who were 
acquainted with them, from the clothes they wore. 

Ch. XXVII. Pope Calixtus II. returns to Rome — Ilisponti' 
ficate — The antipole Boiirdin arrested, and kept in con- 
finement till his death. 

Iisr the year of our Lord 1120, the thirteenth indiction, pope 
Calixtus, having restored order in the ecclesiastical afiairs of 
France, returned to Italy, having in his company a great 
number of men of rank, of both orders ; and being well 
received by the Eomans governed the apostolical see for five 
years.^ This pope performed, by Grod's grace, many good 
works, and was the brightest light and the best model of 
virtues the church had in our times. He caused the anti- 
wrecked on the night between the 25th and 26th, as our author has before 
stated, the search for the bodies could not have commenced before 
the 26th. 

' As the king's ship sailed before the Blanche-Nef, this statement can 
only be reconciled with that circumstance by supposing that the count and 
his two attendants hurried from one vessel to the other just in time to 
embark with the king. 

^ Pope Calixtus reached Rome June 3, 1120. We have already men- 
tioned the duration of his pontificate. 



1120 — 1121.] BOITEDIK-, THE ANTIPOPE. 43 

pope Bourdin who was tyrannizing over the church to be 
arrested at Sutri, and shut him up in the monastery of La 
Cava to prevent his again disturbing catholic unity by his 
bowlings.^ This monastery is the habitation of monks who 
are allowed by their rule a plentiful table and abundance of 
all things necessary for subsistence. It stands on a spot 
which is almost inaccessible, so that no one can approach it 
but by one path, whence it derives its significant name of 
La Cava. For as lions, bears, and other wild beasts are con- 
fined in caves, in order that, not being able to roam at large, 
they may not make cruel attacks on men or cattle, so, savage 
and unruly men, who wander about and perform their mis- 
chievous gambles like the wild asses of the desert, are 
compelled in this cave of discipline to live under regular rule 
in the service of God. 

Ch. XXVIII. Henry I. marries Adelaide of Louvain — 
He distributes the estates of the lords ivho 'perished at sea. 

KrN'G Henry, having lost his wife and his son, resolved after 
consulting his council, to contract another marriage, and 
having selected Adelaide, the beautiful daughter of the dukp 
of Louvain,^ the marriage was celebrated with the Christian 
rites, the king wearing the ensigns of royalty; and the 
queen was crowned by the ministrations of the priesthood.^ 
She adorned the court and kingdom for fifteen years, but 
though richly endowed in other respects, to this day* she 
has borne the king no child. 

• Bourdin, the antipope, having been arrested at Sutri by the aid of the 
Normans in Italy, was conducted with ignominy to Rome, mounted on a 
camel, April 23, 1121, and sent in captivity to the celebrated abbey of La 
Cava. He was afterwards transferred to Janula, and again, in 1124, to 
Fumone, where he died at a very advanced age. 

2 Queen Adelaide, or Alice, was the daughter of Geoffrey I., surnamed 
The Bearded, duke of Brabant and Louvam, by Ida of Namur. The 
king Avas then fifty-one years old. 

3 The marriage was celebrated at Windsor, which being in the diocese 
of Salisbury, the bishop of that see was on the point of giving the nuptial 
benediction, and had already put on his pontifical robes, when the arch- 
bishop, Ralph d'Escures, who was supposed to be prevented fi-om travel- 
ling by a paralytic affection, made his appearance, and gave directions to 
the bishop of Worcester to proceed with the ceremony, instead of the 
bishop of the diocese. 

* This passage must have been written before the death of Henry I. 



44 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXIX. 

The king distributed with exemplary justice the domains 
of those who perished in the shipwreck amongst those who 
survived them, giving their wives, daughters, and nieces with 
the inheritance of their deceased relatives to his young 
nobles, thus affording consolation to a number of persons, 
and liberally endowing them beyond their expectations. 

Eanulf of Bayeux obtained the earldom of Chester, with 
all the patrimony of Earl liichard, being the next heir as 
nephew of Matilda, Earl Hugh's sister. E-anulf married 
Lucy,^ widow of Eoger, son of Grerald, by whom she had 
William Eanulf, who succeeded at his death to the earldom 
of Chester, and all his paternal inheritance on both sides 
of the sea. 

Oh. XXIX. FidJc, count of Anjou, goes to Jerusalem, and 
joins the Knights- Templars — On his return, he grants 
them a yearly subsidy. 
Eflk, count of Anjou, having concluded a peace with the 
king of England, and ratified the alliance by a union between 
their children, as before mentioned, became anxious for the 
safety of his soul, and very desirous of being reconciled to 
Grod. In consequence, he devoted himself to doing penance 
for the sins he had committed, and leaving the government 
of his territories to his wife and his sons G-eoffrey and Elias, 
who were of tender age, he went in pilgrimage to Jeru- 
salem,^ and there, joining the Knights-Templars, remained 
for some time. Eeturning home, with their permission, 
he voluntary agreed to pay them a tribute, bestowing upon 
them annually three hundred livres^ of Anjou. Thus 
did this illustrious count pay a yearly subsidy to the 
reverend knights, whose whole life is spent in combating for 

^ Lucy's first husband was Ives Taillebois ; her second, Roger, son of 
Gerald, and brother of William de Roumare. It is remarked that there 
was only the interval of a month between the two marriages. By her 
second husband she had a son named William after his uncle, who had 
attained his majority or nearly so when she married for the third time. 
Respecting this lady, see the Continuator of Ingulf. 

2 He set out April 20, 1120, and began his journey homewards Sept. 
24, in the year following. 

3 M. Leopold Delisle calculates the livre of Anjou to have been worth 
about thirty-four or thirty-five francs of the present day, whioh multiplied 
by thirty would make about one thousand francs in intrinsic value, and 
more than six thousand according to the present value of mone^. 



1120—1125.] P0N», ABBOT or CLUNi. 45 

G-od, both with body and soul, and who despising- all worldly 
things, are daily prepared for martyrdom ; and his laudable 
example induced several other French lords to imitate his 
liberality. 

Ch. XXX. Allot Pons quits Chmi — His successors — Bettirns 
to Cluni — His disorderly intrusion — The alley pillaged — 
His imprisonment at Home — Moccommunication and death. 

After the council of Eheims, concerning which I have 
related many particulars, tlie archbishop of Lyons, the bishop 
of Macon, and many other bishops, greatly harassed the 
monks of Cluni, depriving them of several of their domains 
which had been granted them by others, and inciting the 
clergy, who are always jealous of the monks, to rebel against 
tbem. They heaped insults upon them throughout their 
dioceses, and grievously oppressed them by their own acts 
and by means of thejr subordinates. Thus the brethren, 
unable to bear these losses and injuries, were in great 
tribulation, and took refuge in the sheepfold of the monastery, 
like sheep fleeing from the jaws of wolves. There also sprung 
up a bitter controversy between the monks themselves in 
the interior of their house. Some of them stirred up jea- 
lousies against their Abbot Pons, and accused him before Pope 
Calixtus at Eome of being passionate, as well as lavish in his 
administration, and of wasting the funds of the monastery 
in useless litigation. On hearing this Pons, was very indig- 
nant, and without reflection, resigning his office of abbot into 
the pope's hands, went on a pilgrimage, and spent some time 
at Jerusalem, Mount Thabor, and other sacred places in 
Palestine, where the Lord Jesus conversed in the flesh with 
the poor Nazarenes. The pope, incensed at the departure of 
Pons without his licence and benediction, commanded the 
monks of Cluni to elect a proper person to preside over them, 
and their choice fell on Hugh, a most excellent old man ; 
but this abbot died three months afterwards, and the monks 
buried him on the north side of the apsis of the choir, and 
caused the following epitaph to be inscribed on the vaulted 
tomb of stone erected over his grave : 

Hie Cluniacensis jacet abbas Hugo secundug, 

Patre Besontinus, Lup;dunensis genitrice ; 

Religione nitens, grandotvus, amore, pioque 



'46 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b. XII. CIE.XXX. 

Semper ovans cultu, tibi, summe Creator, inheesit, 
In requie tecum modo felix vivat in cevum ] 

"Here lies Hugh the second, abbot of Cluni, whose father was of 
Besanfon, his mother of Lyons. Eminent for piety, advanced in years, 
and unceasingly zealous in the love and the service of God, he was 
devoted to thee, Sovereign Creator. May he rest and live with thee in 
bliss eternal ! " 

After this, the monks of Cluni elected for their abbot a 
pious, noble, and learned brother, named Peter, under whose 
government they have now lived for many years. 

Meanwhile Abbot Pons enjoyed a great reputation in 
Judaea, and the fame of his piety and elevation of soul 
was spread abroad among foreign nations. Then, with the 
instability natural to human imperfection, he left the land 
of the prophets and apostles and returned to Prance, where 
he caused great trouble to many minds ; for, on his 
return from the east, having paid a visit to the brethren 
who were his friends at Cluni, a disgraceful schism, insti- 
gated by Satan, arose between the monks. Bernard-le- 
Gros, who was then prior, is said to have been the author 
and fomenter of this dissension. Some of the monks resolved 
to receive Pons as their abbot with great honours, while 
others made a determined opposition. The men of arms and 
other provincial peasants and burghers, welcomed him back, 
being attached to him for his afiability and sumptuous style 
of living ; and when they discovered the schism among the 
monks they broke into the monastery, and by force of arms 
intruded Pons and his friends, though he protested against 
it.^ Shame to say, these ruffians stormed the monastery 
walls, and as if it had been a city taken by assault, set them- 
selves instantly to plunder, and sacrilegiously pillaged the 
furniture and utensils of the servants of Grod. The dormi- 
tory and infirmary, and other private apartments of the 
monks, which none of the laity had been allowed to enter, 
were now thrown open, not only to men and women of good 
repute, but to buffoons and prostitutes. 

On the same day, a terrible prodigy happened at Cluni : 

* The forcible intrusion of Pons into his former abbey took place in 
1125. Our author has strangely misrepresented this outrage, which had 
no other object than pillage, and the carrying off all the precious objects, 
the sacred vessels, and reliquaries of this rich abbey, converted into ingots. 



A.D. 1125.] THE ABBEY OF CLUNI SACKED. 47 

the great nave of the church which had been lately erected, 
fell down, but through God's protection no one was hurt. 
Thus the Lord in his goodness struck terror by this sudden 
disaster into those who were guilty of this scandalous out- 
rage, but in his boundless mercy saved them all. The rabble 
had, indeed, penetrated into every part of the monastery, and 
were guilty of the most shameless outrages,^ but by divine 
mercy they were preserved in a wonderful manner from being 
crushed in this fearful catastrophe, in order that they might 
have time to repent. Peter the abbot was absent at the 
time, having gone into distant countries for the good of the 
numerous brotherhood who were under his charge. The 
monks who adhered to his party hastened to join him, and 
gave him an account of the injuries and losses to which the 
servants of Grod had been subjected ; but instead of returning 
to Cluni, he proceeded to Eome without loss of time, and 
laid before the pope^ what had occurred, to which the monks 
who had suffered in the affair bore witness. The pope was 
much afflicted on hearing this statement, both on account of 
the insults offered to themonks,and the sins of the people who 
had infringed the divine laws. He therefore promptly cited 
Pons to appear before him, enjoining him to abide the judg- 
ment of the apostolic see, and answer the charges which were 
made against him. Pons came to Eome, but was in no hurry 
to present himself to the pope, and though summoned refused 
to appear and plead to the charge on the appointed day. 

In consequence, theEoman pontiff dismissed Peter to Cluni 
with apostolical letters and the emblems of his dignity, and 
enjoined the monks to pay full obedience to him according to 
the order of St. Benedict. The commands of the pope were 
obeyed, and Abbot Peter, triumphant in the issue of his 
appeal, was well received by the monks ; who have submitted 
to his government to the present time, laudably combating for 
the divine law. Some days afterwards the pope caused Pons 
to be arrested by his officers for contempt of the apostolical 
authority, and committed him to prison; where shortly 
afterwards, he fell sick, being overwhelmed with the most 



^ These disorders lasted from the beginning of Lent till the month of 
October. 

'■* Honorius 11. 



48 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b.XIT. CH.XXXI. 

poignant sorrow, and, ending his days in confinement, was 
generally lamented.^ Thus, as the poet says 

Principium fini solet impar esse videri. 
Oft the beginning diiFers from the end, 

every one ought by his hearty prayers and invocations 
to intercede with Grod, the source of all good, that he, who 
hath begun a good work in us may perfect, confirm it, and 
protect it, both in prosperity and adversity, until the faithful 
champion receives the reward of the heavenly inheritance. 

Ch. XXXI. An earthquake in England — Appointments to 
dbheys and lislioprics —Mostly Normans preferred — Ralph 
d'Escures, Archbishop of Canterhiiry, succeeded hy William 
de Curboil, a canon — The archbishops had been generally 
monhs. 
[1119.] I:s' the thirteenth indiction, on Sunday the fourth 
of the calends of October [28th September], about 
tierce, when mass was singing, there was a great earthquake 
in England, and the walls and masonry of the churches 
were cracked in four counties. It was felt in the shires of 
Chester, Shrewsbury, Hereford, and Grloucester, and the 
neighbouring districts, and struck the inhabitants with such 
consternation that they were in terror of their lives. Sub- 
sequently, several hierarchs of churches in England and 
Normandy departed this life ; and, under the dispensations 
of divine providence, resigned the burden of the prelacy, 
which they ambitiously bore, to others. 

Geoffrey of Orleans,^ abbot of Croyland, a pious and 

^ The ex-abbot Pons died December 28, 1128. Although he had been 
excommunicated, and in a state of flagrant rebellion against the holy see, 
our author, echoing the fanatical party who were attached to him, speaks 
just before of his sanctity, proved, as he says, by the miracles wrought at 
his tomb ; for by an indulgence which appears somewhat strange his 
remains were conveyed to Cluni. He was represented on this tomb with 
his feet bound, to betoken his excommunication. 

^ Geoffrey of Orleans had been prior of St. Evroult. He succeeded 
Ingulf the historian as abbot of Croyland in 1119 (see his Chronicle, p. 
2u3, in Antiq. Lib.), and died in 1124. His successor Waltheof was 
probably brother of Cospatric. *' Frater Gaii Patricii ; " our author calls 
him earl of Dunbar. See Monast. Anglic, i. p. 400. This Cospatric 
had large possessions in Yorkshire. He and his brother were probably 
«)ns of Cospatric, earl of Northumberland, in 1069. Waltheof was deposed 
in 1138 by the legate Alberic. 



A.D. 1121 — 1128.] SUCCESSION OF BISHOPS. 49 

pleasant man, departed on the nones [Sth] of June, and 
was succeeded by Waltheof, brother of Cospatrick, of a 
noble English family ; also, Aldbold the Jerusalemite,^ abbot 
of St. Edmunds,^ king and martyr, and who had been a 
monk of Bee, died suddenly. After him Anselm, nephew 
of the archbishop of the same name, governed the abbey for 
a number of years. On the death of Eobert de Limesi,^ 
bishop of the Mercians [Chester and Coventry] ; Eobert, 
surnamed Pecceth succeeded him ; at whose death, Eoger, the 
nephew of Geofirey de Clinton* obtained the bishopric ; 
after the death of Thorold, abbot of Peterborough, it was 
administered by the noble Matthias,^ of Mount St. Michael, 

^ Not that Aldbold was a native of Jerusalem, as it is said in the 
Monasticon ; but he had made a pilgrimage there. 

^ Our author calls him de Bedrici-Rure alias. Aldbold, who had 
been prior of St. Nicaisius at Meulan in 1115, died March 1, 1119. 
Anselm, nephew of St. Anselm, and abbot of St. Saba at Rome, suc- 
ceeded Aldbold in 1121, and was nominated and enthroned as bishop of 
London in 1 136 ; but his election having been contested, he returned to 
his abbey, which he administered till his death in 1148. This abbot had 
been previously sent to England by the pope as legate of the holy see, 
but the king refused him admission. 

^ Robert de Limesi, who transferred the episcopal see from Chester to 
Coventry in 1095, died August 30, 1117. Robert Pecceth, who succeeded 
him, had been employed in the pantry of Henry I. He was consecrated 
by archbishop Ralph at Abingdon, and died August 21 or 22, 1127. 

* Roger de Clinton paid the king three thousand silver marks for 
the bishopric of Coventry. He was ordained priest, December 21, 1129, 
consecrated bishop at Canterbury the day following, and died at Antioch, 
April 16, 1148. 

^ After the death of the fierce abbot Thorold, Godric, the brother of 
his predecessor Brandon, administered the abbey of Peterborough. It 
then passed into the hands of Matthias, brother of Geoffrey Ridel, the 
kmg's justiciary. It is probable that this Geoffrey Ridel is the person of 
that name described as having perished with his wife, daughter of the earl 
of Chester, in the shipwreck of the Blanche-Nef. After him came 
Arnulf, a Frenchman, who had been a monk of St. Lucien at Beauvais, 
and was afterwards prior of Canterbury. Arnulf, being raised to the see 
of Rochester in 1114, was replaced by John of S^ez, who appears to have 
been invited to England by the archbishop, Ralph d'Escures, and was one 
of the three persons he commissioned to fetch his pallium from Rome. 
John of Sdez having died of dropsy in the month of October, 1125, the 
king retained the abbey in his own hands for two years, and then sold it, 
according to his usual custom, in the month of May, 1128, to Henry of 
Anjou his kinsman, who was also related to the count of Anjou, and 
already abbot of St. John d'Angeli. Our limits will not allow of 
our tracing all the eccentricities of the life of this turbulent ecclesiastic, 

YOL. lY. E 



50 OEDEEICTJS VITALIS. [e.XII. CH.XXXI. 

who was succeeded "by John, a monk of Seez, a man of deep 
learning. At his death, the king gave the abbey m commen- 
dam to his cousin Henry, who had been abbot of St. John 
d'Angeli, but was expelled by the monks and "William, duke 
of Poitou. After Fulchered, the first abbot of Shrewsbury, 
who regulated divine worship in the convent, Godfrey, a 
monk of Seez had the pastoral care of it entrusted to him.^ 
Upon his dying suddenly soon afterwards, Herbert took the 
government of this rising community. Guntard, the 
strenuous abbot of Thorney, having departed this life, 
Eobert de Prunieres'^ was appointed in his place, ^e was 
chosen from the monks of St. Evroult for this preferment on 
account of his great endowments in learning and eloquence 
and his excellent character. 

In the time of Pope Paschal, Ealph, the archbishop of 
Canterbury, sought the king in Normandy, and thence set 
out for Eome, although he was suffering from a swelling in 
his feet ; but hearing on the road of the pope's death, he 
returned to Eouen, and stayed nearly five years in Normandy. 
"While he was there, on the feast of the Translation of St. 
Benedict, which is olDserved by the monks with great solem- 
nity, mass being ended, at the moment when he was being 
disrobed of his episcopal vestments, he was suddenly struck 
with paralysis, and lost the use of speech. Some days after- 
wards, from the care lavished upon him by his physicians, he 
could speak a little, but never fully recovered the powers of 
speech. He survived for two years in this paraljrtic state, 
having been conveyed to his own see in a carriage conveni- 
ently adapted for his accommodation. 

who was successively bishop of Soissoas, monk and prior of Cluni, prior 
of Savenay, archbishop of Besanfon for three days, bishop of Saintes for 
seven, at war with the monks of Peterboroiigh, and then driven out of 
England; and returned at last in the month of January, 1131, to die at 
his abbey of St. John d'Angeli, of which he had been never dispossessed 
since his first appointment in 1003. 

* Fulchered, who had been a monk of Seez, died in March, 1113. 
Godfrey, another monk of Seez, and also abbot of Shrewsbury, died 
March 22, 1128. Herbert, a monk of Shrewsbury, was consecrated the 
same year as abbot of that monastery by William, archbishop of Canter- 
bui-y. The time of his death is not known. Herbert translated the relics 
of St. Winifred from Wales to Shrewsbury. 

' Robert de Prunieres became abbot of Thorney in 1140, and died in 
1147. Concerning this abbot, see before, b. viii. c. 18, and xi. c. 32. 



A.D. 1123.] AECHBISHOP OF CANTEEBTTRT. 51 

At last, in tlie year of our Lord, 1123,- the first indiction, 
Archbishop Ealph died at Canterbury on the thirteenth of 
the calends of November [20th October] ; after the see 
had remained void for several years, he was succeeded by 
William de Curboil,^ a regular canon. In this case, the canons 
departed from their ancient custom, on account of their 
jealousy of the monks. Augustine, a monk, was the first who 
preached the gospel in England, and converting King 
Ethelbert and his nephew Sebert, with the people of Kent 
and London, to the Christian faith,^ was thereupon created by 
Pope G-regory primate and metropolitan of all England. 
Erom that time, all the archbishops of Canterbury except 
Erigeard, Odo, and Stigand, were monks ; Erigeard* was 

^ Ralph d'Escures died August 20, 1122. Respecting this prelate, see 
before, b. vi, c. 4. We have the authority of Eadmer, Avhich is better than 
our author's, for fixing his death a year earlier than we find it in the text. 

2 William de Curboil, February 2, 1123— November 24, 113G. This 
prelate is sometimes called William de Turbine. He was previously prior 
of St. Osyth. 

' A.D. 597. 

* M. Le Prevost's note says that " the prelate whom our author calls 
FrigearduSf is designated in the Anglo-Saxon chronology by the name of 
Feologildus. He flourished under Lothaire, king of Kent. His journey 
to Rome must have been made between 778 and 782, the period of Pope 
Agatho's pontificate." 

Several errors have crept into this passage, an unusual occurrence in 
our accurate friend's annotations. The date assigned for Pope Agatho's 
pontificate is probably a misprint ; it should have been 679 — 682, a period 
nearly coinciding with Lothaire's reign in Kent. But we find no cotempo- 
rary bishop answering to the name of Friyeard or Feologild, nor any 
corresponding occurrence during this time. On the contrary, Theodore, a 
prelate of great celebrity, filled the see of Canterbury from 668 — 690. In 
the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, to which we presume the note refers, an abbot 
named Feologild (in some versions Theologild), is stated to have been 
raised to the archbishopric, in place of Wulfred, in 829 ; and, dying about 
two months afterwards, to have been succeeded by Ceolnoth. Florence of 
Worcester takes no notice of Feologild in his Chronicle, but duly places 
him in his catalogue of the archbishops. 

It is clear, however, from the dates alone, were there no other reason, 
that this cannot be the person referred to by Ordericus, nor can we admit 
the name of Frigeard to be identical with Feologild. Our author, as 
well as his commentator, has fallen into serious errors ; and we are 
inclined to think that Frigeard is synonymous with Wigheard, a " priest" 
who, we are told in the Saxon Chronicle, being sent to Rome in 667 that 
he might be there consecrated archbishop of Canterbury, died soon after- 
wards ; and Theodore was appointed in his place. But this occurred in 
E 2 



52 OEDEBICrS TITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXXI. 

the chaplain of King Lothaire, and being elected to the 
archbishopric, went to Home to receive consecration from 
Pope Agatho. The pope having deferred it for ten days, 
Avhile Frigeard was waiting for the benediction, he fell ill and 
took to his bed, and so died without receiving the apostolic 
unction. Odo was chosen from among the secular clergy 
for his noble extraction and courtesy of manners, but after 
his consecration, finding that all his predecessors had been 
monks, he voluntarily assumed the monastic habit with 
much devotion, and served God in sincerity, both as monk 
and archbishop, till the day of his death.^ As for Stigand, 
he was a chaplain of Queen Emma, a very ambitious and 
worldly-minded man, who first usurped the see of London, and 
then that of Canterbury. But he never received the pallium 
from the pope at Eome ; on the contrary, he was interdicted 
by Pope Alexander from exercising the archiepiscopal 
functions, and only profaned Harold when he gave him the 
benediction and crowned him. Being puffed up at having 
procured his elevation by his own means, he was humiliated 

the reign of Oswy, king of Northumbria, and Egbert of Kent, and in the 
popedom of Vitalian, instead of Lothaire and Agatho, as our author repre- 
sents. Florence of Worcester repeats the statement of the Chronicle, 
with the addition that Wigheard was one of the " clerks " of Deusdedit- 
the late archbishop, meaning one of the canons or secular clergy, William 
of Malmesbury confirms this, and (b. iii. c. 29, and iv. c. 1) gives 
some further details respecting the archbishop-elect ; among others, that 
" he was snaiched away, with almost all the companions of his journey, 
soon after he reached Rome, by a pestilence which happened at that time." 
But the circumstance of Wigheard's having been one of the secular clergy 
and not a monk, appears conclusive of the correctness of our suppo- 
sition ; it being the express object of our author in this passage to point out 
the very few persons among that class of ecclesiastics who were advanced 
to the archbishopric during a long course of years. Feologild, it will be 
observed, could not have been the person meant, for he was a monk and 
abbot. 

^ St. Odo was archbishop of Canterbury from before 946 — 958. Very 
little is said of him in English history, the principal fact being his cruel 
separation of King Edwy from Elgiva. Henry of Huntingdon describes 
this archbishop as " eminent for his talent, worth, and virtues, and gifted 
with a prophetic spirit." His belonging to the secular clergy, his high 
birth, and courteousness of manners, all which we learn from Ordericus, 
render the accounts of his extreme severity to the young king and Elgiva 
the more remarkable. He was succeeded by ^Ifsige, who, being frozen to 
death in crossing the Alps on his way to Rome to receive the pallium, was 
succeeded by Dunstan. 



A.D. 1123.] AESOT EOGEE DTJ SAP EESIG^"S. 53 

by Grod, and left to mourn over his own ruin ; for wlien 
William the Eirst was established on the throne, Stigand was 
deposed by a synod for flagrant offences ; and therefore he 
ought not to be reckoned in the list of archbishops.^ 

The English nation were attached to the monks, because 
they owed to them their conversion to Christianity, and in 
consequence they always paid them great reverence; and 
even the clergy showed their respect and good will to the 
order, by being very content that monks should be preferred 
in lieu of themselves. But now, customs and laws are 
changed, and the clergy advance their own order, for the 
purpose of humbhng and crushing the monks. 

Ch. XXXIL Besignation of Boger du Sap, allot of St. 
Evroidt — His letter to King Henry — Warin d'Essarts 
appointed allot — Death of Roger, 

About this time, Eoger, abbot of St. Evroult,^ worn out 
with age and infirmities, lost his former vigour, and was 
very anxious to be released from the burden of his pastoral 
care. He, therefore, sent to England Ernand de Tilleul, 
and Gilbert des Essarts,^ two honourable monks, with a 

' Stigand was first preferred to the see of Elmham (1038) and then to 
that of Selsey. It was Winchester, not London, to which he was translated 
in 1047, and endeavoured to hold with the archbishopric of Canter- 
bury, when elevated to it in 1053, on the expulsion of Archbishop Robert. 
Whatever may have been the irregularities of this aspiring prelate, his 
principal fault, in the eyes of the Conqueror, was his being an Englishman 
and an adherent of Harold. The synod at Winchester, held in 1070, at 
which he was deposed, was employed by the king, as Florence of Worcester 
informs us, " to deprive the English of their ecclesiastical dignities, in 
order that he might appoint persons of his own nation to their preferments, 
and thus confirm his power in his new kingdom." 

^ Roger du Sap. He had been abbot of St. E\Toult from the year 
1091 ; see vol. ii. p. 260 and 522, 523. Ordericus says, in his preface to 
this history, that the work was commenced by the command of this abbot, 
when he was advanced in years. Roger du Sap resigned in 1123, and 
died, as we shall presently find, January 13, 1126. 

3 Arnold de Tilleul-en-Auge, son of Humphrey de Tilleul and Adeliza 
de Grantmesnil, and brother of Robert de Rhuddlan and William, abbot 
of St. Eufemia. Arnold had been commissioned by the chapter of St. 
Evroiilt to present Roger du Sap to Duke Robert at Windsor, in 1091, he 
being then in England. See vol. ii. p. 523. 

Gilbert des Essarts-en-Ouche, a small commune near St. Evroult. 



54 OKDEEICrS TITALIS. [B.XII. CH.XXXIT. 

letter addressed to tlie king, and written out by Ealph 
Lawrence, to the following purport : — 

" To Ms glorious lord, Henry, king of 'England, ^oger, tlie 
unworthy minister of St. Evroult, sends greeting in tlie 
name of Him loho giveth health and salvation to Icings. 

" Forasmucli as tlie apostle saith there is no power which 
is not of God, and the things that be are ordained of Grod, 
it behoves that every one to whom power is entrusted should 
provide for the welfare of God's house. I, therefore, my 
lord, who, unworthy as I am, have, under God's providence 
and the noble government of your excellency, filled the 
place of abbot in ministering to the brethren of the monas- 
tery of St. Evroult, and, sustained by your protection, 
have, more to my burden than honour, filled the ofiice for a 
great number of years ; but now, worn with age and infirm 
in body, and fearing lest I should harm rather than profit 
the church, when the manners of men are undergoing a 
change fi'om the vicissitudes of the times, after taking coun- 
sel with my spiritual fathers, the archbishop of E-ouen and 
the bishop of Lisieux, and of several abbots and other men 
of the ecclesiastical order, humbly implore your clemency 
to take pity on one to whom you have hitherto shown some 
small degree of regard, and release him from a burden for 
which he is now useless and become incapable, and, in the 
vrisdom which God has given you, provide a fit and proper 
pastor for this house of God. At the same time, that it 
may not be supposed I use these things as a pretext for 
obtaining repose for myself by withdrawing from the com- 
munity in consequence of their disorderly or turbulent con- 
duct, I bear witness before God to their charity, obedience, 
and simplicity; for, nourished with the milk and solid 
aliment abundantly provided by the maternal care of the 
church, I have found them always docile in conforming to 
the injunctions of their spiritual father, whom they have 
implicitly obeyed. Alleging, most excellent king, as my 
only reason, my wretched state of weakness, arising from 
age and my utter incapabihty, I entreat you not to postpone 
the granting my request. Sinner as I am, I devoutly j)ray 
the King of kings that He may vouchsafe to co-operate with 
you in this matter. Tarewell." 



A.D. 1123.] WAEIN ELECTED AEEOT. 55 

In consequence, tlie king, full of benevolence, lamented 
the infirmities of the simple-minded and pious old man, and 
issued letters-patent to the convent of monks, dii'ecting 
them to elect for themselves a good and proper abbot. 
"Wherefore, on the return of the messengers, sixty-six monks 
assembled in chapter at St. E\TOult, in the name of the 
Lord, and attentively heard the reading of the chapter of 
the rule of St. Benedict, which relates to the election of an 
abbot. Then the venerable abbot, Eoger, and his spiritual 
sons, having discoursed on the cure of souls, chose one 
of themselves, in the Lord's name, to supply the place of 
abbot. Warin des Essarts, surnamed the Little,^ was the 
monk elected ; and in this they followed the example of the 
apostles, who chose by lot Matthias, God's little servant,^ to 
complete the number of the twelve ; and he was accordingly 
ordained. The two old monks before-mentioned, by order 
of the convent, presented their brother-elect to John, bishop 
of Lisieux ; and with his leave crossed the sea in the cold 
and storms of the winter season, and journeying in search 
of the king, who was then taking a survey of Northumbria, 
they travelled by long roads, deep in mud, till they found 
him at York, on the feast of St. Nicholas, bishop of Myra 
[6th Dec.]. The illustrious king, having learnt the proceed- 
ings of the monks, confirmed the election, and by the advice 
of Thurstan, archbishop of Tork,^ conferred the abbey on 
the brother-elect; Stephen, abbot of Chartres, who was 
afterwards patriarch,* being witness to the instrument. The 
king then granted to abbot "Warin all the possessions of 
the monastery, with the dignities and privileges which his 
predecessors had enjoyed to that time ; and for his security 

^ Warin des Essarts, near St. Evroult, elected abbot, 1123 : died, June 
20, 1137. Ordericus submits his history to him in the last sentence of the 
preface. 

2 We find no authority in the Acts of the Apostles for this description 
of the person of St. Matthias. It was probably borrowed from one of those 
apocryphal works with which it would appear that the library of St. 
Evroult was abundantly supplied in our author's time. 

' The pope had so peremptorily demanded the revocation of Thurstan's 
banishment, that the king and archbishop Ralph were obliged to give way, 
though with great reluctance. Thurstan was therefore enthroned at York 
in 1121. 

* Stephen, abbot of St. Jean-en-Vallee at Chartres, afterwards patriarch 
of Jerusalem in 1128. 



56 OEDEEICTTS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXXII. 

against all cavillers gave him a charter to the following 
purport : — 

" Henry, king of England, to John, bishop of Lisieux, 
Stephen, count of Mortain, Eobert de la Haye,^ and all his 
barons and liege-men in Normandy, sends greeting : Know 
ye, that I have given and granted the abbey of St. Evroult 
to abbot "Warin ; and my will is, and I strictly command, 
that he shall hold the same in peace and quietness, and in 
all honour ; with the churches and tithes, lands, woods, and 
commons, and all the appurtenances, in such manner as any 
of his predecessors held the same, in peace, quietness, and 
honour. Witnesses, Thurstan, archbishop of York ; William 
de Tankerville, and "William D'Aubigni, at York." 

Warin returned to Normandy, supported by the sove- 
reign authority of the puissant monarch, and having duly 
performed, with his brethren, the services of Lent, received 
the benediction from John, bishop of Lisieux, on Ascension 
day ; and thence learnt to endure the labours and sorrows of 
the pastoral care. He is more especially deserving of praise 
for his kind ofi&ces to the venerable Eoger, to whom, during 
the three years he survived, he performed the duties of a 
son to a father, a disciple to a master.^ The gentle old man 
occupied himself in his chamber, as he was before accus- 
tomed, in psalms, and prayers, and religious conversation. 
He was attended by a worthy priest as his chaplain, with 
whom he could talk ; hearing him say mass and the cano- 
nical of&ce in the oratory of St. Martin's,^ and conversing 
with him in question and answer on mysterious passages 
of the Holy Scriptures and the flowers of ascetic treatises. 
He had always felt the weight of exterior cares to be in- 
jurious and insupportable, and now that he enjoyed a secure 
and honourable freedom, he gave thanks to Grod, and, tran- 
quil as well as free, expected with joy the end of his days. 

^ This is probably'the same Robert de La Haie, nephew of Eudes-the- 
Steward, who granted a charter giving lands in England. See Gallia 
Christiania, vol. xi. col. 233. 

2 See vol. ii. p. 260. 

^ M. Le Prevost appears to consider that this is the church of St. 
Martin mentioned before, vol. ii. p. 288 ; but we rather incline to think, 
after examining the locality, that the " oratory " was attached to the 
church or the abbey at St. Evroult; it not being probable that the infirm 
old man would go out of the precincts to perform his daily devotions. 



A.D. 1126.] DEATH OP ABEOT EOGEE. 57 

At last, in the year of our Lord, 1126, tlie fourth indic- 
tion, the pious old man became more sick than he had 
usually been, and having been anointed with the holy oil, and 
completed all the other rites which are fitting for a servant 
of Grod, he expired on the ides [the 13th] of January. His 
disciple and successor, with the rest of the fraternity, com- 
mended his soul to Grod, and on the day following his body 
was brought into the chapter-house and buried there with 
great reverence, by the side of abbot Osbern. I composed 
a short epilogue to his memory in hexameter verses, in 
which more regard is had to truth than to poetical diction. 
Praying for him to the benignant Saviour, and recount- 
ing the virtues divinely implanted in him, I wrote thus : — 

Mitem sincerumque patrem, rex Christe, Rogerum, 

Salva ; nam pro te toleravit multa benigne. 

Rura, domos et velle suum dimisit egenus, 

Teque sequi studuit per iter virtutis anhelus. 

Gervasiusque pater illi fuit, Emmaque mater, 

In quibus emicuit morum jubar et decus amplum. 

Presbyter instructus documentis ultro Rogerus, 

Sumsit ovans almi monachi jugum Benedict!. 

Multa diu mores ejus possedit honestas, 

Qua meruit sociis preeponi rector et abbas. 

Praesule nam facto Serlone Salaribus, iste 

Caenobii sancti regimen suscepit Ebrulfi. 

Quinquies undenis monachus bene floruit annis, 

Unde ter undenis Utici fit pastor ovilis. 

Hie monachos novies denos in discipulatu 

Suscepit, rigidoque regi docuit monachatu. 

Simplex et dulcis, studiisque nitens bonitatis, 

Quos monuit verbis, exemplis profuit almis. 

Denique confectus senio, terris sua membra 

Deposuit, Jani duodena luce peracta. 

Abstersis culpis, bone rex, da gaudia lucis. 

Pads amator erat ; rogo nunc in pace quiescat ! Amen. 

" Christ, king of kings, give salvation to Eoger, the de- 
vout father who suffered much with patience for thy cause ! 
He gave up house and lands, and his own will, and became 
poor ; and strove, breathless, to follow thy steps on the road 
to righteousness. He had Grervase for his father and Emma 
for his mother, who were eminent for their virtues and 
graces. Eoger the priest being well taught in sacred learn- 
ing, took on him with joy the monastic yoke of the blessed 
Benedict." During his long career he distinguished himself 



58 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXXIIT. 

by the excellence of his life, and deserved well to be cliosen 
by bis brethren their ruler and abbot. For when Serlo 
was made bishop of Seez, he succeeded to the government 
of the abbey of Evroult. Por fifty-five years he was a monk 
there ; during thirty-three of which he was the shepherd of 
the flock. He admitted ninety monks into the community, 
and taught them the rule of severe monastic discipline. 
He was simple and kind, zealous in the cause of good, and 
those he admonished in words he also profited by his wor- 
thy example. At length, worn out by age, he gave his body 
to the earth when the twelfth day of January was ended, 
Merciful King, cleanse him of his sins, and grant him the 
joys of light ! He was a lover of peace : I pray for him that 
he may rest in peace ! Amen." 

Ch. XXXIII. Fresh disturbances in Normandy — Waleran, 
count de Mellent, revolts — The princess Matilda takes the 
veil at Fontevraud. 

In the year of our Lord, 1122, the tenth indiction, the spirit 
of malignity again raised the storms of war, and human 
blood was lamentably shed in brutal massacres. Erynnis, 
having established herself in the hearts of the perverse, 
revels in evil, and again stirs up mankind to arms for their 
own destruction and that of their brethren. The turbu- 
lent regret peace, and the rabble tranquillity, and in endea- 
vouring to curb the arrogance of their superiors they often 
fall, according to the just judgment of God, by each other's 
swords. They must be blind and infatuated indeed who 
would exchange peace for war ; who, when they enjoy the 
blessings of prosperity, covet misery as a thirsty man is 
eager for drink; who, not knowing how to value the good they 
possess, when it is lost search keenly for it, but overwhelmed 
with sorrow seek it in vain. Then, finding their loss irre- 
parable, they are plunged in grief and inconsolable. 

To proceed then, many persons, reflecting that King 
Henry's lawful heir was dead, and that the king, who was 
now growing old, had no legitimate off'spring,^ attached 
themselves strongly to his nephew William, and used all 

* Legitimd prole caruerit. It scarcely need be remarked that the 
king's only legitimate son, William, perished in the shipwreck of the 
Blanche-Nef. The words " legitimate offspring," used in the text, must 



A.D. 1122.] MATILDA TAKES THE VEIL. 59 

their efforts to raise him to power. The king had kindly 
brought up, as if they were his own children, Waleran and 
Eobert, the two sons of Eobert count of Mellent, from the 
time of their father's death ; for the king had loved him 
much, because in the beginning of his reign he had greatly 
aided and encouraged him. The two young men, on arriv- 
ing at the age of puberty, received knighthood at the king's 
hands, and "Waleran was put in possession of ail his father's 
domains on this side of the sea, namely the county of 
Mellent in France, and Beaumont with the territory be- 
longing to it in Normandy.^ His brother Eobert had the 
earldom of Leicester in England ; and the king gave him in 
marriage Amicia, the daughter of Ealph de Guader, who 
had been affianced to his own son Eichard ; "with Breteuil 
and the lands held under it for her dowry. 

This same king treated his daughter-in-law Matilda,^ with 
the greatest affection, and entertained her in England with 
the highest honours as long as she wished to remain there. 
But in the course of a few years, becoming desirous to see her 
parents, she returned to Anjou, and, induced by the love of 
her native country, stayed there for some time. At last, by the 
advice of G-eoffrey, bishop of Chartres, she gave up the world, 
ten years after she was contracted in marriage, and became 
a nun in the abbey of St. Eontevrault, where she has now 
attached herself to a heavenly spouse, whom she serves in 
freedom.* She was, I think, twelve years old in the summer 
she married the young prince, and six months had not 
elapsed when her beardless husband perished in the ship- 
wreck. The kind-hearted king brought her up as his own 
daughter, and detained her for a long time at his court -with 
the intention of marrying her to some person of high rank, 
and heaping upon her wealth and honours which would 
have raised her above all her family. But she chose the 
better part, and united herself to a celestial spouse, the Son 

be restricted to issue male, considered as heirs to the throne; the king's 
daughter Matilda, married to the emperor Henry V., born in lawful wed- 
lock, being still living. 

^ Namely Brionne and Pontaudemer. The last was the original patri- 
mony of the family. 

^ The widow of his son William. 

' This princess took the veil at Fontevraud in 1128, became abbess of 
that monastery in 1150, and died in 1154. 



60 OEDERICTJS TITALIS. [b.XII. Cn.XXXIT. 

of God and fhe Yirgin. For she was prudent as well as 
fair, eloquent and accomplished, and possessed of many 
virtues. May the good choice she has made be approved 
among men and pleasing to Grod ! 

Ch. XXXIY. Revolt of some of the Norman lords — Hugh 
de Montfort arrested and escajyes — Sis castle of Montfort 
heseiged and surrenders. 

Abotjt the same time Amauri, count of Evreux, nourished 
great bitterness in his mind at seeing the king's provosts 
and officers grievously harass the people on his domains. 
They exacted extraordinary imposts and perverted justice 
at their pleasure, laying heavy burdens on men both of 
high rank and low degree ; and this they practised, not on 
their own authority, but by the terror they inspired of the 
king's power. Meanwhile, although he, ignorant of this, 
tarried in England, the fear of him restrained any hostile 
movement, but men lamented that tax gatherers should so 
oppress the people. Corrupt officers are worse than thieves, 
for the peasants can escape from robbers by taking to flight 
or getting out of their way, but crafty bailiffs connot be got 
rid of without serious losses. 

The incensed Amauri therefore sought out Fulk, count of 
Anjou, his nephew, and used all his address to persuade him 
to give in marriage to "William, duke E-obert's son, his 
daughter Sibylla, who, for her worth, beauty, and illustrious 
birth, was worthy of an empire. Eulk readily agreed to his 
uncle's proposal, and inviting the young prince with his 
governor and domestics, betrothed his daughter to him,^ 
and gave him for her dowry the county of Maine until he 
should recover his hereditary dominions. Thereupon 
Amauri engaged on his side all such as he could persuade 
to join his enterprise, and with the natural levity of jSTor- 
mans, he found many who were easily induced to support him. 

1 See vol. iii. pp. 432, 433, and the notes; where this alliance, and the 
efforts made to dissolve it, are mentioned. The want of direct heirs to 
Henry's vast dominions, since the shipwreck of the Blanche-Nef, had 
turned much attention to the young prince, who seemed designed by 
providence to succeed his uncle. It was not till late in the year 1123 that 
the king and the pope succeeded, by threats of excommunication, in 
breaking off the match, on the ground of consanguinity between the 
affianced parties. 



A.D 1122 — 1223. J EEYOLT IK NOEMANDT. 61 

"Waleran, count of Mellent, "William de Eoumare, Hugh 
de Montfort, Hugh de Neufchatel, William Louvel, Baudri 
de Brai, Paganus de Gisors/ and several others, were the 
first to mutter treason, and privately joined the league ; 
but they soon afterwards, to their own loss, broke into open 
revolt. Count Waleran ardently desired an opportunity of 
exhibiting his youthful valour, but he certainly showed great 
weakness in embarking in this enterprize ; rebelling against 
his lord and guardian, and being among the first to lift his 
hand in cruel arms against him. He had three sisters,^ and to 
afford them the consolations of lawful matrimony, and at the 
same time strengthen himself on all sides among his neigh- 
bours, he gave them in marriage to three lords of castles, 
whose vassals, wealth, and strong places made them very 
powerful. One he gave to Hugh de Montfort, another to 
Hugh du Neufchatel, the son of Gervase, and the other to 
"William Louvel, the son of Ascelin, who, after the death of 
his brother Eobert Goel, acquired the castle of Tvri with all 
his patrimony. 

William de Eoumare^ claimed the land of his mother, which 
Eanulf of Bayeux, his father-in-law, had exchanged with the 
king for the earldom of Chester, together with another 
domain in England called Corby .^ But the king w^ould not 
grant his suit ; on the contrary, he gave him a contemptuous 
reply. The incensed youth therefore forthwith crossed over 
to Normandy, and taking his opportunity revolted from the 
king; and finding many allies made a fierce inroad from 
Neufchatel against the Normans. For two years he vented 
his wrath by plundering and firing the country, and taking 
many captives, nor did he relinquish his attacks until the 
king made him satisfaction, and restored to him the greater 
part of the domains which he had claimed. 

* All these persons have been already mentioned, and it may suffice 
to remark that William Louvel was lord of Ivry, and Hugh, of Chateau- 
neuf-en-Themirais. 

2 These three ladies were named Adeline, Amicia or Alice, and Aubrey. 

" This young lord must not be mistaken for his uncle, the castellan of 
Neuf-Marche-en-Lions. The person here spoken of was son of Roger de 
Roumare, by Lucy ; whose second marriage with Ranulf de Bricquessart 
has been already mentioned. 

* Probably Corby, near Stamford, the heritage of Ives Taillebois, Lucy's 
first husband. 



62 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXXIT. 

In tlie montli of September, Amauri, Waleran, and tlie 
other lords I have before named, met at lia-Croix-Saint- 
Leuffroy,^ and there entered into a general conspiracy. 

These clandestine treasons did not escape the king's 
observation ; and he, therefore, assembled a large force at 
Eouen in the month of October, and marching out of the 
city on a Sunday, after dinner, "without telling any one where 
he was going or what he intended to do, summoned Hugh 
de Montfort to his presence, and on his immediately present- 
ing himself, commanded him to put into his hands the fortress 
of Montfort.'^ Hugh, who was one of the conspirators, now 
perceiving that his treason was detected, was suddenly 
thrown into a state of great anxiety, and not knowing what 
to do on such short notice, yielded to the king's commands, 
fearing that if he refused he should be immediately loaded 
with fetters. Thereupon, the king sent some of his faithful 
adherents with him to receive the keys of the fortress ; but 
as soon as he found himself far enough from the king's 
presence, he put spurs to his fleet charger and gave his 
companions the slip at the entrance of the forest.^ Then, 
following a short track with which he was well acquainted, 
he got to his castle before them, and without dismounting, 
gave orders that his brother and wife, with his retainers, 
should keep watch and ward for the defence of the place. 
" The king," said he, " is marching here at the head of a 
strong force ; and you must hold the fortress stoutly against 
him." He then galloped forward toBrionne,and telling Count 
"Waleran what had occurred, the count instantly armed his 
vassals and prepared for open war. The king, on the return 
of his trusty friends complaining that they had been outwit- 
ted by Hugh de Montfort, immediately put his troops under 
arms and attacked the garrison before they had time to place 
the castle in a state of defence. During the two first days, 
the whole town was reduced to ashes, and all the fortifica- 
tions, except the castle, were taken. Eobert, the king's son,* 

* Where Waleran had a castle. 

^ The castle of Montfort-sur-Risle. 
3 The forest of Montfort-sur-Risle. 

* Robert, the illegitimate son of Henry I., who was afterwards earl of 
Gloucester, and strenuously supported the cause of his sister, the Empress 
Matilda, against King Stephen. The Normans called him Robert de Caen. 



A.D. 1123.] SIEGE OF POXTAUDEMEE. 63 

and Nigel d'Aubigni, brought up a strong reinforcement 
from Coutances and other districts, and Ralph de G-and^ and 
the rest of the besieged were annoyed by frequent assaults 
on the place. At last, despairing of any relief from the 
conspirators, after a month's siege, they took the wisest 
resolution, and having proposed terms of peace were received 
into alliance with the king, to whom the tower was surren- 
dered. Thence King Henry marched to Pontaudemer, the 
siege of which he pressed closely for six weeks. 

The king offered to Adeline and her son Waleran the open 
part of the domains,^ she being the daughter of Eobert count 
of Mellent, on condition that [her husband] Hugh de 
Montfort should return to his allegiance, and thenceforth 
conduct himself as his loyal subject and faithful friend. But 
Hugh foolishly disdained the offer, and preferred being en- 
tirely disinherited to a reconciliation with the king, and 
attaching himself, so much for his own advantage, to the 
friend by whom he had been brought up and raised to honour. 

Ch. XXXy . SerlOj the aged hisliop of Seez, 'prejpares Tiis own 
tomb — Circumstances of his last hours and death^ shortly 
afterwards. 

In the same month the venerable Serlo, who had governed 
the bishopric of Seez for thirty-two years,^ after celebrating 
mass in the church of St. Gervase the Martyr,* on the seventh 
of the calends of November [26th Oct.], when it was finished, 
called about him the clergy and ministers of the church, and 
thus addressed them : " I am worn out with age and in- 

^ Ralph de Gand was a son or a grandson of Gilbert de Gand. We 
find his name as witness to a charter granted in the sixteenth year of Henry 
1. to the abbey of Bardney in Lincolnshire, which was restored by the 
chief of that family. Gilbert de Gand married a daughter of Hugh II. 
de Montfort, and according to the continuator of William de Jumieges, 
Hugh IV. was their son. This Ralph de Gand must have been, therefore, 
either his brother or his nephew. 

* The farms, or agricultural part of the fief of Montfort, reserving the 
castle and probably the town and forest. It does not appear that the 
young Waleran lived to grow up. 

^ See vol. ii. p. 520. Serlo was formerly abbot of St. Evroult, and 
made bishop of Seez in 1091. 

* The cathedral of Sdez, of which we have spoken in vol. ii. p. 294,; 
but were perhaps mistaken in calling the place the smallest cathedral city 
in France. 



64i OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXXT. 

firmity, and perceive tliat my end is approacliing. I commend 
you to my Lord God. wlio made me his vicar over you, and 
I beseech you to implore worthily his mercy on me. Let a 
grave be immediately prepared for me, for the time of my 
dvrelling among you will now be shortly ended." He then 
went, accompanied by the clergy, to the altar of St. Mary, 
the holy mother of God, and marked out before it with his 
pastoral staff a small space, which he consecrated for his 
tomb, sprinkling holy water upon it. Workmen were 
immediately employed in digging a grave with their mattocks 
and throwing out the earth Avith shovels ; and masons and 
stone-cutters chipped out the hollow of a coffin with their 
pointed hammers, and fitted and completed everything for 
the interment of the bishop, as if he were lying dead on a 
bier, instead of being walking and speaking. 

The next day being Friday,^ he went into the church, and 
attempted to celebrate mass, according to his usual custom, 
and with more mental vigour than bodily strength, drew 
his hood' over his head, but his limbs trembled, and he 
skrank from commencing so solemn an office, and ordered 
his chaplain "William to perform it. The mass being ended, 
be called to him all the canons, and said to them : " Come 
to me after dinner, for I wish to bequeath in a legal manner 
the wealth which I have acquired for temporal purposes from 
the revenues of the church to her use. It is my earnest 
desire, by God's grace, to prevent the enemy's finding in me 
anything wherewith justly to accuse me in the sight of God. 
As I came naked into this world, it is fitting that I should 
depart out of it naked, in order that I may follow unencum- 
bered the footsteps of the Lamb, for love of whom I long 
ago renounced all worldly things." 

The bishop took his seat at table at the nintb hour,^ but 
all his thoughts being now raised to heaven, he partook of 

1 Friday, October 27, 1122. 

'^ Amictus, Fr. Amict, is the first of the six vestments used in cele- 
brating mass. It was formerly drawn over the head, and was therefore alluded 
to as galea salutis, the helmet of salvation, in the prayer used by the priest 
while he was robing. Most of the religious orders retain this practice, 
instead of wearing it on the shoulders, like the secular clergy. It must be 
remembered that Serlo, as well as all his chapter, belonged to the order of 
St. Benedict. 

5 At 3 P.M. 



A. D. 1123.] BISHOP SERLO'S END. b'5 

notUng that was set before him; and as the rest of the 
company ate little, being full of sorrow, he fed them abund- 
antly with the food of holy doctrine, and shed among them 
in rich abundance the seed of the word of God, which he 
had always scattered with a liberal hand. Normandy, I think, 
never had a son whose style was more elegant, or gifted with 
greater elegance, than Serlo. In person he was of moderate 
height, and had all the outward graces of the human form, 
which can be expected in one who dwells in a Avorld so full 
of miseries. "When young he had red hair; as he grew up it 
soon turned grey, and for the last fifty years was as white as 
snow. He was a profound scholar both in secular and divine 
learning, and always prepared to meet any questions which 
were addressed to him. Severe on those who persisted in their 
evil courses, his clemency to penitent sinners was unbounded, 
and he was mild as an afiectionate father to a son suffering 
from disease. Many are the good traits I could relate of 
him, but my words cannot recall him to life, and weary as I 
am of my labour, I hasten on to bring to a close the sequel 
of the book which I have commenced. 

When they were about to rise from table, after the refec- 
tion, a messenger entered and announced the arrival of two 
cardinals of the church of Eome, Peter and Gregory.^ It 
was then the eve of the feast of the apostles SS. Simon and 
Jude.^ The bishop immediately said to his clergy, and the 
steward and servants of his household : " Go quickly, and 
pay due attention to these Eomans, serving them abun- 
dantly with all things necessary, because they are legates of 
our lord the pope, who, under God, is the father of all the 
faithful ; and as to them, whatever they are, they are our 
masters." Thus the thoughtful old bishop sent all his 
attendants to meet his visitors, while lie himself, according 
to his wont, remained seated in his chair, being in no nain, 

^ Peter de Ldon, afterwards antipope, by the name of Anaclete. See 
what we have said of him in p. 12 ot this volume. Gregory was afterwards 
pope by the name of Innocent 11. It does not appear in the sequel that 
these princes of the church exhibited any sympathy for their aged host, 
whose last earthly thoughts seem to have been directed to their reception 
with due honour and hospitality. 

^ The feast of St. Simon and St. Jude is on October 28. 
YOL. IT. F 



66 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b. XII. CH. XXXV. 

and exliibiting no outward signs of any malady. All the 
rest went to meet the cardinals as they were directed, and 
offering hospitality, paid them the honours becoming their 
station, according to the bishop's orders. Meanwhile, 
during the time they were engaged in paying their respects 
to the legates, the bishop died, while sitting in his chair,^ 
just as if he had fallen asleep. His servants returning to 
their master after fulfilling his commands, and finding him 
thus dead as he was sitting, wept over him in deep af&iction. 
On tlie morrow his body was deposited in the tomb which, 
as I have already said, was prepared for him on the third 
day previously, John, bishop of Lisieux, performing the 
ceremonies ; for which purpose he was sent by the king 
from the siege of Pontaudemer. 

On the death of Serlo, John, the younger, who was son 
of Harduin, and nephew of John, bishop of Lisieux, was 
advanced to the bishopric ; a person who was not only 
younger in age, but must be considered far inferior in learn- 
ing, to his predecessor. He was consecrated after Easter, in 
the year of our Lord 1124',* and by order of his uncle began 
to exercise his episcopal functions in the diocese of Lisieux. 
On the fourth of the nones [4th] of May, he dedi 
cated the church of St. Alban, at Cisai,^ and came the 
same day to St. Evroult, where on the fourth of the nones 
of May he blessed the new crucifix, and consecrated the 
chapel and altar of St. Mary Magdalen, which Arnold, an 
old and noble monk,^ had erected out of his own funds and 
the offerings of the faithful. 

The king's officers, having heard of the sudden death of 
the late bishop, flew to the spot from the fortress they 
guarded, like ravens pouncing on a carcass ; and transferred 
to the king's exchequer all the money and other valuables 

^ In cathedra sedens. Not, vre think, that the bishop had gone alone 
into the cathedral and seated himself for meditation and prayer on his 
episcopal chair, which according to primitive practice stood in the centre of 
the apsis behind the altar ; but more probably he had left the refectory 
and seated himself alone in his j)nvate apartments, waiting the return of 
his attendants from offering their respects and services to the newly- 
arrived cardinals. 

'■^ Easter day fell that year on April 6. 

^ Cisai-saint-Aubiu. 

* Often mentioned before. 



A.D. 1123.] PONTAUDEMEE SUEEETTDEES. 67 

they found in the bishop's residence, without any regard to 
the claims of the church or the poor.^ 

Ch. XXXyi. The siege and surrender of JPontaudemer, 

Meanwhile, the king was besieging an enemy's castle f 
but had suspicions of many of those who, admitted to 
familiar intercourse with him, loaded him with flatteries ; 
and discovering their perfidy, he considered them as disloyal 
men. Lewis of Senlis,^ Harcher, grand cuisinier of France 
and a distinguished knight, with Simeon Tresnel, of Poissi,* 
Luc de la- Barre,^ and other intrepid soldiers were in the 
place and defended it against the enemy by many con- 
trivances. However, the king reduced to ashes the town, 
which was of great size and very rich, and sharply assaulted 
the castle. He himself carefully looked to everything, run- 
ning about like a young soldier ; and animated all with great 
spirit to perform their duties. He taught the carpenters 
how to construct a berfrey,^ jocularly chid the workmen who 
made mistakes, and encouraged by his praise those who 
did well to greater exertions. At last he completed his 
machines, and by frequent assaults on the besiegers, which 
occasioned them serious losses, compelled them to surrender 

^ A constant practice in the reign of Henry I., as it was in that of his 
brother William; of which many instances may be found in the histories of 
the times. 

2 Pontaudemer. 

2 Louis de Senlis, second son of Guy de Senlis, lord of Chantilli and 
Ermenonville. He was grand-butler of France in 1128, and was still 
living in \\'o2. 

* M. Le Prevost is not able to give any account of this person, and is 
not even sure that the first syllable of the name is given exactly as it is 
abbreviated in the MS. of St. Evroult. Should it be Fresnel ? 

^ Luc de la Barre, in Ouche. This person seems to have had a very 
early connection with Count Waleran, for we find him appear in his 
charters adhuc puer. He figures among the Normans who defended 
Breteuil against Lewis-le-Gros in 1119. See before, vol. iii. p. 489. 

^ Bcrfredum ; a warlike machine constructed of timber, which, mounted 
on four wheels, and being of equal or superior height to the walls and 
flanking towers of the besieged place, enabled the assailants to shower 
arrov/s and stones on the defenders, and make a lodgment from it on the 
battlements. The reader is referred to Simeon of Durham for some 
curious details of this siege of Pontaudemer, which lasted seven weeks. 
See under the year 1 123. The berfrey in this instance was raised twenty- 
four feet above the walls of the place. 

E 2 



68 OEDEEICrS TITALIS. [b.XTI. CH.XXXTII. 

the place. Lewis, however, and Ealph, the son of Durand,^ 
and their comrades came to terms with the conqueror, and 
on giving up the fortress, were allowed to march out in 
safety -^vith all their baggage.^ Some of them went with 
the Trench to Beaumont, where Count Waleran was. 

Simon de Peronne,^ Simon de Neufle, Gruy, surnamed 
Malvoisin,^ and his nephew Peter de Maule,^ William 
Aiguillon,^ and nearly two hundred other Trench men-at- 
arms, served under the count's banner in this fortress, and 
at his command made inroads through the neighbouring 
districts, inflicting great losses on the king's adherents by 
plundering and setting fire to their property. 

Ch. XXXVII. Hobert de Chandos narrowly escapes heing 
treacJierously taken at Gisors — The toiin and church are 
hurnt. 

The same day on which the castle of Pontaudemer 
surrendered, news was brought to the king of a lamentable 
outrage committed in another quarter. Tor while he was 
engaged in military operations on the banks of the Eisle, a 
traitorous plot which I will describe was acted on the Epte. 
On Monday, when the market was held,' a parley was 

^ Durand was Count Waleran's confidential agent at Pontaudemer, and 
probably had the command of the castle. His name often appears as a 
witness to charters in favour of the abbey of St. Pierre de Preaux, where 
in the end he became a monk. 

2 Simeon of Durham informs us that the Breton soldiers in the king's 
army, when the town was burnt, dug among the ruins, and discovered in 
the cellars gold, silver, rich clothes, palls, pepper, ginger, and other stores 
of that kind, which the citizens had concealed in these vaults when 
threatened with the siege ; all which were carried off. As soon as the 
inhabitants had submitted to the king, they began to restore the place from 
its ruins ; but Count Waleran came upon them suddenly and reduced all 
their new buildings to ashes. 

^ Simon de Peronne was either castellan of that place under the count de 
Vermandois, Waleran's uncle, or at least a relation or vassal of the count. 
One of the count's brothers was named Simon, but he had been bishop of 
Noyon since the year 1121. 

* Guido cognomeyito Malus-Vicinus ; Guy IMauvoisin, lord of Rosni 
and Boissi-Mauvoisin. 

* Peter II. of Maule. See vol. ii. pp. 282, &c. 

^ William Aiguillon, lord of Trie, son-in-law of Theobald Paganus 
of Gisors. He died in the Holy Land in 1147. There were several 
branches of this family in Normandy, and also in England. 

' The market at Gisors is still held on Monday. 



A.D. 1123.] BOBEET DE CHAKDOS AT GISOES. 69 

appointed in the house of Paganus of Gisors, to which 
Eobert de Chandos/ warden of the king's tower, was invited, 
in order that he might be suddenly murdered by armed 
assassins, placed in concealment, and the fortress then seized 
by surprise ; bodies of troops being placed in ambush all 
round it for that purpose. Accordingly on the day men- 
tioned, soldiers who mixed amongst the crowd of peasants 
and women flocking to the market from the neighbouring 
villages entered the town promiscuously with them, and 
many of the soldiers, finding old acquaintances among the 
burghers, were hospitably ofiered accommodation in their 
houses, so that the place was nearly filled with them, for 
they came in great numbers. At length when the hour 
fixed for the treachery arrived, messenger after messenger 
was sent to desire Eobert de Chandos to make haste ; but 
his wife Isabel, a pious woman, detained him a long time, 
having domestic aff'airs to settle with him. This delay was 
doubtless ordered by Grod's providence. Eobert being thus 
delayed at home, Baudri came last to the parley, and find- 
ing the rest laying wait already armed, he threw off his 
mantle and putting on a breastplate, cried aloud : " JSTow 
soldiers, do your duty, and act firmly." Immediately upon 
this, the people of the town discovered the intended treach- 
ery, and tumultuous shouts being raised, the nearest gate 
was forcibly taken possession of by the men of Paganus. 
Eobert de Chandos having mounted his horse unconscious 
of what was intended, upon riding into the market place 

* This person was by his wife Isabel, brother-in-law of Walter Giffard, 
the third of that name, earl of Buckingham. The original seat of the 
family of Chandos was a fief lying at the junction of the communes of 
Catelon, Illeville, and Flancourt, the etymology of the name being 
Campi Dorsum. Dugdale states in his baronage that this was the 
same Robert de Chandos who came in with the Conqueror, and had a 
grant of lands at Caerleon and Goldclyve (GoldclifF) in the marches of 
Wales. This line became extinct in England in the time of Edward III. 
Of the same family, but not in the same branch, was the famous Sir John 
Chandos, who distinguished himself at the battle of Poitiers in the same 
reign, and afterwards with Prince Edward in Spain at the battle of Bazan, 
and was slain in Gascony in the 44th Edw. III., leaving no male issue. 
Another Sir John Chandos flourished in the reign of Henry IV., and left 
only two sisters, Alice Brydges and Margaiet Mattesdon. The ancient 
barony of Chandos is in abeyance. The dukedom was revived in the 
person of the late duke of Buckingham and Chandos. 



70 ORDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XXXTII. 

found the armed ruffians plundering the town, and hearing 
fearful cries in all quarters, took the alarm, and hastened 
back to take refuge in the fortress, from which he had not 
yet proceeded far. Thereupon, Count Amouri and his 
nephew AV^illiam Crespin,^ with their troops, ascended the 
hill which stands over against the castle, and tried to 
frighten the garrison, much more by their threats than their 
deeds. Certainly all those who took a leading part in this 
affair are to be judged traitors, and guilty of perjury in 
breaking their oaths of fealty to the king. Eobert, however, 
considering that he could not, ^^dth the force he had, drive 
them out of the town, which was strongly fortified, set fire 
to the nearest houses, and the devouring flames being spread 
by the wind, the whole bourg was burnt to the ground. 
This drove the enemy out of the city walls, and saved the 
castle from being assaulted. In this dire confusion, the free 
and worthy burgesses of Grisors sustained great losses, and, 
their houses and substance having been a prey to the flames, 
were reduced to great indigence. The church of St. G-ervase,- 
which had been consecrated a few years before by arch- 
bishop GrcoflTrey, was also burnt. 

The king having heard reports of the aff'air, moved his 
army with the utmost expedition from Pontaudemer to 
Grisors, resolved to give battle to the traitors if he could 
find them. They, however, fled with great terror, fatigue, 
and shame, as soon as they heard that the victorious king 
was hastening to attack them, instead of being still engaged, 
as they thought, in the siege of Pontaudemer. Thereupon 
the king's justices sequestered the county of Evreux and all 
the domains of the traitors, and declared them to be for- 
feited to the king. Hugh, the son of Paganus,^ was then 
with Stephen coimt of Mortain, and in the king's service, 
not being privy to his father's malpractices. The king, 
therefore, granted him the patrimonial domains, and entirely 

1 William Crespin, second of that name, married the heiress of Etrd- 
pagni. He was Amauri's nephew by his mother Eva de Montfort, the 
count's sister. 

^ The parish church of Gisors. 

^ Hugh de Gisors, second son of Theobald Paganus, who, with his 
eldest son Hervey, probably retired to one of their numerous fiefs in the 
French Vexin. 



A.D. 1123, 1124'.] rOETEESSES GAEEISONED. 71 

disinherited tlie old traitor and his son Hervej. Thus the 
treaty of peace which the pope had lately concluded between 
the kings was broken, and fresh hostilities of the fiercest 
character commenced on both sides. 

Ch. XXXVIII. A cessation of ay^ms during the ivinter — 
King Henry garrisons tJie^ 



The winter was rainy, and the king taking into consi- 
deration the toils and sufferings of the people, spared them, 
lest from over fatiguing them like beasts of burden, they 
should utterly fail and perish. Wherefore, having gained 
possession of two very strongly fortified places, Pont- 
audemer and Montfort, with the territories belonging to 
them, when Advent came, he allowed the people a season of 
rest ; but he quartered his own troops under the command 
of his best officers in the different castles, entrusting them 
with the defence of the countr}^ against freebooters. Hanulf 
of Bayeux was stationed in the tower of Evreux ; Henry, 
son of Joscelin de Pomere,^ at Pont-Antou,^ Odo, surnamed 
Borleng, in the fortress of Bernai, and other brave soldiers 
in various strong places, to defend the country against the 
enemy's inroads. Also William, son of Eobert de Harcourt,' 
adhered to the king and gave his services. 

Ch. XXXIX. Siege of Vatteville on tlie Seine — Battle of 
Mougemontier — The Icing^s cruelty to his prisoners, and 
particularly to Luke de la Barre, the minstrel — Beaumont 
surrendered. 

lis the Lent following, Count Waleran assembled his alHes, 

^ There are several communes of the name of Pomeray in Normandy. 
That in the canton of Thuri-Harcourt, and diocese of Bjiveux, was the 
cradle of this family. There are several grants made by this Henry de 
Pomeray in the time of Henry I. noticed in the Monastic, Anglican. He 
must have been a nephew of Ralph de Pomerei, who had large possessions 
in Somersetshire and Devonshire at the time the Domesday Book was 
compiled, and was a baron by tenure. 

"^ Pont-Antou, at the confluence of the Risle with the river of Antou. 

^ William de Harcourt was the son of Robert I. and married Hue d'Am- 
boise. This family, which afterwards became so illustrious, derived its 
name from the bourg of Harcourt near Brionne. It was a younger branch 
of that of the lords of Pontaudemer and Beaumont-le- Roger, counts de 
Meulan. 



72 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH. XXXIX. 

and on the night of the Annunciation^ went to Yatteville,^ 
where they fortified the tower. He had with him his three 
brothers-in-law, Hugh de Neufchatel, son of Gervase, Hugh 
de Montfort, and A¥illiam Louvel, the son of Ascelin Goel ; 
but Count Amauri took the lead of them all. Under these 
leaders the expedition introduced a convoy of provisions 
into the besieged place, and assaulted, very early in the 
morning, when they were not expected, the entrenchments 
which the king had thrown up to straiten the fortress. In 
this attack, while Walter, the son of AVilliam de Valiquer- 
Adlle, who had by the king's appointment the chief command 
of the troops on guard, was standing on the rampart of the 
fortification in his coat of mail, bravely defending the 
trenches, he was ingeniously caught by some one with an 
iron hook, and not being able to extricate himself, was 
dragged down and carried away prisoner. Count AValeran 
had given the custody of the tower to two brothers, in 
whom he placed great confidence, Herbert of Lisieux and 
Eoger, with eight men-at-arms. He then pillaged all the 
farms round the neighbourhood, and carrying off all the 
corn and food from the houses and churches, conveyed it 
into the tower for provisioning the garrison. On the 
same day the count, savage and foaming like a wild boar, 
went to the forest of Brotonne, and finding peasants there 
cutting wood, seized several of them and lamed them by 
chopping off their feet.^ Such was the way in which he dese- 
crated the blessed feast of the Annunciation ; but he did 
not escape with mipunity. 

Meanwhile, Ralph de Bayeux, the castellan of Evreux, 
having received intelligence from his spies that large bodies 
of the enemy had entered Yatteville in the night, went with 
all haste to his friends Henry, Odo, and William,^ and inform- 
ing them of the passage of the enemy, earnestly entreated him 
to oppose their return by defending the king's highway, well 

* The night between March 24 and 25. 

^ Vatteville, on the left bank of the Seine, near Caudebec. 

^ It is the more extraordinary that Count Waleran should have com- 
mitted these barbarities, as the forest belonged to him. Nothing is said of 
the woodmen being even trespassers, and the probability is that they wer© 
his own vassals. 

* Henry de Pomerei, Odo Berleng, and William de Harcourt. 



A.D. 1124.] DATTLE OP BOUEGTEEOUDE. 73 

armed. Readily acceding to liis proposal witli their prin- 
cipal liegemen, they collected three hundred men-at-arms 
handsomely equipped, near Bourgteroude,^ and debouch- 
ing from the forest of Brotonne, waited for the enemy on 
the open plains on the seventh of the calends of April 
[March 26th], as they were returning to Montfort. The 
royal troops coming in sight of them, and observing their 
superiority in force and numbers, began to waver in the 
presence of such formidable bands ; upon which some of the 
leaders endeavoured to encourage their troops. Odo Bor- 
leng said : " The Idng's enemies ravage his lands in security, 
and have captured and are carrying off one of his lords, to 
whom he had entrusted the defence of the country. What 
are we to do ? Are we to sufler them to lay waste the 
whole neighbourhood with impunity ? It will be best for 
part of us to dismount and engage on foot, while the other 
part remain in the saddle, and fight on horseback. The 
bowmen should form the first line to annoy the enemy, and 
check their advance by flights of arrows which may wound 
their horses. On the plain which is the field of battle this 
day, each man's valour and prowess will be distinctly seen ; 
and if we, through our cowardice, suifer the king's baron 
to be carried off in fetters before our eyes, without striking 
a blow, how shall we ever venture to appear in the royal 
presence ? We shall justly forfeit both pay and honour, 
and in my opinion ought no longer to eat the king's 
bread." 

All Odo's comrades, encouraged by this exhortation, 
consented to dismount, provided he did the same ; agreeing 
to which he took his station on foot at the head of the 
troops by whom he was much beloved, and stood in arms 
cheerfully waiting for the conflict to begin. The young 
"Waleran, eager to win the honour of knighthood; exulted 
with boyish delight as soon as the enemy appeared, but 
Amauri, more mature in age and wisdom, dissuaded his less 
prudent comrades from engaging rashly, " By all the 
world," such was Amauri' s oath, " I am for declining a 
battle ; for if with our small force we venture to engage our 
numerous enemy, I much fear we shall suffer loss and dis- 

^ Burgum Thuroldi. This battle was fought on the territory of Rouge- 
montier, as we shall find in the sequel. 



74 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [e.XII. CK. XXXIX. 

grace. See, Odo Borleng has dismounted ; be sure that he 
will obstinately contend for victory. This brave knight, now 
that he and his comrades have become foot soldiers, will not 
retreat, but must either conquer or die." ^ The others replied : 
" Have we not long wished to meet the English on level 
ground ? Here thev are ; let us fight, for a sbamefal flight 
will bring dishonour on us and our posterity. We have here 
the flower of the chivalry of France and Normandy ; who 
can resist it ? Far be it from us to be so frightened by a 
band of peasants and common soldiers, that we should turn 
out of our road to avoid them, or have any hesitation in 
giving them battle." 

They, therefore, ranged themselves in order of battle. At 
first Count "Waleran wished to charge the enemy with forty 
men-at-arms, but his horse was shot by the archers and fell 
under him. ISo less than forty horses were thus killed in 
the onset, and brought to the ground before their riders could 
strike a stroke. In consequence, the party of the count 
was quickly overpowered and routed, each man abandoning 
his arms and every incumbrance, and seeking his safety 
in flight in the best manner he could. Count "Waleran and 
the two Hughs, his brothers-in-law, and nearly eighty other 
men-at-arms, were taken prisoners on the spot, and being 
closely confined in the king's dungeons, paid the penalty of 
their rash enterprise in deep distress. 

William de Grandcourt, the son of William count d'Ea,^ 
a gallant soldier in the royal army, was present in this battle 
and took Amauri prisoner as he was making his escape ; 
but, touched for a man of such bravery, and knowing to a 
certainty that if he made him his captive, he would never, or 
with great difliculty, get out of the king's hands, he resolved 
to abandon his sovereign and his own possessions and go 
into exile, rather than entangle a count of such distinguished 
worth in the meshes of a net from which he could never 
extricate himself. He therefore conducted him as far as 

1 Our author attributes all the honours of the day to Ralph de Bri- 
quessart, to his lieutenants, and William de Harcourt. Most of the other 
historians place William de Tankerville in the first line, but the wery 
circumstantial narrative of Ordericus completely refutes this statement. 

2 William de Grand court, near Eu, was the second son of the count by 
a sister of Hugh, earl of Chester. 



A.B. 1124.] THE PEISOIN-EES MUTILATED. 75 

jBelmont, and then becoming an exile with him, as his 
preserver, found an honourable refuge in France. 

William Louvel being taken prisoner by a peasant, from 
whom he ransomed himself by giving him his armour, 
had his hair cropped by him so that he might pass for a 
groom, and taking a staff in his hand he got away to the 
river Seine.^ Arriving in this disguise at the ferry, he gave 
his boots to the boatman for carrying him over, and reached 
home on his bare feet, only too happy to have escaped any 
how from the enemy's hands. 

After Easter,^ the king pronounced judgment at Eouen 
on the captive culprits, causing the eyes of Geoffrey de 
Tourville^ and Odard du Pin'* to be put out for the treason 
of which they had been guilty. He also deprived of sight^ 
Luke de la Barre, for having ridiculed him in his songs, and 
engaged in rash enterprises against him. At that time, 
Charles, marquis of Flanders,® who had succeeded the young 
Baldwin in the duchy, was at the king's court with many 
nobles, and commiserating the case of the condemned 
prisoners, said to the king with more boldness than the 
other courtiers, " My lord king, you are doing what is quite 
abhorrent to oiu' usages when you mutilate captives taken 
in the service of their lords." To which the king replied: 
" Sir count, I do what is right, and I will prove it by good 
reasons, G-eoffrey and Odard became my liege-men with 
the consent of their lords, and breaking their oaths of fealty 

* One does not understand why William Louvel crossed the Seine. To 
do so would lengthen the distance he had to accomplish, and render it 
necessary that he should re-cross the river. 

* Easter fell that year on April 6. 

' There are ten places of this name in Normandy; Geoffrey probably 
belonged to that which lies between Pontaudemer and Preaux, and is the 
person mentioned in the Monastic. Anglic, as Galfridus de TurviUa, i. p. 
519 ; ii. p. 309. In England he was a vassal of the Earl of Leicester. 

* A native of Pin-au-Haras, near Argentan. 

^ This was a favourite punisliment of Henry L He did not even 
hesitate to inflict it on his cousin-german, the unfortunate Count de Mor- 
tain. The mutilation was not discovered until after the king's death, when 
it excited universal horror. ]t is supposed, as we have already remarked, 
that a similar act of cruelty was per/etrated by his command on his 
brother Duke Robert. 

° Charles, surnamed The Good, count of Flanders, who was assassinated 
March 2, ] 127. 



76 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH. XXXIX. 

proved false to me, and therefore incurred the penalty of 
death or mutilation. To preserve the fealty which they 
swore to me, they ought to have given up all they had in 
the world rather than attach themselves to any one contrary 
to right, and break their ties to their liege-lord. Luke, 
indeed, never did me homage, but he was in arms against 
me at Pontaudemer ; after which, when peace was con- 
cluded, I excused all their forfeitures, and suffered them to 
go free, with their horses, arms, and baggage. But Luke^ 
immediately rejoined my enemies, and, in conjunction with 
them, stirred up fresh hostilities against me, adding to his 
former offences such as were still worse. Besides, the merry 
glee-man made scurrilous sonnets on me,^ and sang them 
aloud to bring me into contempt, thus often making me the 
laughing-stock of my malicious enemies. Now God has 
delivered him into my hands for chastisement, in order that 
he may be forced to renounce his evil ways, and that others 
who hear of the punishment of his audacious conduct may 
be profitably corrected." 

On hearing this, the count of Flanders held his peace, 
because he had no reasonable objections to make. The 
butchers^ did their office. The unhappy Luke, when he 
found himself sentenced to lose his eyes, preferred death to 
a life of perpetual darkness, and made all the resistance 
he could to the executioners when they attempted to muti- 
late him. At last, after struggling with them, he dashed 
his head against the stone walls, and, like one demented, 
fracturing his skull, thus miserably expired, lamented by 
many who admired his worth and playful wit. 

Meanwhile, Morin du Pin,'^ steward of the count of 

^ Luke de la Barre, in Ouche. See vol. iii. p. 489. Ouche, it may be 
recollected, is the name of the commune in which St. Evroult, called also 
the abbey of Ouche, stood ; so that Luke was probably well known to the 
monks. 

2 It is much to be regretted that these satirical songs of the early part 
of the twelfth century are lost. They would have been invaluable speci- 
mens of the Norman poetry of that age. Humanity shudders at the cruel 
fate of the gallant soldier and witty trouveur. 

^ Carnifices. The translation is but too exact, and the word might be 
well applied to Henry himself. 

*■ He is probably the same person who was witness to the charter 
granting Guernanville to the abbey of St, Evroult (b. v. c. 12), and, like 
Odard and Gilbert du Pin, was a native of Pin-au-Haras. 



A.D. 1124.] WALERAN's castles STJERETiDEEED. 77 

Mellent, put his castles in a state of defence, and, full of 
spirit, animated all, over whom he had any influence, to make 
a stout resistance against the king. This brave prince, 
however, having assembled a powerful army, laid siege to 
Brionne in the month of April, and immediately constructed 
two forts, which compelled the enemy to surrender in a very 
short time.^ But, through the violence of misguided men, 
peace was not obtained without great injury to innocent 
people ; for the whole village with the churches was first 
burnt down. Meanwhile those who had shut themselves up 
in the tower at Yatteville, made terms with the king, and 
gave up the strong hold, which he soon afterwards, with 
politic rigour, ordered to be razed to the ground. 

The king having now reduced all the count's fortresses 
except Beaumont, sent tidings to the count m prison of his 
successful operations, and by the same messengers enjoined 
him to give orders that Beaumont should be surrendered 
without striking a blow. The count, perceiving that all the 
schemes he had formed with youthful folly were now des- 
perate, and that he had deservedly fallen from his high estate 
through his own perverseness, fearing also to expose himself 
to still greater peril, if by his obstinacy he still further 
offended his powerful judge, sent trusty messengers with 
positive orders to Morin, who had the charge of his affairs, 
to give up the castle of Beaumont, without delay, to the 
victorious king. Then Morin, though reluctantly, fulfilled 
his lord's orders, but he was unable, by any means he used, 
to obtain the king's favour for himself; for having been 
appointed by the king the count's governor and tutor, he 
had been the means, through pernicious counsels, of his 
engaging in the revolt. Morin now lost the wealth which 
had inflated his pride and lifted him up above his proper 
position in Normandy, where his ambition carried him to 
lengths which brought trouble and ruin on many innocent 
persons. He was banished by the king's sentence from his 
native soil, and continued in exile in foreign lands till the 
day of his death. 

Thus the king obtained possession of all the domains 
which this rich count held in Normandy, and he kept him and 

^ Our author omits to mention that Henry caused the eyea of the com- 
mandant of the castle of Brionne to be put out. 



78 OHDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XL. 

Lis two "brothers-in-law in close custody. Some time after- 
wards all the three were transferred to England, where the 
count and Hugh, the son of Grervase, were kept prisoners 
during five years. As for Hugh de Montfort, he has now 
groaned in fetters for thirteen years,^ nor has any one 
of his friends ventured to intercede with the king on his 
behalf, seeing how grievous was his offence without any 
reason for it. 

Ch. XL. Sichmissio7i of some lords of castles in the neigJibour- 
liood of Lisieux and St. Evroult — The rehels sue for peace. 

"Blessed be God, who disposes all things well, directing 
the career of mortals more for their welfare than they desire 
themselves, and has manifested his righteous judgments 
to those who contemplate them with a religious mind in 
the territory of liougemontier. In the year of our Lord 
1124, the Lord gave victory to the lovers of peace, con- 
founded the bold enterprises of the disturbers of the quiet 
of the whole country, and dispersed the confederates in their 
wicked attempts by a sudden downfall. In the same week 
the lords of seven castles in the districts of Lisieux and St. 
Evroult, and consequently on the borders of the rebel chiefs, 
resolved to join them, to the detriment of many.^ Hugh 
de Plessis^ had already got possession of Pont-Echaufre 
by stratagem, and firmly expected succoiu' from the con- 
federated rebels. Wherefore the castellans of Sap, Bien- 
faite, Orbec, and several other places, out of fear, made an 
alliance with them, not having the force or courage to 
defend themselves against their great power. But when the 
heads of the revolt were crushed, as I have already related, 
their fellow conspirators kept quiet, their only fear being 
lest they should be indicted before the justices and lawyers 
for joining in the plot. It was the bissextile year, and, as 
we have heard it commonly said, the UsseM fell indeed on 
the traitors.^ 

1 This passage appears to have been written in 1135, before the death 
of Henry I. 

^ Probably le Plessis, between Anceins and Pont-Echaufre, now Notre- 
Dame-du-Hamel. 

^ By a superstition which can be traced to the times of the Romans, 
and which prevailed through the middle ages almost to our own day, it 



A.D. 1124.] WILLIAM, THE HEIE OF IvOIlMANDY, 79 

By degrees, finding their forces dwindle awaj, Amauri, 
Louvell, and the other rebels, sued for peace with the king, 
and, though with regret, deserted the cause of the exiled 
William, since thej could not render him any aid. At 
length, having made humble submission to the king, they 
were restored to his favour, their past offences being par- 
doned, and were reinstated in their former possessions. 

Ch. XLI. William, tlie lieir of Normandy^ is comjpelled to 
quit Anjou, and again oecomes a wanderer — Ilis cha- 
racter. 

Ik consequence of this turn of affairs, the treaty of Prince 
William with the Angevins was broken, and he became a 
.wanderer from cottage to cottage in foreign lands, accom- 
panied by his governor Elias and Tirel de Manieres,^ in 
great fear and want. He had to dread the grasp of his 
uncle's long and powerful arms, y/hose might and wealth, or 
the fame of them, were spread everywhere, from the west 
to the east. This young prince was born to misfortune, 
from which he was never altogether free as long as he lived. 
He was brave, handsome, and high-spirited; desperately'"^ 
fond of warlike adventures, and recommended himself more 
to the various nations who supported his pretensions, by 
hopes which were illusory than by his merit. In the con- 
vents of monks and canons, amongst whom he was accus- 
tomed to seek hospitality, he was so sumptuous in his way 
of living, though an exile, that his visits brought more 
charge than honour on his hosts, and he was the cause of 
more misery than profit to the multitude who adhered to 
him. A great number of persons were mistaken in him, as 
Heaven afterwards made very clear, and I shall faithfully 
relate towards the close of the present book. 

was supposed that the bissextile years were more distinguished than others 
for calamitous occurrences, and it was a common saying that the bissext 
fell on such a person or on such a thing. See Ducange under the word 
Bissextus. 

* Tirel de Manieres, near Neufchatel. 

^ DanmabiUter. 



80 OBDERICUS TITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XLII. 

Ch. XLII. Deaths of Ualph le Vert, arcTihislwp of JRJieims, 
Pope Calixtus II., and Gilbet^t, archhisliop of Tours — 
Their successors. 

About this time there were many changes among persona 
of the highest rank, who were replaced by the men of the 
present day. Ealph, surnamed le Yert/ archbishop of 
Eheims, who was distiuguished among the fathers of the 
church in our times by his learning and eloquence, and lauda- 
bly devoted to such good pursuits, the father and patron of 
his monks and clergy, and the guardian and protector of the 
poor, and all who were subject to him ; after a life, memo- 
rable for many excellent deeds, died in a good old age, 
and was succeeded by Beynold, bishop of Angers, a prelate, 
in many respects, unequal to his predecessor. TJlger,^ took 
the government of the church of Angers ; his life was illus- 
trious for religion and science, and he furnished his people 
with the light of truth. 

In the year of our Lord 1125, the third indiction, Pope 
Calixtus died,^ and Lambert, bishop of Ostia, became pope, 
under the name of Honorius. He was an old and very 
learned man, zealous in his observance of the divine law, 
and governed the church of Eome for six years. In the 
very same week in which Pope Calixtus was taken from the 
world, Gilbert, archbishop of Tours, who had gone to Eome 
on ecclesiastical affairs, also died there.^ The people of 
Tours, on hearing of his death, invited amongst them Hilde- 
bert, the worthy bishop of Mans,^ and, by permission of 
Pope Honorius, he was translated to the metropolitan see 

^ For this prelate, see vol. iii. p. 5. He died July 23, 1124. 

^ Ulger was made bishop of Ans;ers September 20, 1123. This most 
quarrelsome prelate died October 17, 1148. 

^ Calixtus II., as we have before remarked, died December 13 or 14, 
1124, and Honorius was elected his successor on the 15th or 15th, and 
consecrated the 21st, of the same month. 

* The exact day of Archbishop Gilbert's death is not exactly known, 
but it is certain that it was in the same month, and it is not impossible in 
the same week, as that of Pope Calixtus. Hildebert did not take posses- 
sion of the archiepiscopal see of Tours until the authority of the pope 
had succeeded in removing his scruples, and that was not till the month of 
February following (1125 — 1132). 

^ Guy d'^^tampes was Hildebert's suxetsor in the see of Mans (1126 — 
1136.) 



A.D. .1125.] DEATH OE THE EMPEEOE HEIfET V. 81 

of Tours. He lived tliere for nearly seven years with great 
honour, and much to the profit of his flock. He consecrated 
Gruiomar, the Breton, to the bishopric of Mans. 

Ch. XLIII. Death of the 'Emperor Henry V. — Proceedings 
of the diet in lohich Lothaire ivas elected his successor. 

Itt the same year, during Whitsun week, died the Emperor 
Charles Henry Y.,^ and he was buried at Spires, the metro- 
polis of Germany. The emperor, on his death-bed, be- 
queathed the emblems of imperial power to the Empress 
Matilda, but afterwards, as he left no surviving children, 
Lothaire, duke of Saxony, was raised to the throne by 
decree of a general assembly of the states, and the crown'' 
and imperial ornaments devolved on him. The archbishop 
of Mayence,^ who filled the highest rank through his power 
and talents, caused every precaution to be taken against 
either a schism, or usurpation of the empire. He therefore 
convoked a meeting of all the bishops and gi'eat men of 
G-ermany, with their troops, and when they were assembled 
treated with them on electing an emperor. He had ob- 
tained the imperial ornaments from the empress before he 
ventured to speak on so important a business : " Most 
excellent barons," he said, " who are now met together on 
this plain, listen to me, I pray you, with attention, and 
prudently adopt the counsel I am about to give you. I 
labour for the welfare of you all, and of many others who 

' The emperor, Henry V., died at Utrecht, May 23, 1125, at the age 
of forty-four years. " The English, a very credulous people," observes 
M. Le Prevost, " were silly enough to believe that the prince was not 
dead, but having retired to the neighbourhood of Chester, led the life of a 
hermit under the name of Godescal to expiate by penance the wrongs he 
had done to his father." This story is told by Roger de Hoveden, See 
vol. i. p. 218, of his Annals in the Antiq. Lib. 

^ Hoveden also tells us that the empress carried away with her the 
imperial crown and the hand of Gt. James the apostle, which she delivered 
to her father on her return to England ; and Henry was so overjoyed at 
obtaining the sacred relic that he built the abbey of Reading for its recep- 
tion, but the crown he deposited in his own treasury. William of 
Malmesbury and Florence of Worcester relate the foundation of Reading 
abbey by Henry I., but say nothing of this relic. It was dedicated to the 
blessed Virgin and St. John the Baptist, not to St. James. 

^ Albert I., son of Sigebert, count of Saarbruch, was then archbishop of 
Mayence (1109— July 14, 1137). He was one of the most determined 
enemies of the emperor Henry V. 
YOL. IV. G 



82 OEDEEICTJS TITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XLIII. 

are absent, and day and night I am filled witli anxieties. 
There is no need of many words on this occasion. You are 
well aware that our late emperor died without leaving any 
child, and we have therefore wisely to seek a successor, 
who will be faithful and devout to God, and render the 
greatest services to the sons of the church. Let then forty 
prudent and loyal knights be chosen among you, and let 
them retire, and, according to their faith and conscience, 
elect as emperor him whom they judge most worthy of the 
imperial throne,^ and who will protect all the people under 
his government to the utmost of his power. All agreed to 
this proposal, though more than sixty thousand men were 
there present under arms ; who, with different objects, 
watched the course affairs would take. 

At last these politic chiefs, chosen from among so many 
thousand men in arms, returned, after a long conference, 
and thus spoke : — " We approve highly of Frederick duke 
of Almaine, Henry duke of Lorraine, and Lothaire duke 
of Saxony, and pronounce them to be persons of honour 
and worthy of the empire. This we affirm most certainly, 
not from any private favour, but from a consideration of 
what, in our judgment, is best for the general good. Take, 
in the name of God, whichever of these three you choose, 
for all are persons of distinguished merit, as they have long 
since proved, and, in our opinion, may justly be preferred 
to all the world for their pre-eminent qualities." 

After hearing this the archbishop said : "Ye glorious 
princes who have been thus named, withdraw at once, and 
elect one of you three ; him that you shall choose we will 
obey, in the name of Almighty God. But if any one of you 
shall refuse to submit to the decision of the rest, let him be 
beheaded on the spot,^ that this sacred congregation of 
Christian men be not disturbed by the frowardness of one 
person. This rigorous proposal of the spirited bishop struck 
terror into the whole assembly, and no one in that vast 
multitude dared to whisper a word in opposition to the 
prelate. 

^ This account is not exact; the choice of the future emperor wa3 
entrusted to ten electors. 

^ It can hardly be conceived that the arclibishop ventured to propose so 
violent a measure. 



A.D. 1125.] LOTHAIEE ELECTED BY THE DIET. 83 

In consequence, the three dukes before-mentioned drew 
aside and took their stations in the middle of the armed 
legions, who formed a circle round them ; then looking at 
each other they were all silent for some time. At length 
Henry first broke the silence, saying : " What are we doing 
here, my lords ? Are we sent here to do nothing but hold 
our peace ? We are charged with an affair of the highest 
importance; we are met here not to keep silence, but to 
speak of what concerns the general good. I have been long 
waiting to hear what you have to propose ; shall we stand 
mute the whole of the day ? Eeflect upon the duty we are 
enjoined to fulfil, and let us know what is your pleasure." 
His colleagues agreeing that, as he was the eldest, he 
should be the first to make some proposition, he said : " It 
behoves us that our counsels be governed by wisdom, for 
all Christendom is anxiously waiting the result. Let us 
therefore pray the Lord God, who set Moses over the 
Hebrews, and revealed to him that Joshua should be his 
victorious successor, that of his mercy he would vouchsafe 
to co-operate with us, as he was present with Samuel when 
he anointed David as king." AYith these words he declared 
his choice in favour of his son-in-law, Lothaire.^ The third 
elector feared to make any opposition, dreading the sen- 
tence which the archbishop had pronounced. 

They then returned to the assembly of the states, and 
Henry, casting his eyes on the whole multitude, made this 
proclamation : — " We elect Lothaire, duke of Saxony, who 
is adorned with many virtues, and long proved both in arms 
and justice as filling a princely station, to be king of the 
Grermans, the Lorrainers, the Teutons, the Bavarians, the 
Lombards and all the people of Italy, and emperor of the 
Eomans." The whole assembly heard this decision, and 
great numbers of them heartily approved of it. 

The primate who had convoked this diet was, as I have 
said before, the archbishop of Mayence. He then ordered 
that all the princes should immediately, before they left the 
field, do homage to Lothaire in the presence of the assembly. 
Whereupon Henry with joy and Frederick with sorrow, and 

^ The whole narrative is full of mistakes. The duke of Lorraine was 
neither one of the electors nor the father-in-law of Lothaire ; and his 
name was not Henry, but Simon or Sigismund. 

G 2 



84 OEDEICTJS VITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XLIV. 

after them all the great lords, bent the knee before Lothaire, 
did homage to him, and acknowledged him as their king and 
emperor.^ 

JN^o sooner was the meeting dissolved, than the troops of 
Frederick^ fell on Lothaire, and wounding him and several 
of his party put them to flight. For Frederick had brought 
with him nearly thirty thousand men, hoping to secure the 
crown either by intimidation or favour. But his designs 
being baffled by the policy of the sagacious prelate as we 
have already seen, he employed his brother Conrad^ to wage 
a fierce war against the new emperor. However, by God's 
help, Lothaire prevailed, and has now reigned ten years,* 
deserving praise for his talents and piety. 

Ch, XLIV. Consecration of tlie cathedral of Seez, and tTie 
abbey clmrcli of St. Ouen at Bouen — Roger, count of Sicily, 
recovers the principaliti/ of Apulia. 

Iisr the year of our Lord 1126, the fourth indiction, the 
cathedral church of Seez,^ dedicated to St. Glervase of Milan, 
the m.artyr, was consecrated on the twelfth of the calends of 
April [2lst March], by the lord Greoffrey, archbishop of 
Eouen and five other bishops. Henry, king of England, was 
present on the occasion with his nobles, and granted to the 

* The election took place on the 30th of August, 1125, in the presence 
of the papal legates and Abbot Suger, whose influence greatly contributed 
to the rejection of the duke of Suabia. 

* Frederick II. de Hohenstauffen, duke of Suabia, a great builder of 
castles, was grandson of Henry IV., and father of the emperor Frederick 
Barbarossa. It was a great misfortune that his elevation to the imperial 
throne was thwarted by the intrigues of Suger and the legates. 

3 Conrad de Hohenstaufen, created duke of Franconia in 1116 by his 
uncle, the emperor Henry V. It is su^jposed that he had gone to the 
Holy Land before the election. He was elected emperor in 1138, by the 
name of Conrad II. 

* This appears to have been written towards the close of the year 1135, 
or the beginning of 1136. 

* We think that the nave of the present cathedral at Seez is part of the 
edifice completed at the period mentioned in the text, although it has been 
said that the church did not escape the flames when the town was burnt 
down in 1150, and again in 1363. The architecture of the nave is in the 
pure early English style, light and lofty, with double lancet windows. But 
the most striking feature is the deeply-recessed portal at the west end 
(forty-seven feet deep), flanked by two spires. 

The choir and transepts are in the decorated style of a later age. 



A.D.1126.] EOGES, PEIXCE Or APULIA. 85 

churcli an endowment of ten pounds yearly rent.^ Gerard, 
bisliop of Angoiileme and legate of the Eoman cliurcli, John, 
bishop of Lisieux, John, bishop of Seez, Geoffery, bishop of 
Chartres, and Ulger, bishop of Augers, assisted at the 
ceremony. 

In the month of October, the church of St. Peter the 
Apostle, in a suburb of E-ouen, was dedicated. In this church 
the body of St. Ouen, archbishop and confessor, is honour- 
ably entombed.^ 

The same year "William de Poitiers died.^ Also William, 
duke of Apulia, son of Eoger la Bourse, died without issue, 
and Pope Honorius attempted to subject the duchy to the 
dominion of the apostolic see. But Eoger, the young count 
of Sicily, made head against this pretension, and, fighting 
several battles against the pope's army, recovered his cousin's 
principality by force of arms, and holds it to the present 
day under homage to the pope. He was the son of Eoger, 
the elder son of Tancred de Hauteville, and the illustrious 
Adelaide, daughter of Boniface, the powerful marquis of 
Italy,* who, after the death of her first husband, who was 
the brother of Guiscard, married Baldwin, king of Jerusalem. 

Ch. XLY. The fortunes of William, tlie exiled heir of Nor- 
mandy — Charles, count of Flanders, assassinated — William 
succeeds him — Sis acts in Flanders — He dies of a wound 
received hefore Alost. 

In the year of our Lord, 1127, the fifth indiction, Lewis, 
king of France, held a parliament of the great lords of his 
kingdom during Christmas,^ and earnestly entreated them to 

^ A charter of Henry I. is extant, dated at Dieppe in 1131, from which 
it appears that the endowment made by the king on this occasion was 
fifteen pounds, not ten pounds, as stated by Ordericus, payable yearly 
from the royal fisc at Falaise and Exmes. 

' The only part of this structure remaining is a lateral apse, which has 
received the name of " Chambre aux Clercs." The present church of St. 
Ouen, one of the most perfect specimens of Gothic architecture, was com- 
menced in 1318, and completed towards the close of the fifteenth century. 

3 On the 20th of July, 1127. 

* Boniface, marquis of Montferrat. 

* This meeting took place at Christmas in the year 1126, Ordericus 
placing it in 1127, because he always reckons the year as commencing at 
Christmas, instead of the 1st of January. 



86 OEDEBICrS VITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XLT. 

take compassion on "William the !N"orman/ and give him 
their succour. Tor he was a young man of illustrious birth, 
handsome, brave, and spirited, but from his infancy he had 
been a prey to misfortune. "Wliile he was yet a babe, his 
mother, Sibylla, a princess of Apulia, was taken off by 
poison. His father, Eobert, duke of Normandy, was m.ade 
prisoner at the battle of Tinchebrai, by Henry, king of 
England, his brother, who usurped the duchy of Normandy. 
When a mere boy he was entrusted by the king's order to 
the care of his brother-in-law, Elias de Saint Saens, as his 
guardian ; by whom he was carried off to France for fear of 
the king and his partisans, and there brought up amongst 
foreigners in great indigence, and not without much appre- 
hension. The young prince was sought for by many enemies, 
and in various ways, who threatened his life ; and on the 
other hand there were many who sought to restore him to 
the inheritance of his father. Human means fail of success 
when Divine Providence otherwise disposes. Lewis, the 
king, with the chief lords of the kingdom of France, Bald- 
win, full of youthful ardour, and Charles also, both counts of 
Eianders, with their great men, Amauri de Montfort, count 
of Evreux, Stephen, count d'Aumale, and Henry, count 
d'Eu, Waleran, count de Mellent, with Hugh du Neufchatel, 
Hugh de Montfort, and Hugh de Gournay, William de 
Eoumare, and Baudri du Bois,^ Eicher de 1' Aigle, Eustace de 
Breteuil, and many others, both Normans and Bretons, also 
Eobert de Belesme, with the forces of Anjou and Maine, 
endeavoured to aid the exile AVilliam, but G-od was against 
them, and having given King Henry the pre-eminence in 
profound wisdom, valour, wealth, and friends, they could do 

^ GuUelvio Normanno. Our author generally calls this young prince 
Gulielmus Clito, a designation, as we have more than once observed, 
equivalent to the title of atheling or etheling in the Anglo-Saxon times, 
and denoting in such cases the heir to the throne or duchy. In the trans- 
lation we have usually adopted the style here used, and called him William 
the Norman. 

2 It has been remarked before, in connection with the battle of Bremule, 
that this is the same person as Baudri de Brai. We may add that he was 
the son and heir of Goel, lord of Baudemont, a castle on the right bank of 
the Epte, of which Bray, standing on a neighbouring islet, is a sort of tete 
du pont. Baudri made his peace with Henry I., and obtained from him 
the manor of Mutford and two others in the county of Suffolk, before 1131. 



A.D. 1127.] WILLIAM OF IJOEMANDT'S MAEEIAGE. 87 

notliing. A great number of these lords were made prison- 
ers for their wicked enterprise, and either disinherited or 
put to death. Man}^ rebellions were raised against King 
Henry in this cause, and castles and farms were given to the 
flames. This is attested by the city and cathedral church ot 
Evreux, with the abbey of nuns there ; by Brionne, Mont- 
fort, and L'Aigle, by Pontaudemer, and Belesrae, as well 
as many other places which were reduced to ashes by the 
devouring flames. 

At length, when William the exile had attained the age 
of twenty-six years, no one having been able to render him 
effectual aid against his uncle for the recovery of his paternal 
inheritance. Queen Adelaide gave him in marriage her half 
sister, whom she had by the Marquis Eainier.^ King Lewis 
granted him Pontoise, Chaumont, Mantes, and all the Vexin. 
This took place in the month of January, and soon after- 
wards, before Lent, AVilliam proceeded to Gisors at the 
head of some troops to lay claim to Normandy ; and the 
Normans paid him the respect due to their natural lord. 

On the calends [1st of March ],^ Charles, duke of 
Flanders, son of Canute, king of Denmark, attended by 

* This Queen Adelaide was the daughter of Humbert II., sumamed the 
Strong, count of Maurienne and Savoy, by Guisle or Gisele, daughter of 
William the Great, count of Burgundy. She afterwards married Rainier, 
count of Montferrat. Their daughter Jane, who married William of 
Normandy, is not mentioned by the Savoyard and Italian historians. 

' This fearful assassination took place on the 2nd, not on the 1st of March. 
The count and Thcsnard, chatelain of Bourbourg, without any attendants, 
were in the church of St. Donatien at Bruges, kneeling before the altar of 
our Lady or St. Basil, and the count was reciting the fourth of the 
penitential psalms, when the assassins, to the number of seven or eight only, 
fell upon them. It was Burchard, who having touched the count on the 
shoulder to make him turn his head, dealt him so violent a blow that his 
brains were scattered on the pavement. The assassins then hastened to 
Thesnard's house to butcher his two sons, Walter and Gilbert; and after- 
wards learning that Thesnard still showed signs of life, and had even been 
able to receive the last sacraments, they returned with fresh fury, and 
dragging him by the feet, fractured his skull as they hauled him down 
the steps before the church porch. Count Charles had the honour of a 
public service to his memory on the very day of his death. 

One of Thesnard's sons, named Henry, escaped the massacre of hia 
family, and afterwards married Sibylla, commonly called the Rose, daughter 
of Manasses, count de Guignes. 

Bourbourg was at this time a place of importance, and Robert the 



88 OEBEEICUS YITALI3. [b.XII. CH.XLY. 

Tesnard, castellan of Bourbourg, and irwenty men-at-arms, 
went to tlie cburch at Bruges to hear mass. There, while 
praying to God prostrate on the floor, he was slain bv 
Burchard de Lille, and thirty-two other men-at-arms, and 
almost all his attendants were cruelly massacred on the 
spot. William d'Ypres,^ having heard of this monstrous 
outrage, immediately blockaded the castle of Bruges, and 
beset the cruel murderers on all sides, until the king of 
France arrived with AVilliam the Norman, and after closely 
besieging the bloody butchers for the period of -a month, 
took them, and cast them headlong from the highest tower. 
The king then gave the duchy of Flanders to William the 
Norman, and received back the Yexin, and the fortresses 
which he had granted to him.- But AVilliam, having obtained 

Jerusalemite bore the title of Count de Bourbourg during the latter years 
of his father, Robert the Frisian. 

Almost all Burchard's accomplices, like himself, were of the family of 
Bertulf his uncle, provost of St. Domitien of Bruges, arch-chaplain and 
chancellor of Flanders, and the instigator of this bloody outrage. Their 
names were Guelric, Bertulf's brother, Robert his nephew, Walter another 
nephew, William de Verviers, Ingran JEsmensis, Isaac, his cousin, Haket 
chatelain of Bruges, with some others. 

^ William d'Ypres was a natural son of Philip, the second son of 
Robert the Frisian, and burgrave of Ypres, who lost his life by falling out 
of a window in 1104. William took his name from Ypres, of which he 
was viscount. His mother was a low woman, who gained her livelihood by 
spinning all her days. It is not at all certain that he was not privy to the 
murder of Count Charles: demanding of Bertulf, when brought to his end 
on the gallows, who were his accomplices, the dying man replied, *' You 
know as well as I do." 

Lewis le Gros was compelled to besiege William at Ypres, and it was 
there that he was taken prisoner on the •26th of April, and not at Trie, as 
our author states a little further on. Being thrown into prison at Lisle, 
afterwards at Bruges, and then conveyed back to Lisle, he was set at 
liberty in the month of March, 1128, on promises of fidelity, which he did 
not keep. On the premature death of Count William he made himself 
master of L^cluse, and opposed Thierre d'Alsace, who drove him out ot 
the country, and forced him to take refuge in England, where he entered 
the service of King Stephen, and became notorious in the lawless times 
which succeeded. We shall hear more of him. This William d'Ypres 
was one of the miscreants employed by Henry I., as principal agent in his 
intrigues against William the Norman in Flanders. It is for this reason 
that he is so favourably treated by our author. 

' The castle had been invested' by Gervase the chamberlain eight days 
after the bloody deed, and he was soon afterwards joined by Evain and 
Daniel, and also by the inhabitants of Gand (Ghent) and Bruges. The 



A.D. 1127.] WILLIAM BECOMES COUITT OF ELANDEES. 89 

the duchj bj the king's gift and hereditary right, lived to 
govern it only eighteen months, and that with much toil 
and anxiety. 

First, he took arms against the traitors who had com- 
passed the murder of Duke Charles, and using all his efforts 
to trace them out, spared no one, without regard to nobility 
power, rank, or penitence. He condemned about one hun- 
dred and eleven of them, sentencing them to perish by 
being cast down headlong, or by other cruel deaths ; in 
consequence of which the relations of the condemned 
criminals were overwhelmed with grief, and conspired for 
the ruin and destruction of the prince. Elias de San Saens, 
his guardian, who had so long shared his exile, along with 
Tirol de Manieres, both of whom were disinherited, he 
rewarded \\dth a grant of the castle of Montreuil.^ In the 
month of August he marched an army against Stephen, 
count of Eoulogne,^ and in order to reduce him to sub- 
mission, laid waste his territories with fire and sword in the 
most cruel manner. At length trusty negotiators were 
employed, and the two counts, who were cousins, joined 
hands, and concluded a truce for three years. 

Meanwhile, Duke AYiliiam being engaged in this expe- 
dition, during which the vicissitudes of fortune were some- 
times in his favour, but more often the reverse, Evain de 
Gand,'' and Daniel de Tenremonde," the nephew of Baldwin 

king and William Clito arrived at Bruges on Easter Tuesday; and on 
Tuesday the 19th of April, the beseiged surrendered at discretion. They 
were thrown headlong from the top of the tower of Bruges on Wednesday 
the 3rd of ]\Iay. The election of Count William was held at Arras, 
in presence of the king, on the 25th or 26th of March, and renewed at 
Bruges the 2nd of April. 

^ Montreuil-sur-Mer. 

^ Stephen de Blois, count de BouiOgne, in right of his wife Matilda de 
Boulogne, and afterwards king of England. He was cousin-german to 
William, the young heir of Normandy. 

' Evain de Gand, who was afterwards lord, and steward, of St. Pavon, 
Alost, and Waes. He was a grandson of Baldmn I. of Gand, and the 
second son of Baldwin II., surnamed Le Gros. Evain and Daniel acted 
by the instigation not only of Henry I., but of the Countess Gertrude, 
named Petronilla, the wife of Florence II., count of Holland, and sister of 
Thierre of Alsace. It was about the middle of February, 1128, that 
Daniel, who until that time had been the friend of William the Norman, 
quarrelled with him through his taking the part of the Gantois, and drew 
Evain into the affair. 

* Daniel de Tenremonde appears to have been a cousin-german of Evain, 



90 OSDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XLV. 

de G-and,^ set tliemselves with great address to obtain 
revenge for tlie loss of their friends, and used all their 
eflforts to accomplish their object, to the loss of many. 
"With this view they applied to Thierri, count of Alsace, 
and reproached him for suffering his hereditary rights to 
be sacrificed by his neglect and silence, and promised that 
if he asserted his claims they and others would sup- 
port them. In consequence Thierri, count of Alsace,' 
and Lambert, count of Ardennes,^ marched troops into 
Planders, and with the consent of the Flemings, took 
possesion of a very strong castle called Lisle, together with 
Purnes, Grand, and several others. Duke William, on 
receiving intelligence of this movement, concluded a truce 
with Stephen, count of Boulogne, and entered on a mortal 
struggle with his intestine foes. He had to deal with men 

as well as his most intimate ally. The first lord of Tenremonde, of whom 
we can find any account, is Rangot de Gand, who is mentioned in docu- 
ments of 1046, 1052, and 1066. His son, Rangot II., steward (avoue) of 
St. Bavon at Gand, left an only daughter, who conveyed the lordship of 
Tenremonde to Walter de Gand, supposed to have been one of the 
sons of Baldwin de Gand, lord of Alost, who died in 1801, and was Evain's 
grandfather. These two distinguished Flemings were in the pay of Henry 
I., whose mortal hatred pursued his nephew William even into Flanders. 

Tenremonde, now Termonde or Denderraont, standing at the confluence 
of the Scheldt and the Dendre, from which latter river it derives its name, 
is a large town above six leagues and a half east from Gand. 

^ Baldwin de Gand, lord of Alost, was father of Baldwin le Gros, who 
died at Nice in 1110. His sons were this Evain and his eldest brother, 
Baldwin III., surnamed Le Louche. He also bore the formidable surname 
of Cernobodatus, on account of the length of his beard. It is supposed 
that he was privy to the assassination of Count Charles. It appears that 
he had either died or taken the monastic habit before the 24th of October, 
1127. This Baldwin was a person of great eminence, and is described by 
the chroniclers as a peer of the peers of Flanders, and the prhicipal of the 
principal men of Brabant. He left only one daughter, whose name was 
Beatrix. Her uncle' Evain, having robbed her of the greatest part of her 
property with the consent of Count Thierri, his great friend, forced her to 
marry Henry, the son of Thesnard of Bourbourg, who afterwards married, 
as we have already seen, Sibylla, also called the Rose, daughter of the 
Count de Guignes. 

Alost is a town in East Flanders, standing on the Dendre, seven leagues 
S.E. of Gand. 

* Thierri d'Alsace, the eldest son of Thierri, duke and marquis of Lor- 
raine, by Gertrude of Flanders, daughter of Robert the Frisian. We find 
no account of his having been ever count of Alsace, but only lord of Bitche. 

^ Lambert, count of Clermont, near Liege, was son of Conon, count de 
Montaigu, nephew of Godfrey de Bouillon. 



A.D. 1128.] WAES IN- TLAIfDEES. 91 

who were noble and powerful, distinguislied for their 
courage and intrepidity, and formidable for their wealth, 
their alliances and fortresses, and their popularity with their 
countrjonen. 

In the month of July, the duke, having assembled an army, 
laid siege to the castle of Alost, and in concert with Grodfrey, 
duke of Louvaine,' pressed it closely for several days. Num- 
bers flocked to his standard out of Normandy, for there 
were many whose attachment to him was so great, and who, 
deceived by false hopes, placed so much confidence in him, 
that they abandoned their native country with their natural 
lords and their kindred, to serve under him. Some, however, 
of his adherents were culprits banished for treasons and 
murders. 

"William d'Yprea, a son of Eobert, count of Flanders,'^ 
was the first to oppose him, but betrayed by fortune he fell 
into the duke's hands at Trie, a castle in the Yexin,^ and 
was forthwith committed to the custody of Amauri de 
Montfort. Soon afterwards the duke, through the media- 
tion of his friends, restored him to his favour and released 
him from confinement. 

There were three fortresses at Tpres, one of which 
belonged to the duke, another to this William, and the third 
to Daniel and Evain. It was in this last that the duke's 
enemies plotted his death, and their plan was to force an 
entrance into his fortress in the night time ; having first 
stationed four troops of soldiers outside, to prevent his 
having any opportunity of avoiding his fate by flight. 
Meanwhile, the duke, in entire ignorance of the fatal trap 
contrived for him, paid a visit to a young girl to whom he 
was attached. The girl knew of the enemy's plot, and, aa 
according to her custom she was bathing his head, shed 
tears. The young prince inquired of his mistress what 
caused her to weep, and between entreaties and threats, 
drew from her with great address all the particulars which 
she had learnt from ha^ enemies relating to their plot against 

1 Godfrey VII,, surnamed the Bearded, duke of Lorraine, count of 
Brabrant and Louvain. 

' A natural son of Robert the Frisian, as already stated. 

^ Trie-le-Chateau, near Gisors. But this is controverted, see note, 
p. 88. 



92 OEDEEICrS TITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XLV. 

his life. Thereupon he instautly seized his arras, without 
waiting to have his hair combed,^ and took the girl with him, 
lest she should incur any risk ; and sent her under the care 
of a certain abbot to "William, duke of Poitiers, a companion 
of his in the wars, of his own age, requesting him to pro- 
cure for her his liberator an honourable marriage, as if she 
were his own sister. And this was done. 

Then Duke William passed in safety through all the 
parties who were placed in ambush for him, aud incensed at 
the plot condemned his enemies as traitors. The warlike 
young prince afterwards collected troops from all quarters 
and sat down before the castle of Alost, assaulting it 
vigorously, and using every effort to compel the garrison to 
surrender the place. Often, he performed in his own person 
the duties both of a commander and private soldier, for 
which his loving guardians, who feared for his life, frequently 
blamed him. He often marshalled his troops and com- 
manded them like an able general, but still oftener he fought 
like a gallant novice in arms. 

One day, a body of the enemy approached a certain ford, 
with the intention of throwing relief into the besieged 
garrison ; on perceiving which the duke instantly sent three 
hundred men-at-arms to defend the ford." The conflict 
being much prolonged, and the enemy receiving reinforce- 
ments, the duke's troops began to waver and gave way a 
little. Seeing this, his spirit was roused, and he flew to 
their aid, and fighting valiantly so encouraged his men that 
they routed the enemy. On his return he made a sudden 
attack on the outworks before the castle gates, and taking 
by surprise a body of troops who had sallied out, dispersed 
them and put them to fligbt, while part leaped over the en- 
trenchment. The duke, observing this movement, and 
attempting to seize the lance of a foot-soldier who still 
made resistance, was unfortunately wounded by the steel 

1 M. Le Prevost remarks that this amusing story is not preserved by the 
local historians, who were likely to be much better informed than our 
author. Ypres had been taken by the king of France and Count William 
as long before as the 26th of April, 1127, and the count made it his 
principal residence. 

* The parchment of the manuscript being injured in this place, the sense 
of the passage is given after the text of Duchesne and the edition of the 
Historical Society of France. 



A.D. 1128.] COTJKT WILLIAM SLAIIT EEFOEE ALOST. 93 

blade wliicli lie was endeavouriug to catcli in his right hand, 
the point entering the fleshy part between the thumb and 
the palm, and dangerously piercing an artery in his arm. 
Finding himself severely wounded, he retired from the spot, 
and showing the wound to his friends complained that he 
suffered anguish which struck him to the heart. Soon after- 
wards he was compelled to retire to his bed; for what is 
caUed the " sacred fire "^ mingled with the inflammation oi 
the wound, and his whole arm up to the shoulder turned as 
black as a coal. He lay sick for five days, and being penitent 
for his sins, called for a monk's dress, and, fortified by 
receiving the Lord's body and by confession, then expired. 

Elias and Tirrel, and the rest of the duke's household, 
who had always served him faithfully, concealed the fatal 
consequences of their young lord's wound from the Flemings 
and all strangers ; and so pressed the garrison that they com- 
pelled them to surrender the place. Evain who commanded 
in the castle, having made propositions and delivered hostages, 
peace was signed, and he became on friendly terms with the 
besiegers. Then they led him to the tent of the jSTorman 
duke, and showed him, sorrowing, the body of their lord 
lying dead on a bier. " You may see here," they said, "what . 
you have done ; you have slain your lord, and brought 
sorrow on thousands without number." Evain, seeing this 
began to tremble, and so deep was his sorrow that he 
burst into tears. Upon which Elias said to him, " Cease, I 
pray you, to mourn, for now your tears are useless, and can- 
not help the duke ; go and take your arms, cause your troops 
to arm themselves, and have the corpse of our deceased duke 
conveyed with all honour to St. Bertin." 

This was shortly afterwards done ; the convent of monks 
came forth in procession to meet the corpse and received 
it into the church. There it was buried by the side of Duke 

^ The malady described by our author is known as *' St, Anthony's 
fire," a highly inflammatory erysipelas. It was in the course of July, 1 128, 
that Count William, after having defeated Thierri, united his forces under 
the walls of Alost with those of his ally, Geoffrey-le-Barbu, who was 
besieging it on his own account, and had invested it on the Uth or 12th of 
that month. Thierri, Evain, and Daniel were in the place. It appears 
that the count was wounded on the 28th of July, and died on Friday, the 
9th of August. The Flemish historian relates the circumstances some- 
what difierentlv. 



9i 0EDEEICU3 YITALIS. [e.XII. CH.XLYI. 

Eobert, and a stone laid over it, on wliich the following 

epitaph was inscribed •} 

Miles famosus, Gulielmus, \iv generosus, 
Marchio Fhmdrensis, jacet hie, monachus Sithiensia j 
Rodbertus pater huic^ materque Sibylla fuere ; 
Et Normannorum gentis frenum tenuere. 
Luxque kaleiidarum sextilis quinta redivit, 
Cum pugnax apud Alost ferro plagatus obivit. 

" Here lies William, count of Planders, a soldier of renown, 
a man of illustrious birth, who became a monk of Sithieu. 
Eobert was his father, and Sibylla his mother ; they 
governed the people of Normandy. The fifth day of the 
calends of August had returned, when this warrior died of a 
wound received at Alost." 

John the son of Odo, bishop of Bayeux,'^ was the first who 
brought to King Henry the intelligence of his nephew's death, 
and humbly placed in his hand's letters under his seal, in 
which the dying prince entreated his uncle to forgive him 
for all the ill he had done him, and conjured him to receive 
into his favour those who had attended or flocked to him in 
his exile, if they would return to his uncle's court. After 
reading this request the king granted it, and received with 
kindness several who came to him ; more, however, over- 
whelmed with grief for the loss of their master, took the 
cross, and becoming exiles for Christ went on pilgrimage 
to his tomb at Jerusalem. Thierri of Alsace became 
duke of Flanders, and made an alliance with Lewis, king 
of France,'^ and a secret treaty with Henry, king of 
England. Stephen, count of Boulogne, and the other 
Normans who held lands in Flanders, did homage to King 
Henry in right of his cro^Ti.^ After some years, Thierri 

* In point of fact, Count William was buried in the church of St. 
Bertin, near his cousin Baldwin-a-la-Hache. This epitaph proves that he 
died in the monastic habit, as our author relates. 

' See what is said in b. viii. c. 1, of the eloquence and merit of this 
person, who was an ornament of the court of Henry I. A son of his, 
named Robert Petit-Fils' de VEveque (Nepos Episcopi), appears on the 
exchequer rolls of 1131. This Robert seems to have heen the grandfather 
of William du Hommet, constable of Normandy, under Henry IT. 

' However, he did not do homage for his fief to Lewis le Gros till 1132. 

■* A secretis. This does not give us a high idea of the good faith of the 
contracting parties towards the French king. 

M. Le Prevost observes, that he cannot understand how the king of Eng- 



A.D. 1128.] Kl-NQ HENET's LENITY. 95 

lost his first wife, who was a very beautiful woman, and by 
the advice of the king of England married Sibylla of Anjou, 
the widow of his predecessor.^ 

Ch. XLYI. King B^enry's lenity to William the NormarCs 
adherents — William de Boumare marries the daughter of 
Bichard de Beviers — JEndows monks at Nezifchdtel — Death 
of Bohertj diche of Normandy. 

Supported by the aid of the Supreme Euler of events. King 
Henry stood firm at the summit of power in the midst of so 
many adverse circumstances, and pardoning the rebels who 
abandoned their rash enterprises and approached him as 
supplicants, he wisely, as well as kindly, received them with 
favour. First, as I have already mentioned, "William de 
Eoumare made an honourable peace with the king, and 
afterwards was admitted among his courtiers and intimate 
friends ; the king also gave him for wife the noble lady 
Matilda, daughter of Eichard de Eeviers,^ who bore him a 
fine boy named William Elias.^ William de Eoumare had 
been in his youth a libertine, and gave the rein to his 
passions, but scourged by the divine rod, he fell into a 
grievous sickness ; this led him to consult with Archbishop 
Geofirey, under whose monitions he made a vow to God for 
the amendment of his life. When his health was restored, 
returning to Neuf-Marche, where four secidar canons then 
served the church, he established seven monies, and added 
liberally to the endowment which Hugh de Grantmesnil 

land could have any suzerainty in Flanders. It must have been for their lands 
in Normandy, we should conclude, that these lords did homage to Henry. 

* His first wife was Swanchilde, who was not the widow of his pre- 
decessor, Charles of Denmark, whose name was Margaret of Clermont. 
She died about 1130. 

His second wife, Sibylla of Anjou, who had been betrothed to William 
of Normandy, married Thierri of Alsace in 1134, and attended him in his 
two last journeys to the Holy Land. The last time she remained behind, 
against his consent, and took the veil in the convent of St. Lazarus at 
Bethany in 1158. 

' Richard de Redvers, Reviers, or Rivers, lord of Nehou in Normandy, 
and of Okehampton in England, and afterwards earl of Devon. See vol. 
ii. p. 498, and note (b. viii. c. 15), and vol. iii. p. 418 and note (b. xi. c. 
32), where we find that he was dead in 1107, and was buried in the abbey 
of Montebourg. 

' It does not appear that this child lived. 



96 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XLVII. 

had made for the monks of St. Evroult in tliat house.'' He 
granted a charter confirming the grant of what he had given, 
and repaii'ed the chancel" and the lodgings of the monks. 

William, the young count of Flanders, having died in the 
twenty-eighth year of King Henry's reign, with him departed 
the strength and daring of all who abetted him against his 
uncle. Their daring arrogance had no one to whom it could 
be attached, after the young chief, in whose cause they had 
devastated the fields of Normandy with fire and sword, had 
perished. Duke Eobert, who was then confined at Devizes, 
felt in a dream just at that time his right arm struck by a 
lance, and he seemed thento lose the use of it. "When the duke 
awoke in the morning he said to those about him : " Alas ! 
my son is dead." The intelligence had not been orally con- 
veyed bymesssengers t(?that place, when the duke, instructed 
by his dream, intimated to his attendants his son's death. 
He himself died six years afterwards at Cardifi',^ and then, 
carried forth from his prison, was buried at Gloucester. 

Ch. XLYII. Extracts from the prophecies of Merlin relating 
to English history^ with comments upon them. 

See how the prophecy of Ambrosius Merlin, delivered in 
the time of Vortigern, king of Britain* was clearly fulfilled 
in many instances during a period of six hundred years. I 
may therefore be allowed to introduce in this work some of his 
pre'dictions which appear to relate to the present era. Merlin 
was contemporary with St. Germanus, bishop of Auxerre. He 
twice crosed over to England in the time of the Emperor 
Yalentinian,^ and, disputing against Pelagius and his disci- 
ples who cavilled at the doctrine of divine grace, confuted 
the heretics by many miracles wrought in the name of the 
Lord. Then, after devoutly celebrating the feast of Easter, 

1 See vol. i. p. 397. 

* This chancel is probably the same which now exists in the church of 
Neufmarche-en- Lions. There is a plate of it in the " Records of the 
House of Gournay." 

^ See afterwards, b. xiii. c. 9. 

* Vortigern is supposed to have flourished about the year 447. 

^ The first ^i8it to England of St. Germanus, bishop of Auxerre, and 
St. Lupus, bishop of Troyes, was made in 430, when the Alleluia victory 
was c;ained. 



PEOPHECIES OF MERLIK, 97 

he fought against the Anglo-Saxons, who being pagans 
waged war against the Christian Britons; and prevailing 
raore by his prayers than his arms, routed the heathen 
host with an army of the newly baptized in the faith, he 
himself shouting Alleluia during the battle. Should any- 
one desire to learn more of these events and the fortunes 
of the Britons, he should peruse the books of Gildas the 
British historian, and Bede the English writer,^ in which the 
reader will find a lucid narrative of "the acts of Vortimer and 

/ The History of the Britons by Gildas, and Bede's Ecclesiastical 
His.orj,have been published in Bohn's Antig. Lib. in English translations 
As to (rermanus, see Bede, b. i. c. 17, 21 (p. 26—33). 

The pretended prophecies of Ambrosius Merlin, long cherished am one 
the native population of Britain, and consoling them for their humiliation 
by the promise of bloody and glorious reprisals on the Anglo-Saxon race 
do not appear to have become known to the Normans unril a late period 
in the reign of Henry I. It was probably about the same time that 
the story of Brutus, published by Geoffrey of Monmouth soon after- 
wards, presented to the Normans, in a series of absurd fables, a magnificent 
account of the origin of the people whom they had lately reduced to 
Bubj^^ction. If we may apply the term to such romances, we may say that 
these Acts of the Bretons" were of the same character as the''' Acts of 
the Romans" (Gesta Eomanorum) which were then generally current 
and from which our author frequently borrowed his materials. They 
tormed a sort of British epic, well calculated to seize the attenrion of the 
various races with which the country was now peopled much more vividly 
than the disjointed stories which found their way over the channel, and 
nad little interest but for the localities in which thev originated 

The prophecies of aMeriin, when now carefully adapted to circumstances 
and thus given to the worid, were admirably suited to complete a reaction 
which assumed an historical character. In this way, the past, the present, 
and the future of the English nation, and its mixed populations, were 
represented as ordered and linked together in a regular series; and so we iind 
them soon afterwards, as a natural consequence, in the work of Geoffrey of 
Monmouth. The success of this combination was immense, both in En^^- 
land and even on the continent. Not only the people of Normandy, but 
those also who hlled its castles, its schools, and its cloisters, and even Vrave 
politicians, such as Suger, became the dupes of the imposture The 
predictions of Merlin, implicitly accepted as soon as they made their 
appearance, were, like tlie Sibylline books, placed on neariv the same 
looting as the holy scriptures, became the subjects of elaborate com- 
mentaries as eariy as the twelfth century, and were frequently quoted with 
respect during the whole of the middle ages. Among other works in 
^'hich these prophecies were treated as authentic, the commentary of 
Alain de Lisle, pnnted at Frankfort in 160a and 1649, and the paraphrase 
m verse of John of Cornwall may be especially mentioned P^'^'P"'^'^ 

TOL. IV. H 



98 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b XII. Cn.XLTII. 

his brothers, with those of the valiant Arthur, who fought 
twelve battles against the English. 

We are told that Merlin showed Yortigern a pond in the 
middle of the floor, and in the pond two vessels, and in the 
vessels a tent folded up, and in the tent two worms, one of 
which was white and the other red. The worms grew very 
fast, and becoming dragons, fought desperately with each 
other. i\.t last, the red dragon conquered and drove the 
white dragon to the margin of the pond.^ The king be- 
holding these things, with the Britons, was sorely distressed 
and wept. Merlin, being then interrogated by the astonished 
spectators, explained in the spirit of prophecy that the pond 
in the middle of the floor signified the world ; the two vessels, 
the British isles ; the tent, the towns and villages of Britain, 
the seats of human habitation; by the two worms were 
meant the British and English people, who should harass 
each other by turns in fierce conflicts, until the bloody Saxons, 
who are designated by the red dragon, had driven into Corn- 
wall, and to the shores of the ocean, the Britons, who are 
figured by the white dragon, because they were arrayed in 
white at the baptismal font from the times of King Lucius, 
and pope Eleutherius. 

The prophet also predicted the course of events which 
would occur in future ages in the islands of the north, and 
reduced his prophecy to writing in allegorical language. 
Having spoken of the Q-ermanic worm and the decimation 
of IS'eustria, which was fulfilled in Alfred, brother of Edward, 
che son of King Ethelred, and his companions at Gruilford,- 
he made predictions concerning the r8voluti(ms of the 

• There is no pure and authentic text of these prophecies extant, and 
our author's reading differs materialJy in some points from the version 
given by Geoffrey of Monmouth. Among other variations, the iatler 
omits the passage about the tent and the two worms, and transposes the 
cohmrs assigned to the two dragons, in the subsequent exphmation. This 
reading is not happy, for red, as we have had occasion to observe before, 
was the national colour of the Britons, and also of the Scandinavians and 
their Norman descendants. 

* In 1036, according to the Saxon chronicle. The narrative is more 
circumstantially related by Henry of Huntingdon, who gives the date of 
1040 to the massacre. M. Le Prevost considers the use of the word 
Neusiria to prove clearly an interpolation of this passiige after the fact, as 
Neu^tria did not exist as a kingdom or province in the time of Merlin. 



PKOPHECIES OF MEELIJT. 99 

*: fono:Sg -^^,'^l'™-We.ome vicissitudes o.f aifairs,. to 

whott,^?]"^'" *f "'""'' '"'^'■' ^ *™''^'' ''°'i i"! «»at8 of iron, 
who shall execute rengence for iBiquity.' It shaU restore 

str^n":^ ,Tn t*'"*^.*" their honis/and the rufn rf t e 
SfateVr^/ f °'^''«,'"'i°'f«^t- Their germs shall be 

Shall be decimated; they shall bear the yoke of pernetual 

slaiL W the 1 r^T '""f '""•=""'*' •'"^ °^ whom^hali be 
Slam by the darts of malice/ and the other shall verisJi 
under the shadow of a name.= A lion of justice' shaU sue 
ceed, whose roar shall cause the towns of^France andttt 
dragons of the island to tremble. In his days goU shall be 
extorted from the lily and the nettle, and^silver shal be 
scattered abroad by the hoofs of lowing kine The men 

TolourT^'afd °tf" ^'"'1 ^'''^ 1°'^^ °^™™- textu^L^^a 
colours and theu- exterior shall betoken their interior 

shall bl 1,iT^"l t^^^' ^'"'* °ff- The beasts of ase 

pun shmenT tIw t ^"i"""'*^ ''^''" "°"™ °™'- t^e 
punishment. The tokens ol commerce shall be cut in sun- 
der, and the halves shall be round." The rapaciou^kTs 

inke'!'"t\^lf\Ti:tf'' '"» '=''P;iv!ty retained only the „an,e .,f 

5 In^i!^^?^ ^^ justice" represents Henry I. 

subsequently called in and a rniriS nf « f^t^^,?''^^® ^^^^'es being 

If .he%r„pLev e„„'ib\":o\";redf it Zm et 'rjr:' i"^""^^^- 

ordinary m the whole series Vny fKo r^ • "® ^^^' ^-"^'^i'^- 

not issi^ed until la eLlf rdW FdwT/r'^' '" "^^^^ ^^^ ^'^^^^^ ^^^ 
author's tinie. lee whaVpSoI ^f W * f ''"^'^^ ^' ^""^^ ^^^er our 
farthina, n -^6} fflh v?- .^ of Worcester says of these trianaular 

on the new'-coina.:. " ''^'"" " ^''''' ^^^*'^- ^^■^'- -^ ^ note Co 



R 



o 



100 ORDERICUS TITALTS. [b.XII, CH.XLVII. 

shall perish, and the teeth of wolves be blunted. The lion's 
whelps shall be transformed into sea-fishes/ and his eagle 
shall build her nest oti the Ai'aunian mountains.'^ Venedocia 
shall be red with a mother's blood, aud the house of Corineus 
shall slay six bretheren.^ The island shall be bathed in the 
tears of night, and thence the people shall be incited to all 
sorts of villainies.^ The men of after times shall aspire to 
soar aloft, and new men shall rise to favour and eminence. 
Piety shall be turned by the impious to the injury of those 
who possess it.® 

"Armed therefore with the teeth of the bear, it shall tran- 
scend the summits of the mountains and the shade of the 
helmed warrior. Albany shall be roused to fury, and calling 
in those who dwell by her side shall give herself up to the 
shedding of blood.^ A bit forged on the Armorican sea 
shall be put into its jaws ; but the eagle that severs the bond 
shall devour it, and shall exult in making her nest for the 
third time. The whelps of the roaring lion shall ^wake, and 

^ This was applied, as the interpolator no doubt intended, to the ship- 
wreck of King Henry's children in the Blanche-Nef. 

2 Editors and commentators are quite at a loss about these " Araunian 
mountains." In the text of Geoffrey of Monmouth we have Montcm 
Aranium. Alain de Lisle offers three versions, Montem Moranium, Mon- 
tem Avium, and Montem Aravium, adding that the last is the name of a 
mountain in England. John of Cornwall adopts the reading of Araviw7n. 

' Venedocia, as Giraldus Cambrensis informs us, is an ancient name of 
North Wales, Corineus was said to be a companion of Brutus, and the 
first king of Cornwall ; while the six brethren put to death like the six 
sons of Erecthcus, are, according to Alain de Lisle, the six sons of Fremun, 
who was viscount of Cornwall under Henry I. 

* In the version of Ordericus a passage is here omitted which too 
transparently alludes to the circumstances attending the embalment of 
Henry I. (See Henry of Huntingdon's Hist. p. 26'2.) It is this : " Woe 
to thee, Neustria, for thou shalt be bespattered with the lion's brain, and 
he shall be borne from his native land with dismembered limbs." The 
explanation of this passage not being found in the text of our author is 
perfectly natural : he wrote the passage before the event, and consequently 
before the prediction. 

* We can make no sense of the sequel of this sentence, do7iec sese geni- 
torem induerit. 

* Albany, as every one knows, is Scotland. The passage may refer to 
the continual incursions of the Scots on the English border, and to the 
Breton troops (Arraorica being Brittany) in the pay of Henry I., and 
employed to bridle, in the language of the prophecy, his numerous 
enemies. 



PROPHECIES OF MEELI]?r. 101 

leaving the forests, shall hunt under the walls of towns. 
They shall make a great carnage among all who resist, and 
tear out the tongues of bulls. The necks of the lions shall 
be loaded with chains, and ancient times be renewed. After 
that, from the first to the fourth, from the fourth to the 
third, from the third to the second, the thumb shall be 
smeared with oil. The sixth shall throw down the walls of 
Ireland,^ and convert the woods into an open country. He 
shall reduce the several portions to one, and shall be crowned 
with the lion's head. He shall restore the places of the 
saints through the country, and fix pastors in convenient situa- 
tions. He shall invest two cities with palls, and confer virgin 
gifts on virgins. He shall therefore obtain by his merits the 
favour of the Thunderer, and shall be crowned among the 
blest. There shall arise from him a pest,^ which shall pene- 
trate every where, and threaten ruin to his own nation. 
Through it Neustria shall lose both islands, and be shorn of 
her former diginity. Then the citizens shall return to the 
island." 

I have made these short extracts from Merlin's book and 
ofier them to the studious who are not acquainted with it. 
Some of his prophecies I have traced to events now past, 
and, if I mistake not, more of them will be verified in the 
experience of posterity either with joy or sorrow. Persons 
acquainted with history will easily understand the words of 

^ The prophecies of Merlin having relation to Ireland, are introduced 
and commented on by Giraldus Cambrensis in his History of the Conquest 
of that island, insomuch that from this circumstance, and the reference to 
other ancient predictions, he gave it the title of " The Vaticinal History." 
The reducing the several portions into one is taken to refer to the union of 
the four provinces, into m hich Ireland was divided, under one supreme lord, 
and governor. The application of the other passages of this supposed 
prophecy to Irish history will be discussed in a forthcoming edition cf the 
works of Giraldus Cambrensis in the Antiquarian Library. We may, 
however, here remark, as a curious addition to the evidence we have pro- 
duced of the high estimation in which these prophecies were held, that 
John de Courcy, one of the principal leaders in the enterprise for the 
conquest of Ireland, was so convinced of their truth that he always 
carried a copy of them about his person, and applied portions of them to 
his own acts. 

•^ Lues. There is an important variation in Geoffrey's and all the other 
versions of the prophecies, which read lynx ; and this passage was in a 
later age applied to Henry II., although history does not lead us to think 
that the king was gifted with the quick sense attributed to that animal. 



102 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [e.XII. CH.XLYII. 

Merlin, when they recollect what happened under Hengist 
and Catigirn, Pascent and Arthur, Ethelbert and Edwin, 
Oswald and Oswy, Cedwal and Alfred, and other princes 
both English and British, until the times of Henry and 
Griffyth,^ who in the uncertainty of their lot are still expec- 
ting what may befall them in the ineffable dispensations of 
Divine Providence. Eor instance, it is as clear as light to 
the intelligent reader, that Merlin is speaking of the two 
sons of William, when he says : " Two Dragons shall 
succeed," meaning libertine and fierce princes, "one of 
Avhom," that is William Eufus, "shall be slain by the darts 
of malice," namely by an arrow in hunting, "the other," 
that is duke Eobert, "shall perish in the shadows of a 
dungeon, retaining only his former title," that of duke. 
"The lion of justice shall succeed, which refers to Henry," 
at whose roar the towers of Prance and the Island dragons 
shall tremble ; because in wealth and power he transcends 
all who reigned in England before him. In the* same 
manner, the wise can clearly decypher the rest.^ I might 

1 Henry I. and Griffith-ap-Rhys. This passage is of some importance, 
because we infer from it, that the -whole paragraph was written before the 
death of Henry I., as we have already concluded from its omittiMg the 
prediction relative to the embalment of that prince. 

- The result of our examination of the text of these prophecies is that 
Ordericus and Geoffrey used one and the same Latin translation of them, 
which was then in existence, but was not of earlier date than the reign of 
Henry I. ; but Geoffrey omitted some passages and introduced others which 
have been pointed out in preceding notes. 

We may also observe that the Latin translation of the history of Brute 
was no more Geoffrey's, than that of the prophecies of Merlin. Henry of 
Huntingdon informs us, in his epistle- to Warin, that when he was at the 
abbey of Bee in Normandy, on his way to Rome (in 1139), Robert Del- 
mont (called also De Torigni), a monk of that society, showed him, to his 
great surprise, a manuscript of GeofiVey's work recently wTitten. This 
could hardly have escaped the research of Henry of Huntingdon in 
England, if it had already been in the library of Alexander, bishop oi 
Lincoln, the historian's patron. " I have never been able to discover any 
traditions or writings containing records of the earlier periods of English 
history" — he tells his friend Warin, who being a Breton was acquainted 
with these marvellous compositions, and blamed him for having omitted 
any notice of them in his chronicle. It may therefore be inferred that 
Geofirey of Monmouth met with a translation of these British annals, and 
was content to make a mere transcript of it, as it is quite clear that he did 
of the prophecies in the passage quoted by Ordericus. 



A.D. 1128.] A ST>iOD AT ROUEy. 103 

say more in explanation, if I undertook to write a commen- 
tary on Merlin. But leaving tliis, I resume the course of 
my narrative, and shall faithfully relate the events which 
have occured in my own time. 

Ch. XLYIII. Succession of the Patriarchs of Jerusalem — 
Sickness and death of Geoffrey , archbishop of Bouen — A 
synod there — Henry's daughter Matilda marries Geoffrey 
JE*lantagenet — Fidk, count of Anjou, marries Baldwin'' s 
daughter, and succeeds him as king of Jerusalem. 

Ik the year of our Lord, 1128, the sixth indiction, died 
Gormond,* patriarch of Jerusalem. After him Stephen of 
Chartres'* governed the holy Sion for two years. On his 
death he was succeeded by William of Flanders.^ In the 
seventh indiction, G-eofTrey, archbishop of Rouen, fell sick, 
and after a long illness departed this life on the sixth of the 
calends of December [November 26th] .^ While the arch- 
bishop lay sick, and in concern for the salvation of his soul, 
gave away all he possessed, Matthew, a monk of Cluni, 
who was bishop of Albano and legate of the Eoman church, 
came to Eouen to meet King Henry, and treat with him on 
matters concerning the welfare of the church. Whereupon, 
by the king's command, the bit^hops and abbots of Normandy 
were convoked at Eouen, the capital, and in the king's pre- 
sence heard the decrees pronounced by the legate of Pope 
Honorius to the following effect -!' — 

" That no priest shall have any wife. Any priest who 
win not give up cohabiting with a concubine shall not hold 
a church, or obtain any share in ecclesiastical preferments, 
and none of the faithful shall hear mass celebrated by him.^ 

* Gormond, son of Gormond II., lord of Picquigni (1118 — 1128.) 

2 Stephen, a regular canon and abbot of St. Jean-de-Vallee, a relation 
of King Baldwin. It is supposed that he was poisoned (1 1 28 — 1 1 30). 

3 William de Malines, a canon of the Holy Sepulchre (J 130 — 114/i or 
1145.) 

* Our author gives November 26 as the date of this prelate's death but 
according to the registers of the cathedral, and the priorv of Soissons, it 
was the •28th of that month (1128). 

* It appears from what follows that this synod was held in the month of 
September. 

^ Our author has not thought proper to give any account of the reception 
which this canon, the product of tlie council of Kheims, met with in Eng- 



104 OEDEEICUS YITAL13. [b.XII. CH.XLYIII. 

" That one priest shall not serve two churches, nor any 
clerk hold prebends in more than one church ; but kt him 
serve God in the church \yhere he is beneficed, and praj 
daily for its benefactors. 

" That neither monks nor abbots shall receive gifts of 
churches or tithes from the hands of laics, but the laics who 
have usurped them shall surrender them to the bishop, and 
the monks shall receive from the bishop what is offered, 
according to the intentions of the possessors. Such churches 
and tithes as laymen have already acquired by any means 
whatsoever, they shall continue to hold without let or 
hindrance by the indulgence of the pope ; but from hence- 
forth they shall not presume to usurp any thing of this 
kind without the licence of the bishop in whose diocese they 
are situated or arise." 

The E-oman legate then absolved all persons from their 
past transgressions ; and in the month following, as I have 

land two years before, principally on account of the scandal occasioned by 
the cardinal legate, John de Crema, who was said to have been detected in 
the act of fornication the very ni^ht after he had declaimed in the synod 
on the immoralities of the clerijy. Henry of Huntingdon gives the best 
account of this aifair (Hist. p. -5'2); and it is also mentioned by most of 
the other historians. The consequence was, that the cardinal turned his 
steps homewards in confusion and dishonour. He was not, as he is called 
in some versions of the chronicles, bishop of Cremona or Crema, but a 
native of the latter place, a city in the Bolognese, and stni of Ulric and 
Ratilda. Created a cardinal-))riest, under the title of St. Chrysogonus, by 
Pascal II., he was employed to l)esiege the antipope, Gregory VIII. 
(Maurice Bourdin), in Sutri, and found means to carry him off bound hi 
fetters to Rome, as we have before seen (p. 43). Ciacomius is compelled 
to admit tlie charges of simony, and et^pecially of his being surprfsed in 
the act of fornication alleged against him by Henry of Huntingdon, Roger 
de Hoveden, and Matthew of Westminster. The historian of the popes 
makes the most of the silence of William of Malmesbury, a purely 
negative argument, which does not ap.pear by any means conclusive. 

From England this legate went to Scotland, engaged in his usual mission 
against ecclesiastics who were married, or quasi-marned. He had, there- 
fore, to pass tl. rough Durham, where he w.is entertained by bishop Ranulf 
Flam bard This gave rise to another story of the same kind, in which 
the (dd bishop bore a part. But, ciafty as Fiambaid always was,^it is 
difficult to conceive that after the scandal of his adventure at London, the 
cardinal should have falleai into the snare laid for him, and so soon exposed 
himself to the same danger. 

We have remarked before that Hing Henry managed to turn this dispute 
to his own advantage, filling his treasury with the money paid him by the 
clergy for licence to retain their conjugal privileges. 



A.D. 1128.] MATILDA MAEEIES GEOrFRET. 105 

said before, the archbishop died. There were at this synod, 
with the legate, Geoffrey bishop of Chartres, Gosseliu the 
Eed, bishop of Soissons, and aU the bishops of Normandy, 
namely, Eichard of Bayeux, Ouen of Evreux, Turgis of 
Avranches, John of Lisieux, Eichard of Coutances, and 
John of Seez. Several abbots were also present, namely, 
Eoger of Fecamp, AVilliam of Jumieges, Eagenfred of St. 
Ouen, Warin of St. Evroult, Philip of St. Taurin, with 
Alann, abbot-elect of St. Wandrille, and some others. They 
were protected by King Henry, who would not permit the 
bishops to subject them to any grievance.^ 

In the year of our Lord, 1129, the seventh indic- 
tion, the boy Philip was chosen by his father Philip, 
and crowned as king at Eheims by Eeynold 11.,^ arch- 
bishop of that see on Easter day; but two years after- 
wards he was so severely fractured by his horse falling under 
him, that he died at Paris.^ 

The same year King Henry gave his daughter Matilda to 
Geoffrey count of Anjou ; Turgis, the aged bishop of 
Avranches, giving them the nuptial benediction.^ After the 

* Our author has forgotten to mention an important fact which belongs 
to the year 1128. It is the sudden invasion of the country of Maine by 
Henry I., having for its object to prevent Lewis le Gros from affording aid 
to William of Normandy. This skilful combination had all the success 
that the politic king could hope to derive from it, as by cutting off the 
young count from his powerful protector, it brought about the events which 
terminated in his tragical end. 

Henry of Huntingdon thus speaks of it : " The sagacious king Henry 
spent the whole of the next year (1128) in Nonnandy, and made a hostile 
incursion into France, because the French king supported his nephew and 
enemy. He encamped for eight days at Epernon, as securely as if he had 
been in his own dominions, and compelled King Lewis to withdraw his 
succour from the earl of Flanders." Hist. p. 254. Roger of Wendover 
copies Huntingdon, but places the fact under the year 1129, when this 
diversion could no longer hare had any object. 

2 Reynold de Martigni. The king of England assisted at the corona- 
tion in quality of duke of Normandy. 

^ The young prince was born August 22, 1116, crowned at Rheims on 
Easter day, April 14, 1129, and died on October 13, 1131, from the conse- 
quences of a tail from his horse in the streets of Paris, occasioned by a pig 
which ran between its legs. 

* It is difficult to ascertain exactly the date of the marriage of the 
empress Matilda with Geoffrey Plantagenet. 

It seems clear that they were betrothed at Rouen at Whitsuntide, May 



106 OBDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XII. CH.XLTIII. 

due celebration of this marriage, Count Fulk went again on 
a pilgrimage to Jerusalem/ and there married the daughter 
of Baldwin II., obtaining easily by this union the kingdom 
of Jerusalem and the principality of Antioch, which the 
most famous warriors had acpuired with so much difficulty." 
Indeed, his aged father-in-law offered him the crown at once, 
but, as the junior, he refused to accept it during Baldwin's 
life. Still, as his son-in-law and heir, Fulk held the reins 
of power during the year afterwards that the old king sur- 
vived. 

At first he provided for the future with less caution than 
was politic ; too hastily appointing governors and changing 
other authorities without sufficient reason. The chiefs who 
had obstinately fought against the Turks from the beginning, 
and with great labour reduced cities and strong places to 
subjection under Godfrey and the two Baldwins, the new 
prince treated with coolness, and lending a too willing ear 
to strangers from Anjou and other new comers who had no 
experience, repaid their flatteries by calling them to the 
counsels of the kingdom, and entrusting to them the custody 

22, 1127, in the presence of King Henr}'^, who then conferred the order of 
knighthood with great solemnity on his intended son-in-law and five 
young gentlemen of Anjou. But as the count, who was born on 
August 24, 1163, was not yet fifteen years old, we imagine with our 
author and the chronicle of Tours, that the marriage was not celebrated 
until the octave of Whitsunday in 1129, which fell that year on June 2, 
and that it was solemnized at Mans by the bishop of the diocese, Guy 
d'Elampes, assisted by the bishop of Seez, and probably by the prelates of 
Touraine and Anjou. It is very likely that on account of the 
infirmities of the archbishop of Rouen it was Turgis, the bishop of 
Avranches, who officiated at the espou^-als, as our author relates, either in 
the capacity of dean of the suffragans, or, in the absence of the bishop of 
Baveux, the first suffragan. 

the marriage did not turn out happily : " a few days only passed," says 
Simeon of Durham, " when it was told the king that his daughter was 
repudiated and cast off by her husband, and had returned to Rouen with 
a small retinue, which troubled him much. It appears that both husband 
and ^vife had most disagreeable tempers. However, we find that in 1130, 
after deliberation in solemn council, it was resolved that the king's 
daughter should be restored to her husband, the count of Anjou, as he 
demanded. Henry Hunt. p. 258. 

* This second journey of Fulk, count of Anjou, to Jerusalem, took 
place in the latter pirt of ] 129. 

* This princess, whose name was Melisende, was the eldest daugliter of 
Baldwin II.; king of Jerusalem. 



A.D. 1180—1131.] FULK, KING Or JERUSALEM. 107 

of fortresses, the former governors being set aside. This 
occasioned deep resentment, and the pride of the nobles 
desperately revolted against the inexperienced prince vrho 
made these changes in office. Inspired with the spirit of 
evil, they long directed against their fellow Christians that 
warlike enterprise which they should have unanimously 
employed against the Glentiles, uniting with them in all 
parts against each other. Hence ensued the loss of many 
thousand men and of some strong places. 

In the year of our Lord, 1130, the eighth indiction, Bald- 
win II., king of Jerusalem, died^ on the eighteenth of the 
calends of September [August 15th], and Eulk of Anjou has 
now been king six years.^ 

In the same year Hugh of Amiens, a monk of Cluni, and 
abbot af Reading, was made archbishop of Eouen.^ 

In the year of our Lord, 1131, Pope Honorius died at 
Eome, and tnere presently arose a scandalous schism in the 
church of Grod ; for Grregory, the deacon, was elected pope 
by some persons, and named Innocent, while others con- 
secrated Peter, Anaclete.* 

* Baldwin died August 21, 1131, and Fulk was crowned on the 14th of 
September following. 

'^ This must have been written in 1137. 

3 Archbishop Hugh, however he obtained the surname of (T Amiens^ 
was a native of Laon, where he pursued his studies under the celebrated 
Anselm of Laon. We learn from Robert du Mont, that he was not con- 
secrated till the feast of the Exaltation of the Cross (Sept. 14), 1130 ; but 
his election must have taken place at least in 1129, as we find that the 
election of the chapter was confirmed by Pope Honorius who died Feb. 
14, 1130. It is supposed that he was a brother of the legate Matthew, 
bishop of Albano. At least they were countrymen. 

* Innocent II. was elected by fourteen cardinals on the same morning 
on which Honorius died, or the next ; and Peter de Leon (who took the 
name of Anaclete) was chosen by all the other cardinals, as soon as the 
late pope's death was publicly known. Both were enthroned the same 
day, and consecrated on the 23rd. Anaclete's party being the strongest at 
Rome, Iimocent retired to France, where St. Bernard had already 
obtained his recoo^nition by an assembly at Chai'tres. 



108 OEDEEICTJS VITALTS. [b.XIII. Cn. I. 



BOOK XIII. 

Cu. I. Return of tlie Crusaders — Death of Geoffrey count of 
Mortaiii and William de Moulins. 

While the pilgrims from the "West were engaged in con- 
stant wars against the Pagans in Palestine, and by frequent 
conflicts and long sieges reduced Jerusalem and other cities 
to the dominions of Christ, Greoffrey count of Mortain,^ 
the son of count E-otrou, a man eminent for many good 
qualities, fell sick unto death, and having called about him 
the lords of le Perche and le Corbonnais, who were yassals 
to him as count of Mortain, he put his affairs in order 
with great wisdom. Griving prudent directions to his wife 
Beatrix, who was the daughter of the count de Eouci,^ and 
the lords of his own county, he prayed them Yaithfally to 
maintain peace and security, and keep his lands and strong 
places for his only son Eotrou who had gone in pilgrimage 
to Jerusalem.^ Then the brave lord, having duly re- 
ceived all the rites of the church, was made a Cluniac monk 
and died in the middle of October, at his castle of Nogent,^ 
where he was buried ; his father having commenced building 
a monastery there in honour of St. Dionysius the Areopa- 
gite, which he had richly endowed with lands and other 
possessions.^ 

In the course of the same month also died William de 
Moulins a most intrepid lord-marcher, who Avas buried in 
the chapter-house at St. Evroult.'^ 

In the year of our Lord 1100, the- great nobles having 
accomplished the purposes for which they went to Jerusa- 
lem, returned home, and, as was just, reinstated themselves 
in their own possessions. Then Eobert duke of Normandy, 

* Geoffrey II., Count de Mortain, son of Rotrou, and grandson of 
Geoffrey I., who was before Viscount de Ch^teaudun. 

^ Beatrix de Rouci, daughter of Baldwin IV., Count de ^Montdidier, 
d'Arcies, and de Rameru, and Count de Rouci, in right of his wife Alice. 
3 At the first crusade. We are now brought back to the year 1100. 

* Nogent-le- Rotrou. In October, 1100. 

^ This monastery was not begun by his father Rotrou, but by his 
grandfather Geoffrev in 1030. 
^ See vol. iii. p. 221 (b. x. c. 8). 



A.D. 1114.] THE NOEMAS^S AID ALFOIfSO I. 109 

and Eobert count of Flanders, Eotrou, count of Morfcain, 
and many others came back in safety and took possession of 
their territories ; amidst the congratulations of their friends 
and neighbours.^ 

Ch. II. Alfonso I., Ymg of Navarre , receives tTie assistance of 
his cousin Motrou, count of Mortain, against the Infidels. 

A SHORT time afterwards Alfonso, king of Arragon,^ was 
severely pressed by the Pagans, and suffered greatly from 
frequent encounters and heavy losses. He therefore sent 
envoys to his cousin Eotrou, and humbly entreated him to 
come to his aid in the war he was waging against trie hea- 
thens, and bring Trencli auxiliaries whose valour had been 
tried in many difficult circumstances. He also promised to 
give the Erench who rendered him service liberal pay, and 
fertile lands to such as chose to remain with him. The 
most valiant count, without loss of time, summoned together 
his companions in arms, and marching to the aid of the king 
his cousin, gave him his support without fraud or covin ; 
but he did not find the same good faith among the Spaniards. 
For although, with his comrades and compatriots, he per- 
formed many noble exploits, and the Saracens were much ter- 
rified by their prowess, the Spaniards contrived plots against 
them, and laid plans for cutting off their own auxiliaries ; as 
it is supposed, with the consent of the king. This infamous 
design having been discovered to the French by some of the 
accomplices, Eotrou and his companions bid farewell to the 
king and his treacherous Spaniards, and returned to France 
without any adequate reward for their great exertions. 

Ch. III. Hostilities hetween Rotrou count de Mortain, and 
Rohert de JBelesme ahotit their bordering territories — 
Tlieir relationship. 

About this time serious disputes arose between Eotrou 
and Eobert de Belesme respecting certain claims which 

* On the fifth day after his return home, being Sunday, Rotrou went to 
pay his devotions at the church of St. Denis at Nogent, where his father 
was lately buried; and made his offering, with the palms he had brought 
from Jeruralem, on the altar of St. Denis. 

^ Alfonso I., surnamed le Batailleur, king of Navarre and Arragon in 
1104, was cousin-german of Rotrou II., by his mother, Felicia de Rouci,, 
sister of the countess Beatrice. 



110 OEDEEICTJS AiTALIS, [B. XIII. CH. III. 

those marcher lords had on each other in relation to the 
border of their respective territories. In consequence, 
fierce hostilities broke out between them, the farms on both 
sides were pillaged and given to the flames, the defenceless 
people plundered, suffering great losses, and being kept in 
continual alarms ; so that both the military and rural tenants 
who held under these lords, were grievously harassed. How- 
ever, Rotrou gained the advantage, having defeated and put 
to flight Eobert in battle, and taken several of his men ; 
whom he kept in close imprisonment, These lords were 
cousins,^ and. in consequence had quarrels respecting the 
possessions of their ancestors. Warin de Domfrout who 
was strangled by demons,^ was Eotrou's great-grandfather ; 
and Eobert (I.) de Belesme, whom the sons of Walter le 
Sore butchered like a pig, with strokes of their axes, in the 
the dungeon of Balou,^ was the uncle of Mabel, Eobert' s 
mother. Wherefore, Eobert (II.) obtained sole possession of 
Domfrout, Belesme, and all the domains of his parents, and 
so far from allowing any one to share a portion of his wealth 
and power, he was never satisfied unless he was further 
aggrandizing them by force or fraud. 

The counts Greoffrey and Eotrou having adjoining territo- 
ries, had made frequent and urgent demands [on Eobert de 
Belesme] for the restitution of their portion of the inherit- 
ance of their ancestors ; but that tyrant, being in possession 
of thirty-four strong places, defied all their efforts to recover 
their rights, although they were able to inflict severe losses 
upon him. Meanwhile, Henry king of England, becoming 
sensible of Eotrou's worth, bestowed upon him his daughter 

^ Robert II. was g:. ..-grandson, and Rotrou of Mortain, grandson, of 
the great-grandson of William I. de Belesme. 

2 Warin, eldest son of this William I., lord of Domfrout, Mortain, 
and Noient, and viscount of Ch&teaudun, in right of his wife ]\Ie]isende, 
had. treacherously put to death Gunheir de Be'^sme, a gallant and worthy 
soldier, who was unsuspiciously paying his compliments to him; for which 
foul deed he was, according to William de Jum.^:i;c8 (b. vi. c. 4), " strangled 
by a demon in the presence of his friends." These circumstances appear 
to have occurred about 1027. 

^ About 103'3 or 1034. Walter Ic Sor appears to have been the ances- 
tor of Adam le Sor, mentioned in vol. iii. p. 443, and note. M. Delisle 
considers this family to have no connexion with that of Soreng, referred 
to in William of Jumi^ges (b. vii. c. 14), as conjectured in the note. 



A.D. 1114—1115.] THE KOEMANS AGAIN IN SPAIN, 111 

IMatilda^ in marriage, and enriched liim with lands and 
wealth in England. 

Ch. IV. Second expedition of Count Botrou and the FrencJi 
against the Moors in Spain — The Moors defeated in a 
general engagement hy the allied forces of the French and 
Arragojiese. 

The Saracens, having learned the departure of the French, 
rallied their courage, and renewing their inroads on the 
territories of the Christians, manifested their strength by 
cruel massacres, in which numbers perished. The Arragon- 
ese, oppressed by their enemy, and ashamed of their conduct 
[to Count Eotrou], again called in the aid of the French, 
and making them amends for their former ingratitude, pro- 
mised, on oath, to bestow on them lands and honours. The 
count, therefore, dismissing from his mind their previous 
quarrels and the base treatment he had undergone, accepted 
the proposals of his friend and cousin, and gathering a large 
force from all quarters, led them boldly into the enemy's 
country, prepared to make war on the Pagans. Exulting in 
such powerful succour, the Spaniards received the French 
with great demonstrations of joy, and to make amends for 
their former wrongs, quartered them in their cities of 
Toledo,^ Tudela, and Pampeluna, and other towns, heaping 
on them honours and possessions. But, impatient for 
action, the French assembled from their several stations in 
the begin»ing of summer, and, having driven the infidels out 
of the country of their allies by several bloody engagements, 
crossed the frontiers to make reprisals in the enemy's terri- 
toiy. By Grod's help they took ample vengeance for the 
losses and insults which they had suifered, and finding 
abundance of provisions and all other supplies in these dis- 
tricts, spent the winter there. 

Then Eotrou, count of Mortaiu, with the French, the 

^ We have seen that this lady perished in the shipwreck of the Blanche- 
Nef, having been the means of her brother William, the young heir to the 
throne, sharing her fate. 

^ Toledo had been taken by Alfonso VI, king of Castille, in 1085. 
and it is not probable that the Navarrese could quarter their friends the 
French in a place belonging to another king. It has, therefore, been 
suggested, that for Toleto we should substitute Tolosa, or still better, Olito, 
in the Spanish Navarre. 



112 OBDERICUS VITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.TY. 

bishop of Saragossa,'' with the Knights-Palmers,^ and G-aston 
de Bearn,^ with the Gascons, fortified Pencadel,^ where 
there are two impregnable towers, and held it for six weeks. 
At length engaging with Amorgan,'^ king of Valencia, they 
marched on Xativa, but the Pagans retreated before they 
were attacked. The allied forces then retired, leaving a 
garrison of sixty soldiers in the fortress of Pencader. They 
were encountered on their march by a body of Almoravides 
and Andalusians,^ sent from Africa by their king Ali, son of 
Justed,'' who blockaded them in the castle of Serral during 
three days. The Christians having devoted these three days 
to penance for their sins, fasting and prayer, and invoking 
the name of God, gave battle to the enemy on the eighteenth 
of the calends of September [August 14th]. The engage- 
ment lasted all day ; but their valour being strengthened by 
beavenly aid, after sunset victory crowned their arms, 

^ This city was taken by king Alfonso le Batailleur, December 18, 1118, 
after a former unsuccessful seige in 1114. 

2 According to Pierre de Marca (Histoire de Beam vol. V. c. xxi. p. 
416), the Knights-Palmers were an order similar to that of the Knights of 
the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem, established at Mont-Real about 1120, by 
Gaston i. of Arragon, with the double view of securing the Christian frontier 
in that quarter, and preparing for the conquest of the kingdoms of Valencia 
and Murcia. But Briz-Martinez conjectures, that the knights here men- 
tioned belonged to the order of St. John de la Pena. 

2 Gaston IV., Viscount de Beanie, who, as we have seen, so gallantly 
distinguished himself in the ci-usade, entered Spain in 1114, and took the 
most active part in the two sieges of Saragossa. It was also in 1114. that 
Hotrou, released from the dungeon of Robert de Belesme in 111.3, re- 
turned to Spain. 

* Perhaps Benicarlo, in the kingdom of Valencia. 

^ Amorgan probably answers to IMeronan, a person mentioned some 
years afterwards as entrusted with the defence of Valencia. 

^ Amoravii. Properly speaking, the Almoravides were a dynasty of 
African princes, who founded Morocco, and at one period threatened to 
cojiquer the whole of Spain. The word al-moravide is Arabic; it is an 
alteration of al-morahith, and mordbith signifies those who are animated 
with singular zeal for the triumph of the religion of Mahomet. The word 
marabouih is derived from the same source. In this place brdericus 
means, bv the " Amoravii," the Mussulmans of Africa subject to the 
Almoraviue princes. As for the Andalusians of Africa, he means the 
Mussulmans settled in Spain. Andalusia, now only a province, included, 
at that time, all that part of Spain which had submitted to the laws of the 
Koran. 

' Ali, son of Youssouf, or Joseph, was then the reigning prince of the 
Almoravides in Morocco. 



A.D. 1115.] THE MOOES DEFEATED. 113 

although darkness coming on, they could not venture to risk 
the pursuit of the flying enemy for any great distance on 
roads with which they were unacquainted. 

The day before the general engagement, Warin Sancho, a 
person of great merit, ascended the heights with the knights- 
palmers ; and the Christians, combating in God's might, 
defeated King Alhamon,^ who held the mountains at the head 
of one hundred and fifty-four thousand foot soldiers. Of 
this vast host countless numbers perished, either by the arms 
of their pursuers, or being driven over the precipices, by 
excessive fatigue and thirst, or other kinds of death. 
Thus fell the Africans who came to the support of the 
idolaters^ in Spain; and sent to the shades below by the 
weapons of the Christians, suffer with their kings the tor- 
ments of Hell. After this, some of the Normans and French 
made choice of suitable spots, and there settled and fixed 
their habitations. But Silvester de Saint- Calais,^ and Regi- 
nald de Bailol,'* with some others, returned to their native 
land, preferring their patrimonial estates to possessions 
in a foreign land. 

^ Alamimum rex. M. Reinaud conjectures that this person's name was 
Tamien, a brother of the prince of Morocco, to whom he had given the 
government of the provinces of the east of Spain under the yoke of the 
Almoravides. But it would rather appear that the name in the text is Al- 
Hamon Latinized. A race of princes of this name long flourished as 
caliphs of Cordova. 

^ We have had frequent reason to remark how ill acquainted the writers 
of the middle ages generally were with even the first principles of the 
Mahometan religion : anyhow, idolatry was the last thing one should have 
expected to find imputed to them. Ordericus, in common with the other 
chroniclers, generally calls them pagans, or gentiles (heathens). Once or 
twice only he uses the more proper term, infidels. 

^ Not the Calais with which we are best acquainted, but a little town on 
the Sarthe, N.W. of Orleans. 

* Reginald de BailleuI-en-Gouffern, who married Aimerie, niece of Roger 
de Montgomery, and appears among the witnesses to the charter of 
foundation of the Abbey of Shrewsbury. In some copies of Domesday- 
book, this Reginald's name follows that of Ricardus Forestarius (Richard 
Forester), as tenant-in-capite of four lordships in the county of Stafford. 
The name is there spelt " Bailgiole," or " Balgiole." 



VOL. IV. 



114 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [e.XIII. CH.V. 

Ch. Y. 'Robert Burdet is made prince of Tarragona, ly ArcTi- 
hisliop Oldegaire — JRehuilds the ruined city — JBroioess of 
Ms ivife Sibylla. 

At this time, Eobert de Culie,^ sumamed Burdet,^ a JN'orman 
knight, resolved on settling in Spain, and retired to a city 
called, in old records, Tarragona. It was there that, as we read, 
the holy martyrs of Christ, Fructuosiis, bishop, and Augu- 
lus and Eulogius, deacons,^ suffered in the time of the empe- 
ror G-aliemis. Having been first thrust into prison, on being 
exposed to the flames, when their bonds were consumed, 
extending their hands in the form of a cross, they prayed to 
be burnt to death, and their prayer was granted. These 
martyrs were celebrated in a poem composed by Aurelius 
Clemens Prudentius,* inserted in his Booh of Martyrs, 
wherein he describes their triumphant struggle in beautiful 
verses. Tarragona was the seat of a metroDolitan, and 

^ There are four communes in Normandy which bore this name. Pro- 
bably this Culie is that which was afterwards called Rabandages, in the 
canton of Putanges, as, the church of that place belonging to St, Evroult, 
our author might have better opportunities of being acquainted with its 
inhabitants, and taken more interest in them. 

^ In 1077, we find a person of the name of Robert Burdet in a charter 
preserved in the Monastic. Anglic, i. p. 562, as a witness with Ives de 
Grantmesnil, to a deed of Geoffrey de Wirce in 1077. It also appears 
in a charter, of the same year, in favour of the abbey of Angers. He 
is probably the father of the Robert Burdet mentioned in the text. 
His name does not appear in Domesday-book, but we find that of hia 
wife and son, as mesne-tenants in Leicestershire. Lowesby, in that 
county, was the chief seat of the family in England, of which Hugh 
de Burdet, who accompanied the Conqueror, is supposed to have been the 
founder : but the connecting link between him and Sir Robert of Culie is 
lost. 

' St. Fructuosus, the first bishop of Tarragona on record, with SS. 
Augulus and Eulogius, deacons, were given to the flames in that city, 
January 21, 259. 

* Aurelius Prudentius Clemens, for that is the proper arrangement 
(although the second is generally known as his proper name, as our author 
considers it), was a Christian poet of the fourth centurv% He is supposed 
to have been born at Saragossa ; and, among the martyrs whose praises he 
celebrates with much enthusiasm, those of the province of Tarragona are 
particularly distinguished. The sixth hymn in the collection, in his book 
'nepi<jTk<pavu)v, " on the crowns" (of martyrs) here mentioned, is devoted 
to St. Fructuosus, and his fellow martyrs. 



A.D. 1128.] EOBEET BIJEDET. 115 

Odelric/ an aged and very learned prelate, filled the arch- 
bishopric, and exercised the functions of his office in the 
villages and bourgs belonging to his diocese. For, as to the 
cathedral church, it was overgrown with oaks, beeches, and 
other tall trees which had sprung up in it, and also over- 
spread the whole site of the city within the walls, from 
ancient times ; the people by whom it was formerly inhabited 
having been either butchered or driven away by the cruel- 
ties of the Saracens. Now Eobert Burdet, at the suggestion 
of the archbishop, undertook a journey to Pope Honorius,^ 
and, laying his proposals before him, received from the 

1 Oldegaire, bishop of Barcelona in 1 1 16, by a grant of the count of that 
city, dated January 23, 1117, joined to it the archbishopric of Tarragona, 
as well as the bishopric of Tortosa; which were confirmed to him by a bull 
of Pope Gelasius, bearing date March 21, 1118, founded on the count of 
Barcelona having already recovered at least the first of these two cities, 
where, the crescent having long triumphed over the cross, the archbishop 
found things in that state so graphically described by Ordericus in the text, 
Oldegaire, being a strong partizan of Inn9cent II., accompanied him, in 
1130, to the council of Clermont, and to Etampes, Rouen, Beauvais, and 
Rheims, where another council was held. He rebuilt the cathedral of 
Tarragona, and introduced the Knights-Templars into Catalonia; and died, 
in the odour of sanctity, March 6, 1137. Our author has described his 
person and character in his account of the council of Rheims. See before, 
pp. 16, 17, and the note. 

2 Pope Honorius, December 21, 1124 — February 14, 1130. It appears, 
from a charter preserved by the BoUandists, that Robert Burdet received 
the principality of Tarragona directly from the archbishop himself, and not 
from the pope ; though it is very probable that he went to Rome, as our 
author relates, and obtained the pope's confirmation of it, as was usual in 
those times. The fragment of history and documents connected with the 
transaction between St, Oldegaire and Robert Burdet, whom both Nor- 
mandy and England may claim as one of her enterprising sons, are so 
curious, that we have thought it right to translate them. We find them 
in the BoUandists, March 1, 490. 

" Moreover, it was now the tenth year since the holy bishop Oldegaire, 
(archbishop of Tarragona) had cherished the design of rebuilding Tarra- 
gona, and he pushed forward the works as far as his means, and the state of 
public affairs, of which we have spoken, admitted. But this great under- 
taking proceeded more slowly than accorded Avith the general desire, and 
his own in particular, because the barbarians held possession of the 
neighbourhood, and left nothing secure in the country of the Tarragonese. 
The archbishop, therefore, looked about him for some man of deep 
experience, in whose person he might provide a protector for the church, 
and a lord for the city, who would defend the one and the other by hig 
power and arms, and care for their temporal interests as if they were his 
own. In consequence, he cast his eyes on a noble and wealthy knight, 

I 2 



116 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.T. 

pope's gift the county of Tarragona, to hold free from all 
secular exactions ; and on his return, gathering about him a 
band of his own countrymen, he has held it and resisted the 

Robert of the North, alias Bordet, with whom he made a convention in 
the following terms : — 

" ' Oldegaire, hy the grace of God, steioard of the metropolis of Tarra- 
gona, to all the faithful in Christ. Be it known unto all men, that the 
illustrious count and marquis of Barcelona and Provence, hath, for the 
love of God, given and granted, by his letters patent, to God and the 
church of Tarragona, which is the chief of the churches of all Hither- 
Spain, the city of Tarragona to be rebuilt by us, and truly held, possessed, 
and administered, according to our will and pleasure, as in tlie said instru- 
ment in writing granted to us more fully appears. So also, the Roman 
popes, Gelasius and Calixtus, of blessed memory, in conferring upon us, in 
their goodness, the metropolitan dignity, have further, in their bulls, con- 
firmed the said grant of the count. We, therefore, trusting in the divine 
mercy, in order to further the restoration of the said city, to the honour 
of God and his church, with the advice and consent of the aforesaid 
Count Raymond, and our suffragan bishops and temporal lords, and more 
especially at the instance of the lord Raymond, bishop of Ausona, 
have appointed you, Robert, a reverend man, a brave knight, and a sworn 
vassal of the said church, to be prince of the before-named city. All this 
is set before you, that you may there always serve God and his church, 
and bear arms in defence of Christianity. Wherefore we, having regard 
to the honour of God and the church of Tarragona, and reserving the 
fealty due to us and our successors, do give and grant to you the aforesaid 
city, with the territory thereof, as described in the charter of the said 
count, to be rebuilt, held, and possessed by you and your heirs, and that you 
may order, govern, and administer justice to the liege-men who shall settle 
there, in equity and the fear of God, according to the laws and good 
customs which we shall there, by common consent, establish. We also 
grant you all the rents, tolls, and customary payments {las calonias, 
peages, y usages) belonging to the prince, both from the sea and the land. 

'' ' But you and your successors, to whom we shall have granted this 
honour, to hold after your decease, shall have no liberty to give or alienate 
these things to any foreign power, nor to any person who shall not be a 
true and devoted vassal of our church, like yourself. We reserve, how- 
ever, as our portion, and under our own dominion, all churches and 
ecclesiastical possessions, and ecclesiastical persons ; as well as our own 
households, with those of the clerks and monks, and all who farm the 
church lands, or live in houses and places belonging to the church. So 
that with respect to all these, no prince or other inferior person, being a 
layman, shall presume to adjudge, exact, distrain, or order anything, at any 
time, without our command. We reserve also, out of all which we grant 
to you as such prince, all tithes arising from either the land or the sea, 
namely, of houses, farms, castles and forts, and other possessions which 
now are, or shall be "hereafter, within the said principality; as also the 
tithes of the fruits of the earth, of animals and fishes, meadows and 



A.D. 1128.] BUEDET MADE PRINCE OF TAEEAGONA. 117 

Pagans to the present day. Meanwhile, during his journey 
to Eome and return through Normandy, where he went to 
muster his adherents, Tarragona was left to the custody of 
his wife Sibylla, .daughter of William la Chevre,^ who was 

pastures, and of all the rents accruing to you as prince under our grant of 
the said principality. 

"_• I Robert, your liege-man, in consideration of all these rights and 
privileges, granted to me by your liberality, do for my part covenant and 
promise to God and the church of Tarragona, and to you. my lord Olde- 
gaire, the archbishop, that henceforth and for ever I will do fealty, without 
fraud or covin, in your own person, and for all the rights which the said 
church or you have, or ought to have, and which especially you reserve in 
the grant made to me ; and all ecclesiastical jurisdiction and privileges 
which appertain to you. or ought to appertain. I also promise and a^ree 
that, according to the best of my power and ability, I will strive to restore 
the aforesaid city and all your territory, and put down by force of arms all 
men who shall attempt to take away or diminish the just riahts and 
privileges cf the church, or yours, or those of the city, and that I will 
maintain justice as you have before appointed in these presents. Where- 
fore, if any person, ecclesiastical or temporal, shall hereafter contravene 
this record of your suzerainty and my covenant, let him make a composition 
to the party injury of thirty gold livres ; and thenceforth this instrument 
shall remain m force against him. Done in the year of our Lord 1128 
the day before the ides of May (14th of May). ' 

" ' Oldegaire, archbishop of Taragona. 
" ' t The mark of Robert, the prince. 
" ' Raymond, bishop of Ausona. 
„ T T> T, ^ . rn. " ' + ^hc mark of Arnauld, priest and dean. 

1 Robert prince of Tarragona, do swear to you, my lord Oldegaire, 
archbishop of the said city, that now and henceforth I will be a true and 
faitnful hege-man to you and your church, and will perform and execute 
all the covenants I have made with you, as they are written between you 
and me, without fraud or covin. And if, which God forbid, I shall make 
default m any of these, through negligence, I will give you due satisfaction 
within thirty days after I shall receive warning. All this I swear on the 
tour gospels.' " 

" Clothed with this authority," says Dominick, " Robert lost no time in 
repairing the walls, encouraging the citizens, allotting the fields amons 
them, repelling the enemy, and protecting the borders of the territory 
Ihe succession to the principality, after Robert's death, did not continue 
further than his son William d'Aguillon ; for he, having sacrilegiously 
laid hands on the most holy Hugh de Cervellon, archbishop of Tarra'^ona 
and put him to death, [Dominick, in his life of this Hugh, says that he 
was assisted by his brothers, and that the murder was committed on April 
j^i, 1171.] was excommunicated by Pope Alexander III., and being 
deposed from his principality of Tarragona, ended his days in great 

1 This William la Chevre {Gulielmus Caprce) was one of the commis- 



118 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [e.XIII. CH.VT. 

not less distinguished for courage than for beauty. Tor 
while her husband was away, her watchfulness was unceas- 
ing ; every night she put on the coat of mail of a man-at- 
arms, and taking a staff in her hand, mounted to the battle- 
ments, and going the rounds of the city walls, kept the 
sentries on the alert, giving them strict charge, and caution- 
ing them to be on the look out against any stratagems of the 
enemy. Praiseworthy conduct in so young a lady, thus to 
do her husband's behests with true faith and constant love, 
while she piously governed the people of Grod with ever- 
watchful care ! 

Ch. yi. King Alfonso's expedition to Cordova — Se is joined 
hy tlie Mosarabian Christians — Persecution of the Saracens. 

Iif the year of our Lord 1125, when Count Eotrou re- 
turned from France with his own retainers and auxiliary 
troops, the king of Arragon taking umbrage at the brilliant 
achievements of the French against the Pagans in Spain, 
wherein he bore no share, and seeking renown for himself, 
assembled proudly a large army of his own people. March- 
ing through distant parts of the country as far as Cordova, 
he halted there with his forces during six weeks, and struck 
the inhabitants with great terror ; for they supposed that 
the French were acting with the Spaniards. Meanwhile, 
the Saracens lurked in their strongholds, suffering their 
herds and cattle of all kinds to wander at large over the 
country. None of them ventured to sally forth from the 
castles against the Christians, while their bands pillaged at 
will all they found outside the fortified places, and cruelly 
devastated the whole province. 

Then the Mosarabians^ assembled to the number of nearly 

sioners sent by King William Rufus, in 1096, to hold pleas of the crown 
in Devonshire and Cornwall. We also find his name, with that of another 
of his family, to the charter of foundation of the priory of !Montacute, by 
William, count of Mortain (earl of Morton). 

^ Muceravii. The French editors of Ordericus consider, against the 
authority of Ducange, that this word here signifies the Mosarabian Chris- 
tians, who had preserved the faith of their fathers under the yoke of the 
Arabs, and followed the Gothic ritual. The Arabian historians apply the 
term muahld to the Christians who, on the present occasion, joined 
Alfonso. The word which signifies allied, is explained by M. Renaud in 
his Invasions des Sarasins en France. 



A.D. 1125.] ALPOIfSO's EXPEDTTIOI^ TO COEDOYA. 119 

two thousand, and came as suppliants to King Alfonso. 
"We," they said, "and our forefathers have hitherto been 
brought up among the Grentiles to this present day, and 
being baptized, we gladly follow the Christian laws ; but we 
have never been able to acquire a perfect knowledge of the 
doctrines of our holy religion. Our subjection to the Infi- 
dels, under whose oppressive government we long groaned, 
prevented our venturing to call in teachers from Eome or 
Prance,^ nor would such instructors have come to us,byreason 
of the barbarity of the Pagans, our former masters. But 
now, rejoicing greatly that you are come among us, we vrish 
to quit our native soil, and migrate with you, carrying with 
us our wives and all our effects." The king granted the 
petition of the Mosarabians, and in conequence vast multi- 
tudes of them left their country, exiling themselves in toil 
and indigence for their love of the divine law. 

The Arragonese, on their march homeward, found the 
whole country ravaged and laid waste, so that they suffered 
gi'ievously from want and hunger before they reached their 
own homes. Moreover, the people of Cordova and the 
other Saracens were much enraged at seeing the Mosara- 
bians depart with their families and goods. They therefore 
rose, by common agreement, against those who were left 
behind, brutally stripped them of aU their property, and 
loaded them with fetters and all sorts of injuries. Many 
they put to death with horrid tortures, and banished all the 
rest over the sea to Africa, condemning them to a cruel 
exile, inspired by hatred of the Christians, in whose company 
great part of the Mosarabians had quitted the country. 

Ch. tit. Quarrel hetiveen Alfonso, king of Arragon, and 
his ivife TIraca, queen of Leon and Castile — Succession of 
her son Alfonso Raymond. 

KiKG Alfoistso,'^ on his return to his dominions, found 
himself involved in many severe difficulties, both public and 
private. His wife TJraca, the daughter of Alfonso the elder, 

1 The Mosarabian Christians had in the course of time lost the use of 
the Latin language. It is, therefore, no wonder that French and Italian 
preachers were no longer in vogue among them. 

^ Eildefonsus Rex, 



120 OHDEEICUS VITALTS. [b.XIIT. CH.YIII. 

king of G-allicia/ listening to tlie counsels and instigations 
of the G-allicians, rebelled against her husband, and attempt- 
ing his life, both by poison and the sword, brought calamity 
on numbers of people. At length, the Gallicians, seeing 
the violent dissensions betwen the husband and wife, and 
failing by any persuasions to restore a becoming amity 
between them, chose for their king Peter Alfonso, the son of 
Eaymond, aFrench count, by a daughter of Alfonso the Great; 
and to this day have manfully defended the liberties of the 
state under this prince, whom they call their Little King} 
Sharp hostilities long prevailed between the two kings, 
much to the loss of their subjects, the queen Uraca harrass- 
ing her husband by all the means in her power, and favoured 
her nephew, who ruled the patrimonial states. At last, by 
Grod's judgment, after causing much bloodshed, she died, like 
Egla, Da-sdd's wife, of a difficult childbirth.^ On her death, 
the belligerent kings united together in peace and amity, 
turning their warlike zeal with one accord against the 
gentiles. 

Ch. YIII. Alfonso of Arragon hesieges Meqidnenza and 
Fraga — A general engagement tvith the Saracens — Bein- 
f arced ly IRohert Burdet, he defeats them. 

lis the year of our Lord 1133, the eleventh indiction, 
Alfonso, king of Arragon, assembled an army against the 

^ Uraca, or Urraque, was not the daughter of a king of Gallicia, but of 
Alfonso VI., king of L^on and Castile, and the widow of Raymond, son of 
William the Great, count of Burgundy. Her first husband died in 1090, 
and Alfonso married her in 1109, but soon repudiated her on account of 
her haughty and dissolute conduct. Her partisans were defeated in battle 
by Alfonso on the 26th of October, 1111; but she maintained herself in 
the states of her father, the kingdoms of Ldon and Castile, through good 
and evil, until her death, in March, 1126. 

^ Alfonso-Raymond, the eighth of the name of Alfonso, reckoning his 
father-in-law, was born 1106; proclaimed king of L^on as soon as his 
mother died; married in 1128 Donna Berengaria, daughter of Raymond 
Berenger III., count of Barcelona; made many conquests from the Moors; 
was proclaimed emperor of Spain in 1135; and survived until the 21st of 
August, 1157. Our author represents him as the nephew of his mother. 

^ This princess, whose first marriage took place in 1090, could scarcely 
have died in child-birth thirty-six years afterwards. We know rot where 
our author learnt that Eglah, David's wife, died in child-birth, for neither 
the second Book of Kings nor the first of Chronicles, contain any such 
information. 



A.D. 1133.] WAES OF ALFONSO YIII. 121 

Pagans and laid siege to Maeschinaz/ a place of the greatest 
strength and very rich. The possessors glorying in their 
wealth, their abundant stores of provisions, and, as they 
supposed, in the impregnable position of their fortress, he 
sent them a message that if they would surrender the place 
they should depart unmolested, and take with them all their 
effects ; but they made a stout resistance, treating his 
promises and threats alike with contempt. The valorous 
king therefore pressed the siege closely for three weeks, 
and carried by assault the exterior defences of the place. 
Thereupon, those who held the castle, becoming terrified, 
offered to give up the interior fortifications, on condition of 
being allowed to depart free with all their effects. But the 
enraged king gave them this reply : " What ye now ask I 
voluntarily offered you at first, but ye rejected it, making 
light of the power of Christ and the valour and faith of 
Christians. Therefore now I swear by my head that ye 
shall not go forth hence but with the loss of your lives." 
He then commanded his troops to erect the engines which 
had been constructed, and make strong assaults on the place. 
By this means they took the castle, and cutting off the 
heads of aU the Glentiles, struck great terror among the 
neighbours. 

The victorious king then marched his army on the city oi 
Traga,^ and besieged it for a whole year. The citizens sent 
envoys to Africa, and entreated King Ali to send them 
relief ; whereupon he caused ten thousand Almoravides to 
cross the straits, and, on their arrival in Spain, four of their 
chiefs were deputed to require the king of Arragon to raise 
the siege of the city without delay. The king immediately 
commanded the holy relics to be brought to him from his 
chapel ; on which he swore, in the presence of all, that he 
would not abandon the siege until either the city sur- 
rendered, or he himself perished, or was defeated and forced 
to fly. He also caused twenty of his nobles to take the 
same oath. 

The envoys returning, communicated this intelligence to 
the Almoravides, who immediately assembled all their 
countrymen and prepared for war. Then the whole G-entile 

^ Mequinenza ? 

^ Fraga lies twenty miles S.E. of Saragossa. 



122 OEDEEICTTS TTTALIS. [b.XIII. CH.IX. 

force was ranged in order of battle against the king's army, 
and began the engagement with much impetuosity. The 
king having foreseen that a great battle was imminent, had 
sent round his couriers in great haste with earnest entreaties 
to all his allies and neighbours to come to his aid. Mean- 
while, he skilfully withdrew his own troops and posted them 
on a neighbouring hill ; where he held his position, and 
daring three days and nights repelled the attacks of the 
Almoravides. But Eobert, surnamed Burdet, count of 
Tarragona, and other Christians, having received reports of 
the attack on the king, got to arms with the utmost expe- 
dition, and urging their horses to full speed, fell upon the 
Gentiles, shouting the name of " Jesus" for their war-cry ; 
and, by this unexpected charge, overwhelmed, routed them, 
and put them to flight. Many prisoners were taken, more 
of the enemy were slain, and, loaded with spoil the con- 
querors off'ered thanksgivings to the God of victory. 

But in this changeable world no mortal power has long 
endurance, and in the righteous judgment of God adversity 
soon treads on the heels of success. So it happened that the 
townsmen of Fraga, which the king had besieged, a place 
famous for being the refuge of aU miscreants, whether gentiles 
or pseudo-christians, began to dread the wrath and invincible 
enterprises of so magnaminious a king and of the christian 
army whose warriors were signed with the cross and endued 
with indomitable valour ; they therefore made proposals for 
peace to the king and offered him their submission on 
certain conditions. The king however obstinately rejected all 
their offers, treating with disdain their proposal of a yearly 
tribute, and threatened with an oath that he would 
renew the siege and carry the place by assault. On 
hearing this, the Saracens were driven by dire despair to 
energetic counsels, and they again sent envoys to Ali king of 
Africa, and urgently implored succour from other gentile 
kings and princes in this season of extreme peril. 

Ch. IX. B^dbert CuHliose, duhe of Normandy, dies at Cardiff. 
In the year of our Lord, 1134, the twelfth indiction, 
Eobert II. duke of Normandy died at Cardiff in Britain,^ 

1 See before, book xii. c. 46, p. QQ. 

Robert Curthose was nearly eighty years old at the time of his death, 



A.D. 1134.] BATTLE NEAE FEAGA. 123 

in tlie month of February, twenty-eight years after lie had 
been taken prisoner at Tinchebrai and immured in his 
brother's dungeon. He lies buried in the abbey of the monks 
of St. Peter at Gloucester. 

Ch. X. Alfonso, hing of Arragon and tlie allied Christian 

forces fight a great battle with the Saracens near Fraga on 

the Ehro — Alfonso is defeated, and dies soon afterwards. 

Thet^ Buchar Ali, i son of the king of Morocco assembled 

a large force of warriors from all parts, and crossed over to 

having been bom about 1054. According to the Chronicle of Tours, his 
parents were married in 1053; and we find, in the valuable chartulary of 
La Trinit6 du Mont, a charter of William Vernon, with the subscription of 
the Duchess Matilda, bearing the date of 1053. 

In a charter of Odo le Mon^taire, son of Humphrey, the duke's cook, 
about the ygar 1060, we find the names of Eaturius, consiliarius infantis, 
ct Tethold grammaticus, who probably taught him to read. A little later, 
in a charter of William the Conqueror in favour of St. Ouen, appears 
EUgerius, magister paeri. The art of reading was not much in vogue at 
this time. We have already seen, that Henry I., the scholar of the family, 
notwithstanding his surname of Beauclerc, could not read aloud, that 
is fluently, for any length of time. William de Poitiers thought he was 
saying a good deal when he remarks that Archbishop Mauger scri2:)turarum 
arcana intelligenti<B literalis oculo colUgere non indoctus fuit. 

In a charter of William the Conqueror, in favour of St. Ouen, dated in 
1063, relating to Criqueboeuf-sur-Seine, we find the subscription of Robert 
after his parents. After stating their consent, the instrument proceeds: 
et Roberti, eorvmi filii, queni elegerant ad gubernandum regnum post suum 
obitum. It should be observed that he had already two brothers, Richard 
and William. 

In 1064, in anticipation of his marriage with Margaret of Maine, he was 
proclaimed count de Maine, under which title he is described in the charter 
of the collegiate church of Cherbourg: et Eobertiis comes Cenomannis. 
" Robert was a ripe youth at the time of the conquest; of tried courage, 
though short in stature and inclined to be fat; ... 'by the resurrection of 
God, Robelin Curthose will be a brave youth,' said his father; for he had 
that surname from being short." 

* Buchar, son of Ali, is Abon-Omar-Taschefin, son of the prince of 
Marocco. He succeeded his father in 1143. The Arab historian, Ibn-al- 
Atir, should be compared with the narrative of Ordericus. The MS. is 
preserved in the Imperial Library at Paris, No. 740, under the year 529 
of the Hegira, a.d. 1135. M. Reinaud has supplied a translation of the 
passage, extracted from the Arabian author: — 

" The son of Ramirus (Alphonso) having laid siege to the city of 
Fraga, the emir Taschefin, son of Ali, who happened to be at that time 
at Cordova, dispatched the governor of the city, Alzobeyr, son of Omar 
AUamthouny, with two thousand cavalry. The emir of Murcia and 



124 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.X. 

Spain to figlit against the Christians. Alhamon of Cordova, 
Alcharias of Dalmaria, and other emirs of Lybia and Spain, 
joined him with many thousand troops, and they had recourse 
to stratagem in disposing their troops for battle. The 
allied forces marched to the relief of Fraga, divided into 
five bodies. The first division led a convoy of two hundred 
camels, laden with provisions and a variety of of necessaries, 
intended to throw relief into the besieged city, and tempt 
the indigent and greedy Christians to attack the van for the 
sake of plunder. Meanwhile, the other divisions were placed 
in ambush at a considerable distance, cautiously watching for 
an opportunity of falling on the enemy when in pursuit of 
the fugitives. 

Traga stands at the confluence of two rivers, the Segre 
which flows from Lerida, and the Ebro from Saragossa.^ 
It was on the field called the Field of Mourning, between the 
two rivers, that a sanguinary battle was fought in the month 
of July. King Alfonso perceiving the vast host of Gentiles 
who were drawn up against him, assembled the chiefs of the 
Christian army and roused them by noble words to do battle 
gloriously ; for Bertrand de Leon, count of Carrion; Eoderick 
of Asturia ; Aimeri de Narbonne ; Centule son of Graston de 
Bearne, G-arsio Adramis, and many other valiant lords were 
in the battle on the Field of Mourning^. 

Valencia, Yahya, son of Ganya, also put himself in motion, with five 
hundred horsemen, in concert with Abdallah, son of Eyadh, prince of 
Lerida, who was followed by two hundred horse. The son of Ramirus was 
at the head of a force of twelve thousand cavalrv', and confident of success. 
But in the encounter which followed, the Christians were put to the rout, 
and the garrison of Fraga took advantage of it to seize their camp. The 
son of Ramirus fled to Saragossa, where he died a few days afterwards." 
Such is the Arabian account of the action, which, though true in the main, 
is far from doing the justice to the Christians rendered by the very circum- 
stantial narrative of Ordericus. 

^ Our author is mistaken in placing at Fraga the confluence of the 
Ebro, coming from Saragossa, and the Segre, coming from Lerida. They 
unite at a place called on the maps, Scarpe. It is difficult to believe that 
the battle was fought between two rapid rivers, the Ebro and the Segre. 
The probability is, that the engagement took place on the banks of the 
one or the other. 

* Campo Dolenti. This phrase is used by our author as equivalent for 
" The Field of Battle," by which name the spot is still known. Many 
other places might be mentioned which retain the designation given in the 
text, especially one near Dol. The reader will recollect that the field of 



I 



A.D. 11S4.] DEFEAT OF ALF0X30 AT FEAGA. 125 

As soon as king Alfonso perceived the foremost troops 
which conducted the camels laden with provisions, he gave 
orders to Count Bertrand to begin the battle by attacking 
them ; but Bertrand replied : " Lord king, let us suffer this 
division to march by, tliat on their gaining the city, we may 
be better prepared to fall on them as they return encumbered 
with booty, and hold our troops in reserve against any strata- 
gem of the enemy ; mean\^hile, let us wait for the rest of the 
enemy's force, which is coming up, and be ready to engage 
them." The king was irritated by this suggestion, and cried 
aloud: "Where is your courage, noble count? Till this moment 
I never found any cowardice in you." This word brought 
the blood into the face of the dauntless count, and he led his 
men in a fierce charge on the Grentiles, who gave way at the 
first onset, and manoeuvred a retreat on the immense 
mass of the army in their rear. These powerful columns then 
advanced on the Christian troops, and in their fierce attacks, 
Bertrand, Aimeri, Eoderick, and Centule ^ wore slaughtered, 
with many thousands of their followers. The king prolonged 
the battle for sometime, with the relics of his army posted on 
a hill, where, surrounded by the overwhelming force of the 
enemy, he lost nearly all his men, and was resolved himself 
to fight for Christ even to the death. Seeing this, the 
bishop of UrgeP insisted on his quitting the field ; but the 
king, in utter despair at the destruction of his army, refused. 
Then the bishop said : " By the authority of Almighty God, 
I command you instantly to retire from this field, lest if you 
should fall, the whole territory belonging to the Christians 
should be subjugated by the pagans, and a general massacre 
of all the Christian inhabitants ensue." At last, compelled 
by the bishop's injunction, king Alfonso consented to obey 
his command, but surrounded as he was by countless thou- 
sands of the pagan host, it was difficult to find a way of 
escape. At last, sword in hand, and followed by sixty men-at- 
arms, all who were left to struggle along with him, he cut his 
way through the enemy's ranks where they were thinnest, 

Tinchebrai is called by our author Campus Faraelicus, probably from an 
accidental circumstance mentioned in our note on that event. 

^ Aimeri II., viscount of Narbonne, fell in this battle, as vfell as Centule 
V,, \iscount of Bearne, son of Gaston IV. 

^ Urgel, on the Segre, thirty miles from Barcelona. 



126 OEDEEICirS YITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.X. 

and got away with ten of his followers, leaving the rest of 
his sixty comrades, and the bishop, dead on the field. Such 
an issue of the war was a great triumph to the Grentiles and 
a severe affliction to the Christians. 

While the king was retiring in deep sorrow to join his 
friends, he met the men of Saragossa and the French, with 
others of the faithful, hastening to take part in the battle. 
Having learnt the sad disaster, they were overwhelmed vdth 
distress ; but on seeing the king, they tried to take comfort, 
and voluntarily placed themselves under his command. On 
his part, foaming with indignation aod full of grief, he 
had only one wish, which he prayed fervently to the Lord to 
grant, that he might take vengeance on the Pagans before he 
died. In pursuance of this, he led the Christian troops to 
the seacoast through byeways, and finding there a large 
body of the Saracens loaded with booty and driving a crowd 
of Christian captives, with which spoils of victory they were 
freighting their ships, he made a sudden onslaught on them, 
when they little expected it, and putting a great number 
to the sword, somewhat assuaged his furious wrath. There 
was found there a ship laden with the heads of Christians, 
which King Buchar was sending to his father the king of 
Africa as a trophy of his victory. In the empty pride of his 
vain-glorious spirit, he was also embarking, for the same 
purpose, seven hundred captives and brilliant tokens of the 
spoils he had gained. 

But, as we have already said. King Alfonso, by Grod's per- 
mission, suddenly fell on the Saracens with tremendous 
slaughter, and recovering the heads of his slain comrades, 
committed them to the church of Grod to be honourably 
interred. Meanwhile, the captives who already lay bound in 
the ships, hearing the cry of battle lifted their eyes, and 
beholding what they had not ventured even to hope, their 
hearts overflowed with joy. Eesuming their courage, their 
spirits were roused to the 'highest pitch, and while the Chris- 
tians on shore were fighting with the Saracens, they struck 
off" each other's fetters, and leaping from the prows flew to 
the assistance of their friends, seizing the arms of the Grentiles 
vrho had fallen, and turning them against those who yet 
survived. Thus the triumph of the Pagans was succeeded 
by grief, and the Christian army blessed G-od in aU his works. 



A.D. 1130 — 1131.] POPE AND AIh"TI-POPE. 127 

The valiant King Alfonso, worn out with toH and trouble 
soon afterwards fell sick, and taking to his bed breathed his 
last at the expiration of eight dajs.^ As he left no son 
at his decease, his subjects were troubled for awhile in 
the midst of the storms of war, about a successor. In 'the 
end they chose Eemi,^ a priest and monk, because he was 
the brother of Alfonso, and appointed him kin^. But the 
^ayarrese elected for their king, Garsio,^ who had been 
tnerr governor.* 

Ch XI. The pope and anti-pope— Peter Anaclete in Italy 
(^regory Innocent in France and tie West—Greaory is 
received ly Renry I at Cliartres. 
The Eoman church having been distracted since the 
death of Pope Honorius bj the disputes of two princes con- 
tending for the papacy, great troubles and dissentions 
sprung up throughout the world. In most of the convents 
there were two abbots, and in several dioceses two 
bishops claimed the episcopal rights, one of whom adhered 
to Peter Anaclete, the other was a partisan of Greenery 
Innocent. In such a schism every one was in apprehension 
ot the sentence of excommunication, and it was difficult to 
escape it, while one fulminated against the other, fiercely 
denouncing his opponent and those who supported him. 
Ihus, each of them was at a loss what to do, but fouud it 
impossible to take any effective course; and there was 
nothmg left for him but to imprecate the curse of God on 
his rival Peter indeed, through the power of his brother 
and relations, obtained possession of the city, and having 

days?ftert"S."" ''"''' '" ^'^ ''^' °' '""'^^ ^"^ ^^^ ^-^^ ^-^ --e 
^ Ramirus II., Alfonso's brother. He was taken from his abbey of 
St Pons-de-Tomieres (Heraut) to be placed on the throne. 

Garcio-Ramirus IV grandson of Ramirus, the brother and murderer 
of Sancho IV kmg of Navarre. His first wife was Margaret, supposed to 
beJ^r/r ^ ° ^°''''' ^''''''"' ^^"^ "^'"^ ^" '^^ ""^"^^ of Decern^ 

* There is a blank in this place of a page and a half in the manuscript 
ot bt l!.vrouIt; the author meanmg, it would appear, to continue his 
narrative of events m Spam when he could obtain the details Th s 
circumstance throws some light on the desultory manner in which" he has 
sometimes used the mass of information which his industry accumulated 



128 OKDEEICITS TITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XI. 

crowned Eoger, dulie of Apulia, as king of Sicily/ by his aid 
gained nearly the whole of Italy to his side. On the other 
haud, Grregory, having with him the Eoman clergy, betook 
himself to France, where he was first received by the people 
of Aries ; and from thence he sent his legates among the 
French. The monks of Cluni, as soon as they were 
informed of his arrival, sent sixty horse or mule loads of all 
articles necessary for the service of the pope and the cardi- 
nals, and conducted him with great respect to their abbey. 
They entertained the pope and his attendants there for 
eleven days, and caused him to dedicate their new church in 
honour of St. Peter, prince of the apostles, with great 
rejoicings and a large concourse of people.^ 

Thus, Grregory obtained great authority among the nations 
of the west, because he was preferred to Peter Anaclete by 
the monks of Cluni ; for Peter had been brought up among 
them in his younger days, and had become a monk of their 
own habit and rule.^ But Gregory, being now favourably 
received as the father of fathers by the Cluniacs, and they 
ranking highest amongst the monks of our country, his pon- 
tifical dignity shone forth in France ; and being thence 
acknowledged by the western princes and bishops, in a 
short space of time his power was greatly established ; even 
Henry, king of England, humbly knelt at his feet in the 
city of Chartres, and voluntarily paid him the reverence due 
to the papal dignity on the ides [13th] of January ; and with 
royal munificence made large presents to the Eoman clergy.* 

^ Our author has now returned, after a long digression, to the sequel of 
the history of the pope and anti-pope. Anaclete did not crown Roger II.; 
but, by a bull dated September 27, 1130, he gave him the title of king of 
Sicily, with the suzerainty of the principality of Capua and the duchy of 
Naples. This prince caused himself to be crowned at Palermo the Christ- 
mas day following, and not content with these titles, assumed, during a 
long period, that of king of Italy. 

2" The church of Cluni, then administered by Peter the Venerable, was 
consecrated on the 25th of October, 1130. 

^ We may be therefore surprised at Peter de Leo's appearance at the 
council of Rheims " in splendid apparel;" (before, p. 12) as, being a monk 
of Cluni, he should have worn no other than the habit of his order. 

* By a delicate compliment, for which the Jews in his dominions ought 
to have been much obliged to him, Henry made them joint contributors to 
St. Peter with himself and his nobility. Non modo suis sed et optimatum, et 
etiam Judceorum, muneribus earn dignatus est. The king entertained the 



A.D. 1131.] LEWIS-LE-JEUXE CROW^'^ED. 129 

The pope sojourned three days in the house of the vidame 
Elisonde, to the great satisfaction both of the French and 
the Komans.^ 

During the whole of that year the pope travelled from 
place to place in France, causing most burdensome expenses 
to the churches in that country, for he was attended by the 
Eoman officials as well as a numerous suite, and could draw 
nothing from the revenues of the apostolical see in Italy. 
He, also, had an interview with the emperor Lothaire, by 
whom he, with his attendants, were treated as a venerable 
master.- He appointed a coun'cil to be held at Eheims, in 
the month of October, to which he convoked all the bishops 
and abbots of the west. 

Ch. XII. Death, from an accident, of JPliiUp of France — 
Pope Innocent holds a council at Rheims — Croivns the 
king's son, Lewis-le-Jeune — Beturns, hy Gluni, to Italy. 

Mea-Xwhile, Philip the boy-king, who had been crowned 
two years before, by order of his father Lewis, king of 
France, a prince whose simplicity and suavity of manners 
made him esteemed by all who knew him, was thrown from 
his horse, as he was amusing himself by riding after an 
esquire in the streets of Paris, and so dreadfully fractured 
his limbs that he died on the day following.^ Thus, the 

pope at Rovien as well as at Chai-tres; but the visit to Rouen is not noticed 
by any of the local historians except William de Jumieges. William of 
Malmesbury mentions it. 

1 The Vidamess Helisende had been long a widow when she had the 
honour to receive King Henry I. in her house. Her husband, the Vidame 
Bartholomew Bodel, or Boel, and his son Gerard, appear in several charters 
in the chartulary of St. Peter's, the latest of which the date is given being 
in 1101. Her name appears as a witness in 1104, with that of Gerard, who 
uses his father's name, Boel, in other documents in the same collection. 
One of these instruments, bearing the date of 1132, is the act of another 
vidamess, Elysabeth, ficeclomina Carnoti, and her son Henry. She was 
probably the widow of Bartholomew's successor, he having died, as we 
have seen, in 1 104. 

^ At the council of Liege, on the 22nd of March, 1134. 

^ We have already spoken of the accident which ended the days of this 
young prince. He was bom the 29th of August, 1116; crowned at Rheims 
on Easter-day, April 14, 1129; and died at Paris in consequence of his 
horse falling, on the 13th of October, 1131. He was buried at Saint- 
Denis, on the left of the choir, by the side of the queen, Constance of 
Castile. 

TOL. IV. K 



130 OBDERTCrS TITALIS. [b. XIII. CH. XII. 

prince expired in the presence of his fiither and mother, 
without confession and without the viaticum, on the ides 
[13th] of October ; and he was interred amongst the kings 
of France. 

On the Sunday following, the pope dedicated the church 
of St. Medard, the bishop, at Soissons,^ from whence he 
journeyed to E-heims to attend the council, remaining there 
nearly fifteen days engaged in discussing the causes of many 
persons of the highest rank.- There were present thirteen 
archbishops, and two hundred and sixty-three bishops, with 
a great number of abbots and monks. The king and queen 
of France and all the French nobility attended him there ; 
and, through Eeynold arclibishop of E-heims, preferred a 
petition to the assembled council that the young prince 
Lewis should be crowned as king in place of his brother 
Philip. The king's son was, therefore, crowned by Pope 
Innocent on the eighth of the calends of JSTovember [Octo- 
ber 25th] f but this coronation displeased many of the 
Frencli belonging to both orders in the state. There were 
those among the laity who had hoped for advancement after 
the death of the prince ; and some of the clergy claimed a 
right of electing and raising to the throne the chief of the 
realm. For these reasons, certain persons muttered about 
the boy's being consecrated, and would, there is no doubt, 
have used their utmost efforts to prevent it, if they had 
possessed the power. 

King Lewis, perceiving that this novel ceremony had 
given rise to unusual pretensions in his states, was incensed 
against those who attempted to raise obstacles to his son's 
elevation to the royal dignity, and desired to visit them with 
mortal vengeance. Hence, occasion was taken by malevo- 
lent persons to commit horrible crimes with impunity, to 
the cruel destruction, alas ! of some, and the sorrow of others, 
who were fervent in the love of God and their neighbours. 
Thus, when the aged John, bishop of Orleans, had given up 
his bishopric, Hugh, the dean, who had been elected in his 

' The consecration appears to have been solemnized on the loth of 
October, and not the 1 8th, as Ordericus states. 

^ This council of Rheims opened on the 18th of October. 

' In fact, Louis le Jeune, born in 1 1 20, was crowned on Sunday, October 
25, 1131. 



A.D. 1132.] HEFORMS AT CLUNI. 131 

place, was murdered on tlie road by daring assassins ; and 
the see being left without a bishop, was long in a perturbed 
state, like a ship at sea without a pilot/ 

At the same time, also, Thomas, a canon of St, Victor, a 
man of great weight, was assassinated in the presence of 
Stephen, bishop of Paris, a spectacle which, he beheld with 
unspealfable grief.^ Such was the mad rage of his murder- 
ers, that they neither paid any reverence to the Creator of 
mankind, nor, for his sake, to the bishop, his faithful servant. 

In the year of our Lord, 1132, the tenth indiction. Pope 
Innocent, after receiving great submission and kindness 
from the French, returned to Italy f but, being repudiated 
by the Eomans, he retired to Pisa,* a wealthy metropolis, 
where, for several years, he exercised the papal functions, 
issuing his decrees to all parts of the world. 

Ch. XIII. Stricter discipline introduced at the ahbeij of 
Cluni — G^eat gatliering of monks there — The author pre- 
sent — Opposition to the new rules. 

At this time, the rules of monastic discipline began to be 
observed with increased vigour by the ecclesiastics, and 
canonical order gained a large measure of favour and 
strength, both in France and England. The zeal of the 
abbots led them to pass the bounds of moderation observed 
by their predecessors, adding severer rules to the ancient 

^ Our author is not very exact in this passage. In the first place, Hugh 
■was not at this time dean of Orleans, but had been bishop of Laon since 
1 1 12 : and, besides, it was not a dean," but the sub-dean Archembaud, who 
was the victim of this violence. 

* Thomas, prior of St. Victor, was murdered on Sunday, the 20th of 
August, 1133, in the neighbourhood of Gournai-sur-Marne, as he was 
returning from a pastoral visit to the abbey of Chelles, in which he had 
been accompanied by Stephen, bishop of Paris. 

3 The pope again visited Cluni on his journey to Italy, and was received 
with the same generous hospitality as at first; but he gave great umbrage 
to the monks of this abbey by exempting the possessions of the Cistercians 
from payment of tithes, a privilege which he did not confer on the 
Cluniacs. Innocent celebrated the feast of Easter at Asti, in Piedmont, on 
the 10th of April, 1132. 

* " Picenum ;" which Ordericus has continually mistaken for Pisa, to 
which the pope retired; but not till 1133, after having entered Rome the 
same year at the end of April. He crowned the emperor Lothaire on the 
4th of June; and this emperor brought him back to Rome in 1137. 

K 2 



132 0EDERICU3 TITALIS. [s.Xin. CH.XIII. 

institutions, and laying burdens, hard to be borne, on feeble 
shoulders.^ 

Peter, abbot of Cluni, now sent apparitors, carrying 
letters, to all the cells of that abbey, addressed to the priors 
of those cells, in England, Italy, and other countries, com- 
manding them to be present at Cluni on the third Sunday 
in Lent,' in order to hear severer statutes of monastic disci- 
pline than they had hitherto observed. The priors obeyed 
the mandate of their arch-abbot, and, at the appointed time, 
two hundred of them were collected at Cluni. On that day 
one thousand two hundred and twelve brethren assembled 
there, and formed a procession, chanting psalms according 
to ecclesiastical rite ; and with gladness of heart lifting their 
eyes to God, offered him their praises with devout hearts. 
This I well know, for I myself had the gratification of being 
present, and saw this glorious company congregated in the 
name of Jesus Christ, being one of the procession on the ' 
Sunday when they went from the abbey church of St. Peter, 
prince of the apostles, through the cloister into the chapel 
of St. Mary, the virgin mother, where I prayed.^ 

Afterwards, Ralph, bishop of Auxerre, xilberic, abbot of 
Yezelai, and Adelard, abbot of Melun, who were Cluniac 
monks, joined the meeting, and strengthened the hands of 
Abbot Peter by their presence and exhortations. His pro- 
posals were to increase the severity of the fasts observed by 
the members of his order, to take away their liberty of con- 
versing together, and to deprive them of some comforts of 
the feeble body, which the m.ercy and moderation of the 
reverend fathers had hitherto allowed. The brethren, accus- 
tomed to implicit obedience to their superiors, and unwilling 
to offer any resistance which should be contrary to the 
monastic rule, accepted his rigorous statutes. But still they 

^ Our author does not appear to have approved of these excessive 
austerities, the object of which was to assimilate the Cluniac rule to that of 
the Cistercians. 

^ Sunday, the 20th of March, 1132. 

3 It is not probable that the whole of the vast body of monks who 
assisted in the imposing ceremonial described by Ordericus, were Cluniacs. 
He himself, as belonging to St. Evroult, was a Benedictine, and probably 
there were many other visitors of that order, from which the Cluniac wag 
derived; St. Benedict being the common father of several orders, distin- 
guished by some peculiarities in their rules. 



A.D. 1133.] THE EMPEEOR LOTHATEE AT KOME. 133 

set forth in a reasonable manner how that venerable Hugh 
and his predecessors, Maiolus and Odilo, maintained a severe 
course of discipline, and made it effectual to bring disciples 
to Christ. They also submitted with reverence and humi- 
lity that it ought to be considered sufficient, if, treading in 
their steps, and running the way of the Lord's command- 
ments with fulness of heart, they followed the precepts of 
those whose sanctity had been clearly demonstrated by the 
miracles wrought by them. But the rigid reformer, forget- 
ting the precept of Solomon, " Eemove not the ancient 
landmarks which thy fathers have set,"^ and aiming to rival 
the Cistercians and others, who were fond of novelties, per- 
sisted in his rigorous course, and felt ashamed, at present, 
of relinquishing his design. In the end, however, he soft- 
ened down, yielding to the opinions of his subjects, and 
remembering that discretion is the mother of virtues, had 
some compassion on human frailty, and relaxed several of 
the rigorous statutes which he had proposed. 

Ch. Xiy. The emperor LotJiaire interferes ietioeen ilie 
pope and antipope — Jiicharcl, soji of Rohert earl of 
Gloucester, made hisliop of Bayeux. 

In" the year of our Lord, 1133, the emperor Lotliaire 
being implored, for the love of God, by the bishops and the 
rest of the faithful, laid siege to Home, and tried to restore 
peace to the people of God, who, in the present schism wan- 
dered from unity either after Gregory or Peter. Lothaire, 
therefore, sent a message to Peter, requiring him either to 
give place to the other, or submit to a judicial inquiry into 
his ordination. Peter willingly accepted this proposal, and 
professed himself ready to abide the judgment of impartial 
persons in the presence of the emperor himself. Lothaire 
sent a similar message to Innocent, but he refused to come 
and support his cause unless he was received with all the 
honours due to the papacy. On learning this, the emperor 
was so indignant against Gregory that he gave up to Peter 
all that he had taken possession of, and at the end of seven 
weeks, retired from Eome, without having accomplished his 
purpose.'^ 

' Prov. xxii. 28. 

^ It has been already observed, that this was precisely the year in which 



134! OEDERICTIS VITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XT. 

The same year, Eicliard, bishop of Bayeux,^ died in Easter 
week, and was succeeded, two years afterwards, by Eichard, 
son of Eobert earl of Gloucester, King Henry's son ; Hugh, 
archbishop of Eouen, performiug the consecration by order 
of Pope Innocent.^ Then Eichard de Beaufai, a chaplain of 
the honourable king, became bishop of Coutances, being 
consecrated by the same metropolitan.^ 

Ch. XV. Succession to the duchy of Burgundy — Affairs 
in Apulia and the south of Italy, and in Sicily. 

About this time there were great troubles in Apulia, to 
explain the origin of which it is necessary to recur to family 
history and past events. After the death of Eoger the elder, 
coimt of Sicily, the son of Tancred de Hautivelle, his wife 
Adelais perceived that with her young son she could not govern 
tis vast possessions, and in her anxiety about the state of 
affairs, she took serious counsel with herself and her friends 
what was to be done. Count Eoger and his eleven brethren 
had conquered by their valour extensive provinces, and 
reduced the barbarians in Apulia and Sicily under the 
power of the Most High God. At last, the countess made a 
friendly alliance with Eobert, the son ot Eobert, Duke of 

the Emperor Lothaire brought back Pope Innocent to Rome, and was 
there crowned by him on the 4th of June. Our author must, therefore, 
have been misinformed as to the facts he here states. 

^ Richard II., son of Samson. It was after the death of this prelate 
that Henry employed his son Robert, earl of Gloucester, to take an 
inquisition of the fiefs dependent on the see of Bayeux, and the services 
under which they were held, Robert was himself the principal feudatory, 
and the standard-bearer of the bishop. He held of it twenty-five fiefs by 
knight-service, ten of which belonged to the honour of Evreci, according 
to his own declaration. 

2 Richard III., bishop of Bayeux, was son of Robert, earl of Gloucester, 
the bastard son of Henry I. It is most probable that Richard was also a 
natural son of the earl ; for it was not until two years afterwards, and by 
the express order of the pope, that the archbishop of Rouen, who had 
hesitated on account of his illegitimacy, resolved on giving him consecration. 

^ This person, appointed in 1134, and consecrated in 1135, belonged to 
the family of Beaufou (Calvados), of whom the first who is known, 
Richard, was son-in-law of Robert, count dlvri, and brother-in-law of the 
steward, Osborne de Crepon, surnamed the Pacific. We suppose tliat the 
bishop of Avranches was grandson of this first Richard, through Robert or 
Humphrey, his two sons. In fact, the continuator of William de Jumiege^ 
mentions a Richard, son of Robert, but he describes him as a monk of Bee 



A.D. 1033—1075.] THE SUCCESSIOIS- IlSr BUEGUNDT. 135 

Burgundjr, giving him her daughter in marriage with the 
whole principality of Sicily.^ 

His father E/obert was a son of Robert king of France by 
his queen Constance, so that he derived his nobility from 
the blood of kings and emperors ; and he much distinguished 
himself in different countries, by his noble deeds and great 
merits. He it was who was sought by his powerful mother 
to be raised to the throne of Erance, in preference to his 
elder brother Henry ; an object which she used all possible 
means to effect. In the end, justice having placed the sceptre 
in the hand of Henry, the right heir, Eobert held for a long 
period the duchy of Burgundy, and had three sons, Henry, 
Kobert, and Simon. Henry the eldest, by the duke's com- 
mand married a wife who bore him three sons, Hugh, Odo, 
and Eobert, bishop of Langres.^ Henry died in the life- 
time of his father, who lived many years afterwards, and in 
his old age, set aside his grandsons, in favour of his [own 
younger] sons, to whom he made over the duchy, enjoining 
all his lords to be faithful subjects of his sons. The young 
Hugh, hearing this, kept silence, patiently waiting for a 
favourable opportunity of asserting his rights. He, however, 
placed his sure trust in the Lord, and said privately to those 
who lived with him: ''The just God who has removed my fa- 
ther from the world will not deprive his offspring of their in- 
heritance." On the duke's decease, he summoned about him all 
the officials and barons, and gave orders, with the air of a mas- 
ter, to the grooms of the palace to deck the hall in princely 
style for himself and the nobles. The servants were suprised 
at an order issued with such authority by a mere youth ; but 
they were too much awed to venture on disobedience to his 
commands, and hastened to put the palace at Dijon in splen. 
did order for the reception of the new duke. Thus the reso. 

• Our author now carries us back more than thirty years. It was after 
1101, that the countess of Sicily, Adelaide or Adelaise, invited to Sicily a 
Burgundian lord, whose name was Robert, and gave him, with the hand of 
her niece, the government of the country during the minority of Roger II. 
Thid nobleman, little known in France, passes, according to what our 
author says, for having been the second son of Duke Robert I., called the 
elder, who died in 1175, after Henry I., his eldest son. 

^ Our author omits Henry, who became count of Portugal in 1 095, by 
his marriage with Theresa, natural daughter of Alfonso VI., king of Leon 
and Castile. From this alliance the reigning house of Portugal is sprung. 



136 ORBERICUS TITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XV. 

lute youth obtained possession of the states of liis ancestors 
without drawing the sword, or the effusion of blood ; and his 
uncles Robert and 8imon going into exile, he governed with 
honour the inheritance of his fathers during three years. 
His administration was exemplary for its justice, and he was 
beloved by the gentle and good ; but his wrath was terrible 
as the thunderbolt to the lawless and irreligious/ At the end 
of the three years, he made a voluntary cession of the duchy 
to his brother Eudes,and inspired by the love of heaven quitted 
the world ; and becoming a monk at Cluni, served Grod there 
gloriously for fifteen years. His brother Odo held the duchy 
of Burgundy for a long period, and marrying a daughter of 
William Tete-Hardie,- had a son named Hugn, afterwards 
duke, and a daughter named Hela, who by her first marriage 
with Bertrand, count of Tholouse, had Pons, count of Tripoli ; 
and afterwards married "William Talvac, to whom she bore 
Guy, count of Ponthieu, and a numerous oflspring of 
both sexes.^ 

Eobert of Burgundy, having married, as already mentioned, 
the daughter of Roger the Norman, defended his principality 
for ten years, with great resolution against all opponents. In 
the meantime, his mother-in-law brought up the young Roger, 
and when she found that he was of age to bear arms, and 
assume the government of his father's states, she took ofi" by 
poison, sad to say, the illustrious Prenchman, a noble knight 
and her own son-in-law. This noble lord being thus destroyed 
by female treachery, Roger succeeded to the principality, and 
enjoyed great prosperity for many years ; but he was soiled 

'■ In fact, Hufih I. succeeded his grandfather in 1075, and emhraced the 
monastic life at Cluni in 1078, after the death of his wife, Sibylla. 

^ The manuscript reads Testardie. The translation is conjectural. 

3 Eudes Borel died in the Holy Land, in 1102, lea\ing by his marriage 
ivith Matilda, the sister, not the daughter of William Tete-Hardie, Hugh 
II., surnamed the Pacific, who succeeded him, Henry, a monk of Citeaux, 
and two daughters, the eldest of whom, Alice, Hele, or H^late, had for her 
first husband, about 1096, Bertrand, count of Thoulouse, natural son of 
Raymond de St. Gilles, who died in 1112. She then married V/illiam III., 
count of Alenfon and Ponthieu, called Talvas, son of the infamous Robert 
de Belesme. ]\Ienage pretends that she died on the last day of February, 
1191, but that is not tenable. Other authors place her death in 1101, 
which is not more admissible. It is probable that the true date is 1119. 
She was buried, they say, in the abbey of Perseigne, but she was not living 
when that abbey was founded. 



A.D. 1103— 1113.] AFFAIRS OP APULIA. 137 

bj many crimes, and, as I think, must expiate them by severe 
torments. 

.His crafty mother, who was daughter of Boniface of 
Liguria, having collected money from all sources after her 
husband's death, amassed a great treasure. Baldwin the 
3^ounger, king of Jerusalem, hearing this, coveted her wealth 
and sent noble proxies to demand her hand in marriage. 
Adelais, insatiably greedy of pride, of rank, and honour, 
accepted the proposals of the illustrious suitors, and went 
to Jerusalem with a large retinue and a vast treasure.^ 
King Baldwin was pleased enough to receive her money, 
which he lavished on the stipendiaries who fought in the 
name of Christ against the Pagans ; but he repudiated the 
woman who was wrinkled with age, and had rendered herself 
inflimous by many crimes. In consequence, the old womian 
returned to Sicily in confusion at her failure, and spent her 
declining years in general contempt.^ 

Eoger, prince of Sicily, securely established his power, 
and prospered in wealth and honour, above all his predecessors 
of the same family. After the death of duke William, as 
already mentioned, he succeeded him in the duchy of Apulia 
against the will of the people : and he then persecuted all 
who had opposed him, cruely oppressing them by his power- 
ful hand, and sparing no one, either kindred or strangers, but 
crushing them all, and stripping them of their property, he 
trod them under foot.^ 

Tancred de Conversana* was closely besieged by Eoger of 
Sicily in Matera;^ and making his escape thence, was talven by 
his cruel persecutors in a place called Monte Petroso,'^ Greof- 
fry of Andria,'' was also taken prisoner with his wife, on a 
rock on which the castle, near the city of Potenza, stands.*^ 
However Eobert reduced tlie city, and pillaged there a 
treasury containing fifteen pounds' weight of gold and silver. 

» In 1113. 

2 She died in 1118. 

3 In 1127. 

* Tancred de Conversana, in the territory of Bari, probably the nephew 
cf Sibylla, duchess of Normandy. He was count of Brundusium. 

•■^ Matera, in the Basilicata, the see of a bishop. 

^ Monte Scaglioso, a town of the Basilicata, in the diocese of Matera. 

' Andria, an episcopal city in the territory of Bari. 

* Potenza, capital of the Basilicata. 



138 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b. XIII. CH.XYI. 

He also took tlie Lombard G-rimoald de Bari,^ a generous and 
high-spirited man, and stripping him of all his efiects and 
strong places, reduced him to great humiliation. Even his 
cousin Kichard, prince of Capua,- he disinherited, and com- 
pelled him by unjust violence to go into exile. Thus ruining 
bj his tyranny both his kinsmen and strangers, he waded 
through a sea of blood and tears to such power that, first of 
the descendants of Tancred, he ascended a kingly throne, and 
obtained the sceptre and diadems, and other ensigns of royalty. 
He married the daughter of Peter Leo, the sister of Pope 
Anaclete, and having been crowned by this pope, still reigns 
as king of Sicily.^ 

Ch. XVI. A heavy fall of snow, and inundations — Violent 
summer lieats and tliunder storms — Mans and Chartres hurnt 
— Floods in Flanders — Insurrection of the Welsh. 
Is the year of our Lord 1134, many calamities aiSicted the 
world, by which some were punished as their sins deserved, 
while others, witnessing such terrible and unusual events, 
become pale with terror. On Innocents' day, there was such 
a heavy fall of snow that it covered the whole face of the 
country, and so blocked up the entrances of the houses, that 
on the following day it was hardly possible for either man or 
beast to come forth from their abodes, or any how procure 

1 Grimoald, lord of Bari. His name points out his Lombard origin. 
His states were conquered by Roger, in 1 1 32. 

'^ This prince of Capua was not named Richard ; neither the second of 
that name, who died in Januar}', 1106, nor Richard III., who was invested 
in 1120, and died at the end of eight days; but Robert II., who succeeded 
his father, Jourdain II., the 13th of December, 1127, and was invested 
on the 28th of the same month, in the presence of Pope Honorius. He 
struggled long and obstinately against Roger, and it was not till the 1st of 
October, 1135, that the latter completed the conquest of Capua by the 
investiture of his third son, Anfuse, in the principality. 

Capua having been retaken by the Emperor Lothaire, on behalf of 
Robert, was again taken, and utterly sacked, in October, 1137. 

The indefatigable Robert made his re-entry into Capua in 1155, on the 
death of Roger, but being forced to leave it the year following, he was 
given up to the Sicilians, who put out his eyes, and brought lum to a 
miserable end. 

3 Tlie date of the bull conferring the title of king on Count Roger has 
been already given. In 1120 he married Alberie, the daughter of Peter 
de Leon, second of that name, and consequently sister of Pope Anaclete. 
She bore him five children, and, dying on the eighth of February, 1145, 
was buried at Palermo. 



A.D, 1131.] A POETENTOUS SEASOIS'. 139 

what they required. Many of the faithful could not enter 
the churches to celebrate the feast, and in several places the 
priests could not even make their way to them through the 
deep snowdi'ifts. In the course of six days the wind changing 
to the westward, the snow melted and a deep flood immediately 
followed. The rivers were swelled with the waters and over- 
flowed their banks, causing great losses and inconveniences to 
the people. The houses in the towns and villages were flooded 
so that they were compelled to quit tbeir habitations. Great 
ricks of hay were swept ofi" from the meadows, and tuns of 
wine and other vessels, with many valuable and ornamental 
articles, were carried away. Many had to lament their 
losses, while others rejoiced in unexpected acquisitions.^ 

In the month of June, the earth was burnt up during fif- 
teen days by a parching heat, and men were forced to hum- 
ble tliemselves before God with fasting and supplications, 
in terror of perishing by fire, like the inhabitants of the 
Pentapolis. The blazing sun, which was then in the Twins, 
dried up the springs and pools of water, and the thirst v 
animals were reduced to the greatest distress. One Satur- 
day such a number of persons, exhausted by the raging heat, 
sought refreshment by bathing, that many were drowned in 
a single hour. In our own neighbourhood, where the news 
easily reached us, thirty-seven men perished in the pools 
and streams. It is not for me to raise questions on the 
judgments of God, by whom all things are wrought, nor can 
I unfold the mysterious causes of events ; I simply write 
their annals, as I am requested by friends. AVlio can 
search out that which is inscrutable ? Such occurrences as 

* It appears that the inundation followed, on the 1st of January of the 
year on which our author's narrative now enters (1034), the heavy 
fall of snow which occurred on Innocents'-day (December 28) of the 
preceding year. Our author has mentioned it before (b. vi. c. x. vol. ii. p. 
321) in connection with one of those familiar anecdotes which, scattered 
throughout his history, give it a peculiar value, as conveying to us ideas of 
the habits and modes of thought in his times. The hay was generally 
stored in barns for winter fodder, as so rigorous a climate as that of Nor- 
mandy requires ; and we may suppose that what was carried off by the 
inundations had been cut at too great a distance from the farms to be 
carted home, or that the buildings were insufficient. It was therefore 
stacked upon some rising ground, which, however, failed of giving security 
when the floods of the Risle and other streams, swelled by the melting of 
an extraordinary fall of snow, rose above their usual lexel. 



140 ORDEETCUS YITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XTI, 

I liave either seen or heard I record with the best inten- 
tions for the benefit of posterity, and glorify God in all his 
works, which are truly righteous. Let every one consider 
them according to the light he may receive from heaven, 
and if he finds anything he thinks profitable to himself, let 
him select it for his soul's good, as he feels disposed. 

In the month of August, on the eve of St. Lawrence the 
Martyr, after nones, there was a sudden storm of wind, fol- 
lowed, about the hour of vespers,^ by a^vful thunder and a 
deluge of rain. In different places thunderbolts fell with a 
great crash, and killed several women. As far a« I have 
heard, no male perished in this visitation ; females only, both 
of the human species and brute animals, sunk under the in- 
fliction of the passing scourge. In the village of Planches,^ 
on the confines of the dioceses of Lisieux and Seez, a young 
man named "William Blanchard was driving homewards from 
a neighbouring friend, a cart in which his sister was sitting 
with some sheaves of oats. The youth being alarmed at the 
violent storm of rain, made all possible haste to gain the 
shelter of his mother's cottage which stood close by, but a 
thunderbolt fell on the haunches of the mare whicn Avas draw- 
ing the cart, and killed the animal, as well as the girl in the 
cart and a stray pullet of hers which was following after. 
Her young brother, v*'ho was riding the mare with the bridle 
in his liand, fell to the ground, excessively terrified, but 
through Grod's mercy, his life was spared. The rain soon 
afterwards poured down in torrents, but the cart and the 
sheaves it contained were burnt to ashes, which I saw the 

^ "Nones — vespers." It may be convenient to insert a iist of the 
seven " Hourbf as they are called, of the daily service in the Roman 
church : — 

Matins or Lauds; from midnight till primes— service usually at 3, a.ii. 

Primes; 6, a.m., till tierce. 

Tierce, 9, a.m., till sext. 

Sext; 12, or noon, to nones. 

Nones; 2 or 3, p.m., to vespers. 

Vespers; 4, p.m., to complines, or second vespers. 

Complines (completorium), about 7, p.m. 

^ Planches is a village situate about a league and a-half east of Merle- 
raut, on the road from thence to L^igle. St. Evroult stands about four 
leagues to the north of these communes. In point of fact, Planches 
belongs to the diocese of Seez, and stands at its very extremity, being only 
divided from that of Lisieux by the Risle. 



A.D. 1134.] CHAETEES, ETC., BUE-N'T. 141 

uext day, as well as the corpse of the young girl laid out on 
a bier ; for being then at Merleraut I paid a visit to the 
spot in order to be able to ascertain the facts and record 
them with certainty.^ 

At the village of Gapree,^ some reapers, observing a very 
black cloud which darkened the sky, called out to a little 
girl who happened to be gleaning in the field : " E.un quickly, 
child, and fetch us our cloaks and coats to defend us from 
the rain." The girl began running in all haste to fulfil the 
errand ; but she had scarcely, I think, made a single step, 
before she was struck with lightning and instantly expired. 
The same hour many such things happened, as I afterwards 
heard from trustworthy persons, but I cannot relate them all. 

In the first week of September, the Lord our God pun- 
ished many offences by fire, and burnt the houses of sinners, 
with the wealth they had been for a long while unjustly 
accumulating. Le Mans and Chartres, rich and ancient 
cities, were reduced to ashes. Alencon, Nogent-au-Perche, 
Yerneuil, and other towns and villages perished in the 
flames, the wrath of God visiting the earth. At. this time 
the cathedral of Mans, a most beautiful edifice, was burnt to 
the ground, and it was with great difliculty that the chest 
containing the relics of !St. Julian, bishop and confessor, 
was transferred to the monn^tery of St. Vincent the martyr.^ 
The bones of St. Scholastica, the Virgin, were also burnt, 
with many other relics ; but after the fire their ashes were 
discovered in the shrines by those who piously searched for 
them. At Chartres the monastery of St. Peter the apostle^ 

* Our author is very happy in his descriptions of natural occurrences, as 
well as in his personal anecdotes, wliich, as we have just before remarked, 
give such an air of reality to his work. 

^ In villa quce Guaspreia dicitur. The French editors of Ordericus 
consider that the place here mentioned is Gapree, in the arrondissement of 
Alenfon and. canton of Courtomer; but they will not undertake to say 
that It is not Guepree, in the arrondissement of Argentan and canton of 
Trie, the two names being nearly identical in Latin: Guaspreia, Gaepree. 
Gapree is, however, nearer St. Evroult than Guepree. 

^ The details given by our author of the fire at Alans, which occurred on 
the 3rd of September, 1134, are correct. The relics of St. Julian were 
carried to the abbey de la Cloture. 

* St, Stephen's, at Chartres, was destroyed by fire two days afterwards, 
on the 5th of September. 



142 OUDEHICUS TITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XTI. 

was reduced to ashes, and the venerable convent of monks 
was dispersed, their cloister and the other buildings and 
offices being destroyed. At the same season, the inhabitants 
of a variety of places experienced many extraordinary occur- 
rences, and numbers of them suffered from fires originating in 
different ways. In their astonishment or sorrow, they can 
tell long stories of these events to the people of their neigh- 
borhood ; but as I did not witness them, I have resolved 
not to lengthen my work by relating anything on doubtful 
authority. 

In the same month, the righteous Judge took fearful ven- 
geance, by the contrary element in another country, punish- 
ing the pirates for iniquities similar to those with which 
the earth was polluted in the time of JSToah. In Flanders 
the sea overflowed its banks dui-ing the night, and suddenly 
deluging the country for an extent of seven miles, covered 
alike churches, towers, and cottages, and destroyed in one 
common catastrophe thousands of human beings, of both sexes, 
and all ranks and orders. In such an emergency it is plain, 
that neither speed could save the swift messenger, nor cou- 
rage the man of arms, nor riches the wealthy ; but all alike, 
men and women, handsome or deformed, were engulphed in 
the flood of waters, which soon stopped their moutfcs and 
terminated their existence. Thus did the sea accomplish 
the punishment of these wretched people, all in a moment, 
and then straightway at the command of God retired within 
its bounds. A poor woman recovering from recent child- 
birth was alarmed at hearing the rush of waters, but not 
losing her presence of mind jumped out of bed, and seizing 
her infant, with a hen and chickens, lost no time in getting 
on a little mow of hay,^ which stood at her cottage door. 
The hay floated in the*^ flood, which swept everything away 
in its rapid current, and eddying to and fro, carried the hay 
to a great distance from the spot where it stood. By God's 
mercv, the woman was saved with the few little things she 
had with her, being wonderfully snatched from the death 
which was so near. A boy twelve years old told me that he 
escaped destruction by climbing instantly to the roof of a 
^ MuUonem. In the patois of Upper Normandy, the people still speak 
of *' un mulon de oin," for foin. 



A.D. 1134.] IXSUREECTION OF THE WELSH. 143 

house, while his father and mother perished in the lower 
apartment. 

In the course of the same year, several illustrious princes 
departed this life. Eobert 11. duke of Normandy, died in 
February at Cardiff, as already mentioned ; Alfonso, king of 
Arragon at the beginning of autumn, after the battle of 
Eraga, in which fell the noble barons Bertrand and 
Eoderick, with many other lords. 

At this time the Welsh-Britons^ were grievously op- 
pressed by the various races who live under the rule of 
King Henry ; and several of their provinces were granted to 
the Flemings, by whom they were butchered like dogs, with 
out any regard for humanity, whenever they could track them 
out, in the woods and caves in which they lurked. The 
braver spirits among the Welsh finding this, became so in- 
dignant, that their courage was again roused, and flyino- to 
arms, they broke into fierce rebellion against King Henry, 
and made ample reprisals in revenge for their losses. They 
burnt a castle of Paganus Fitz-John, called Caus,^ and mer- 

' Guali Britones. Henry I., in person, led expeditions into Wales in 
1114 and 1116; and during his reign, whenever opportunity could be 
found, irruptions were made on the Welsh by the lords on the frontier, 
frequently followed by reprisals. Henry also planted a colony of Flemings 
in the district of Roos in Pembrokeshire, traces of which still remain, to 
curb the power of Griffyth-ap-Rhys, prince of South Wales in those 
parts. This fact is cursorily recorded by most of the chroniclers, and 
more particularly by Giraldus Cambrensis, in b. i. c. 11, of his Itinerary. 

^ M. Le Prevost states in a note, that he is unable to point out the site 
of this castle, or ascertain its modern name ; but he very judiciously 
observes, that it must have stood in the neighbourhood of that intermediate 
zone, between the two countries which merited the name of Debateahle 
land, rather than that of a regular frontier. This conjecture is not far 
wrong : Cause or Caurse castle, the ruins of which still preserve its ancient 
name, stands indeed within the English border, but on the very confines of 
Shropshire, where a ridge, called the Loni? Mountain, divides it from the 
valley of the Severn and the adjoining county of Montgomery, It was 
one of the most important of the line of border castles built to restrain 
the incursions of the Welsh, more of which are mentioned subsequently 
in eh. xxxvii. Cause was at one time the lordship of Peter Corbett, and 
afterwards came into the pessession of the barons Stafford. 

Paganus (or Payn) Fitz-John, here named, and Milo Fitz-Walter, were 
entrusted by Henry I. with important governments on the borders of 
Wales, the first having the counties of Hereford and Salop, the other that 



14:4 OEDEEICTJS TITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XVII. 

cilessly cut off the heads of all the persons of both sexes 
whom they found within it. Having committed this outrage, 
the whole band, inhabitants of the neighbourhood as well as 
strangers, betook themselves to the woods, like so many- 
wolves, and carried on public hostilities, by indiscriminating 
slaughter, pillage, and hrings. 

Ch. XYII. Coimcil of JPisa — Hugh, arclihisJiop of 'Rouen, 
assists at it — Neglects his diocese — At last consecrates 
Richard, the Mng's iiephew, lishoj) of Bayeux. 

Ik the year of our Lord 1135, Pope Innocent assembled a 
very numerous council at Pisa,^ and brought before it many 
things concerning the welfare of the church ; but was pre- 
vented by adverse circumstances from accomplishing all he 
desired. Hugh, archbishop of Eouen, powerfully seconded 

of Gloucester, under his jurisdiction. These "lord-marchers" bemg, like 
others, in continual hostilities with the Welsh, pushed their conquests 
across the border. IMilo was lord of Over-Gwent and Brecknock, Fitz- 
John was lord of Ewyas, a mountainous district, now called the Hatterell 
hills, a continuation of the Black Mountains, near Talgarth, and extending 
into the county of Hereford. The celebrated abbey of Llantony, stifi 
beautiful in its ruins, stood in the vale of Evryas. 

In the early part of the reign of Stephen, Paganus Fitz-John, who had 
been a favourite and counsellor of Henry I., fell into suspicion, and was 
summoned to court, with others, to answer charges for their cruel and 
rapacious border warfare ; but he was too prudent to obey the summons, 
and, while chastising the Welshmen, was pierced through the brain by an 
arrow, being the only one of his party who fell. See Gesta Stephani, 
pp. 333, 334, appended to Henry of Huntingdon's Hist, in the Antiq. 
Lib. ; and the Itinerary of Giraldus Cambrensis, b. i. c. 2. 

M. Le Prevost remarks of this Paganus Fitz-John, that '" there is no 
doubt but he was a brother of Eustace Fitz-John, who married Beatrice, 
daughter and heiress of Ivo de Vesci, who married Ada, daughter and 
heiress of William Tyson, lord of Alnwick, in the county of Northumber- 
land. William, the son of Eustace and Beatrice, took his mother's name, 
•which was preserved in the family until it became extinct in 1297." He 
observes, that there was, in the 13th century, another family of Fitz-John, 
with which the persons here spoken of had no relation. Eustace Fitz- 
John, in 1117, founded at Alnwick the first priory of the order of the 
Premonstrants which existed in England. The charter of foundation, and 
a genealogy of the family, repeated several times, are preserved in the 
second volume of the Monast. Anglican. 

^ Our author continues to confound Pisa with "Picenum." The 
council was opened May 30, 1135, and closed June 6. 



A.D. 1135.] HENET I. DETAITfED IN" NOEMANDT. 145 

his designs, and was so mucli honoured by the pope, that 
he gave him the primacy over many bishops. Occupied in 
the affairs of the apostolical see, he neglected for some time 
the administration of his own diocese, and remaining too 
long in Italy, diligently employed in the concerns of others, 
the king was much displeased with him. 

Besides, when after the death of Eichard, bishop of 
Bayeux, the king gave the see to his own grandson Eichard, 
the archbishop greatly hesitated to consecrate him, because he 
was a bastard, and deferred it for a long period, until the 
terror of the king's name should induce the court of Eome 
to grant authority for it. At last, when the envoys returned 
with the papal decree, the church of Bayeux Avas given to 
Eichard, the son of Eobert earl of Grloucester ; and on the 
same day the bishopric of Coutances was entrusted to 
Eichard de Beaufai. 

Ch. XVIII. Senry I. is detained in Normandy ly quarrels 
with the count of Anjou,fomentedhy the countess — Marches 
against William Talvas and Roger de Toeni, two of the 
lords in their interest. 

DuRiisra the same year. King Henry having heard the 
sorrowful tidings of the insurrection of the "Welsh, his anger 
was so much roused that, having ordered his affairs in Nor- 
mandy with great prudence, he made three attempts to cross 
the sea, with a chosen troop of archers and a body of men- 
at-arms. But his expedition was prevented by the occur- 
rence of opposing circumstances ; nor was he permitted by 
God, who disposes all things in a wonderful manner, to 
return alive to England. Greoffrey of Anjou, his son-in-law,^ 

* The misunderstanding between Henry and his son-in-law Geoffrey, 
was of long standing, and embittered the last days of the English king. 
As long before as 1 13"2, he had taken back his daughter to England, and 
did not restore her to her husband till in some measure compelled by the 
solemn decision of his counsellors at Northampton, at the feast of the 
Nativity, in 1133. But the journey did not take place till the Lent follow- 
ing. The princess was then far advanced in her pregnancy, as she was 
delivered of Henry II. at Mans, on Holy Saturday, March 25. The king 
followed her to the continent on Wednesday, August 2, notwithstanding 
an annular eclipse at noon, on account of which it was sought in vain to 
induce him to relinquish the voyage. 

The quarrels between the king and his son-in-law continued to the end 

YOL. IV. L 



146 OEDEEICTTS YITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XYIII. 

coveted the vast wealth of his powerful father-in-law, and 
demanded possession of the castles in Normandv, alleging 
that they were promised him by the king when he gave him 
his daughter in marriage. But the high-spirited monarch 
had no inclination to allow any one, while he lived, to have 
any pre-eminence over himself, or even to be his equal in 
his family or dominions, well remembering the maxim of 
divine wisdom, that " No man can serve two masters." In 
consequence, the arrogant young prince was so incensed, 
that he gave offence to the king, both by threats and acts of 
insolence, and treated his counsels and admonitions with 
such contempt, that Henry became much irritated, and 
would have taken his daughter from him and carried her 
over to England, if Providence had so determined. The 
king saw with pain that Geoffrey besieged his son-in-law, 
Eoscelin the viscount,^ reduced to ashes the town of 
Beaumont, and without any respect to his royal father- 
in-law, pushed his advantages against Eoscelin, to the 
last extremity. In this state of affairs between King Henry 
and the count of Anjou, discord grew up among the lords of 
Normandy, some of whom were partizans of. the count but 
dared not break into open revolt, being kept in awe by a 
king of such experience. AYere he to take arms against 
them, they well knew that perpetual imprisonment would 
be the punishment of the culprits. 

William Talvas^ and Eoger de Toeni lay under the 

of Henry's life. It even appears that Matilda took pleasure in fomenting 
them. " The king often proposed to return to England, but his daughter, the 
empress, detained him on account of various disputes which were between 
the king and the count of Anjou, through the intrigues of his daughter, 
by which he was exasperated against the count." It was thought that 
these domestic quarrels shortened the king's days. 

^ Roscelin de Beaumont, lord of Beaumont-le- Vicente and Montre- 
vault (Maine-et-Loire), son of Ralph de Beaumont, second of that name, 
married Constance, the fifth natural daughter of Henry I. Robert du 
Mont calls her Matilda ; perhaps she bore two names, as we have seen in 
the case of Queen Matilda, of Scotland. 

2 William Talvas, third of that name, of whom we have already had 
occasion to speak. The king had restored to him, in 1119, the county of 
Alengon, but not Belesme, which continued to be united to the domains 
of the count du Perche. 

William was one of the causes of the misunderstanding between Henry 
and the count and countess of Anjou, who were much displeased that the 



A.D. 1135.] HENET AKD GEOFFEET QUAEEEL. 147 

greatest suspicion, and therefore did not venture to come to 
court. ^ For this reason the king deferred his voyage to 
EngLand, and quartered his own troops in the fortress 
of Conches. This garrison saved the town, which was sur- 
rounded with good walls, and kept in check the young 
Eoger, who was disposed to revolt. As for Talvas, the king 
often summoned him to his presence, and long waited in 
vain for him, tormented as he was by the stings of an evil 
conscience; and at last, after being frequently called to appear, 
he was disseized of all his fiefs. In the month of September, 
Talvas, deprived of his entire lordship, took refuge with the 
count of Anjou, making his residence in the castles of 
Perai and Mamers, which he held in fealty to that count. 
Meanwhile, the king was engaged from the eleventh of 
August to the feast of All-saints [1st November], in scouring 
the country about Seez, and taking possession of Alen9on, 
Almanesces, and other castles belonging to Talvas. Assem- 
bling a great number of labourers, he enlarged the trenches 
of Argentan, and, unconscious of future events, strongly 
fortified a place which soon afterwards was a great trouble 
to the inhabitants of the neighbourhood. 

On the fifth of the calends of November [28th October], 
while they were celebrating the feast of SS. Simon and 
Jude, and the service of matins was being ofiered by the 
devout to the divine Majesty, a violent wind suddenly rose 
about the fourth watch of the night, and lasting all day until 
nones, in strong gusts accompanied with a terrible roar, 
stripped the roofs of innumerable houses, and churches, and 
lofty towers ; and, levelling to the earth numberless trees, 

king had not, at their request, restored this lord to his favour. It also 
appears, that both the count and countess were of arrogant and violent 
tempers, and they were, therefore, much disliked, as we shall find in the 
sequel. 

^ Roger de Toeni, second of that name and son of Ralph III. This 
family, by an exception extremely rare amongst the Norman lords, appears 
not to have been of Scandinavian origin, but to have sprung from a Frank 
named Hugh de Calvacamp, one of whose sons, Ralph, is described as a 
person of great power; and another was archbishop of Rouen in the 
middle of the tenth century. The archbishop, whose general character 
was far from exemplary, is accused of having alienated the domain of 
Toeni from the church to endow his own family. It has been already re- 
marked, that the baronial house of Stafford in England was derived from 
that of Toeni. 

L 2 



148 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XIX. 

laid open tlie woods. Men's hearts trembled at these 
spectacles, and various opinions were offered concerning the 
visitation. Some wise observers, who inquired keenly into 
the causes of events and conjectured the future from the 
past, said that the wrath of Grod threatened the world on 
account of its sins, and that the princes of the earth with theii' 
subjects would soon be laid low like the trees of the forests. 
At this time Lewis, king of France, who was in the 
twenty-eighth year of his reign, lay sick from diarrhoea, 
which wasted his strength.^ In the immediate apprehen- 
sion of death, he set his house and all that he possessed in 
order, and summoning to his presence two of the most 
powerful lords of Erance, Theobald de Blois' and Ealph de 
Peronne,^ who had been at variance, he restored peace 
between them. The kingdom of France he committed to 
his son Lewis Florus,* having three years before ap- 
pointed him king, and caused him to be crowned at Eheims, 
on the tenth^ of the calends of November [20th October], by 
Pope Innocent, assisted by the whole council of thirteen 
archbishops and two hundred and sixty-three bishops, 
amidst the acclamations of the multitudes who were present. 
Although the physicians despaired of the king's recovery, 
the omnipotent Adonai, who added fifteen years to the life 
of Hezekiah, prolonged also that of the suffering Lewis, 
unexpectedly affording him thereby an opportunity of 
amending his conduct. 

Ch. XIX. TTie illness and death of Henry I. — H.is funeral — 
Measures taken for securing order in Normandy. 

Meanwhile, Henry king of England, having arrived at 

^ Louis-le-Gros died of a diarrhoea, but not till two years later, August 
1, 1137, after reigning twenty-nine years. 

2 Theobald, Count de Blois and Champagne, surnamed the Great, was 
the elder brother of King Stephen. He had been one of the most mortal 
enemies of Louis-le-Gros. Never was confidence more misplaced than on 
Theobald. 

3 Ralph I., Count de Vermandois, de Valois, d'Ainiens, de Crespi, lord 
of P^ronne, and high steward of France. He, on the contrary, was a 
faithful and brave defender of the French crown. His sister married 
Robert, Count de Meulan, but left him for William II,, earl of Surrey. 

* Lewis le Jeune. 

* The reading should be, " on the eighth," the number stated by our 
author before. See p. 130. 



A.D. 1135.] LAST HOTJES OE HEXRY I. liO 

the castle of Lions^ on tlie seventli of the calends of Decem- 
ber, gave orders to his huntsmen to be ready to attend him 
for the chace in the woods on the next day. But during 
the night he suddenly fell sick, and lay at the point of death 
from Tuesday till the following Sunday. In the course of 
that time he confessed his sins to his chaplains f and then, 
sending for Hugh, archbishop of Eouen, he requested his 
spiritual counsels. By his admonitions, the king released 
criminals from all forfeitures, permitted all exiles to return 
to their homes, and restored those whom he had dis- 
inherited to their paternal estates. He gave orders to his 
son Eobert to take out of his treasury, which was under his 
charge at Falaise, sixty thousand livres, and distribute it in 
pay and donatives to his household servants and hired 
troops.' He commanded that his body should be carried to 
Eeading, where he had founded a monastery for two hun- 
dred monks, in honour of the Holy and Undivided Trinity.'* 

^ The castle of Lions was a favourite hunting seat of the Norman 
dukes and kings, in a forest of the same name, about six leagues from 
Rouen. Henry arrived there on Monday November 25. Henry of 
Huntingdon mentions, that his illness was caused by eating lampreys, of 
which he was immoderately fond. P. 259, Antiq. Lib. 

' It was the abbot of Reading, who, happening to be in the neighbour* 
hood, was first summoned to administer the consolations of religion to the 
king. He afterwards sent to the archbishop of Rouen, who gives the 
following account of his last hours in a letter to Pope Innocent, preserved 
by William of Malmesbury : '* I went to him and stayed there, full of 
grief, three days. At my instance, he confessed his sins, and beat his 
breast with his own hand, dismissing all ill-will. By the divine counsela 
given him by me and the bishops, he often promised that he would lead a 
better life. After that promise, as my duty was, I gave him absolution for 
the third time in three days. He adored the crucifix, received with 
devotion the body and blood of our Lord, and ordered alms to be distri- 
buted, thus saying : ' Let my debts be paid, all wages and stipends be 
discharged, and the rest be given amongst the poor."* 

At the king's death, there was found in his treasury at Winchester, say 
the historians, more than a hundred thousand livres, of exquisite coinage. 
There were also vessels of gold and silver, of massive weight and inesti- 
mable value, collected by the ancient kings, with magnificent additions b/ 
Henry himself. 

' Our author omits noticing, that he bequeathed his immense heritage 
to his daughter, without making any mention of his son-in-law, " hemj, 
incensed against her husband, exasperated by his threats, and evea in- 
juries ." 

* This is not quite exact. The abbey of Reading was dediciitrd to tr.e 
blessed Virgin and St. John, as we have already observed. 



150 OEDEEICUS TITALTS. [e.XIII. CH.XIX. 

Lastly, this catHolic prince besouglit all persons to preserve 
peace and protect tbe poor. Then, after having made his 
confession, he received penance and absolntion from the 
priests, and receiving extreme unction, and being strength- 
ened by the holy eucharist, commended himself to Grod, and 
so departed this life on the calends of December [1st De- 
cember], being Sunday, early in the night. There were 
then assembled five counts, Eobert of Gloucester, William 
de Warrenne, Eotrou of Mortain, Waleran of IMellent, 
and Eobert of Leicester,^ besides several other lofds, cap- 
tains, and noble castellans : all of whom were entreated by 
Hugh the archbishop, and Ouen, bishop of Evreux, not to 
forsake their master's corpse unless by common consent, but 
to conduct it to the sea side, all together, in an honourable 
escort. 

On Monday they bore the royal corpse from the castle of 
Lions to Eouen,'^ twenty thousand men attending it, that 
no honour should be wanting in the obsequies. It was 
received with great pomp in the cathedral " church of St. 
Mary, mother of God, all ranks of men and persons of both 
sexes shedding floods of tears during the solemnity. Daring 
the night the body, which was very fat, was opened by a 
skilful surgeon, and embalmed with sweet spices.^ The 
entrails were carried in an urn to Emendreville, and de- 
posited in the church of St. Mary-du-Pre, which his mother 
began and he finished. 

^ Robert, earl of Gloucester, the king's natural son ; William de 
Warrenne, earl of Surrey, probably the third of that name, as his father 
William had died in the course of the year ; Rotrou II., Count du 
Perche ; Waleran, count, or earl, of Mellent ; and Robert the Hunchback, 
earl of Leicester. 

^ The corpse was carried by the high nobles, relieving each other at 
intervals. From the distance between the castle of Lions and Rouen 
just stated, it must have been a long and toilsome journey. 

^ So far from this, the embalment was performed in the most clumsy 
and offensive manner. " The body, being slashed by knives, and copiously 
sprinkled with salt, waa sevrn up in ox-hides to prevent the ill effluvia, 
which so filled the air as to be pestilential to the bystanders," says Henry 
of Huntingdon. A better process was introduced from the east in the 
following century, precious aromatics being substituted for salt. Thus the 
heart of St. Lewis was preserved. The embalment of King Baldwin, in 
1118, though performed in the east, was done according to the 
primitive rude process, salt being the principal ingredient. But Baldwin 
died in the desert. 



A.D.1135.] EITNEEAL OP HENEY I. 151 

Thereupon, tlie government of Eouen and tlie district of 
Caux was committed, by order of the council, to William 
de Warrenne,^ who protected the people for some time, 
much to their advantage. "William de Eoumare, and Hugh 
de Grournay,^ and other lords-marchers, were directed to 
defend the tjorders of the duchy ; Eobert de Sigillo, and 
some other clerks^, with Eobert de Vere*, John Algason^, 
and other English knights, and the guards and officers of 
the royal household, assembled together, and conducted the 
king's bier to Caen, by way of Pontaudemer and Bonneville.^ 
They were detained there for nearly four weeks, waiting a 
favourable wind to put to sea. During this time the corpse 
of the king was kept in the choir of the church of St. 
Stephen, the protomartyr; until, after Christmas, it was 
embarked on board ship by monks, employed in that duty, 
and carried over to England : it was then buried with great 
honours by the successor to the throne, and the bishops 
and great men of the realm, in the abbey-chm:-ch at Eeading. 

Having now given a faithful account of the circumstances 
attending the death of this glorious father of his country, I 
shall proceed to describe briefly, in hexameter verses, the 
sufferings which turbulent Normandy, our wretched mother, 
underwent in the fangs of the viper brood, her own off- 
spring : for, as soon as the death of her pious prince was 
known, in the first week of Advent, on one and tlje same 

1 William III. de Warrenne, earl of Surrey, mentioned just before. 

'^ William de Roumare, second of that name, also noticed. Hugh III. 
de Gournai. 

" Robert de Sigillo, &c. These persons were members of the royal chancery. 
M. Dubois, indeed, the French translator of Ordericus, states in a note, that 
Robert's name was derived from Sigi in the arrondisseraent of NeufcMtel. 
But it is evidently a name of office, Robert being chancellor, and wearing the 
seal of the late king, as M. Le Prevost observes, suspended from his neck. 

* Robert de Ver, or Vere, was the son of Aubrey de Vere, the first of 
the name, or William de Vere ; and consequently brother or cousin-german 
of Aubrey de Vere II. It is supposed that this family originated at Ver, 
in the arrondissement of Coutances. 

'' John Algason, brother of Guigan Algason, viscount d'Exmes. 

* The funeral procession on this occasion proceeded by land, on the 
road through Pontaudemer and Bonneville-sur-Touque. Henry of Hun- 
tingdon gives a loathsome account of the state of the corpse while it lay 
in the church of St. Ouen at Caen. The last honours were not paid to 
the deceased king till January 6, 1136, when his body was interred at 
Reading. 



152 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [B. XIII. CH. XIX. 

day, the jSTormans rushed like raving wolves to the prey, 
and greedily entered on a course of the most infamous 
devastations. 

Sceptriger invictus, sapiens dux, inclytus heros, 

Qui fovit populos justo moderamine multos, 

Proh dolor ! occubuit ; dolor hinc oritur generalis, 

Publica Normannis clades simul instat et Anglis. 

DivitMS et justiti^, sensu, probitate, 

Strenuitas ejus manifesta refulsit ubique- 

Nullus 60 melior princeps dominatur in orbe. 

Tempore quo nimium scelus in toto fuit orbe, 

Ut reor, e cunctis fuit is melioribus unus. 

Hoc attestantur speciales illius actus. 

Ecclesise tutor, pacisque serenus amator, 

Vivat in setemum cum Christo rege polorum ! Amen. 

Occidit Henricus rex prima luce Decembris 
Lugubris incumbit patriae contritio membris. 
Tollere quisque cupit jam passim res alienas, 
Rebus in injustis en quisque relaxat habenas. 
Ecce gehennales furise mortalibus instant ; 
Arma parant, ad bell a vocant, et specula donant. 
Normanni furtis insistunt atque rapinis ; 
Mutuo jam sese perimunt, capiuntque ligantque ; 
Incendunt sedes, et in illis quicquid habetur ; 
Non parcunt monachis, mulieres non reverentur. 
Femina clara gemit rabie spoliata latronum ; 
Tegmina jus non servat ei generale Quiritum. 
Cffiditur imberbis, puero fur non miseretur. 
Hsec Romana phalanx, licet ethnica, non operatur. 
Luce patet clara quod eis pax extat amara ; 
Quam mox spreverunt, ut regem fata tulerunt. 
Pro nece patritii fures leetantur iniqui ; 
Praedones avidi discurrunt ad mala prompti. 
Jamque putant quod nullus eos herus amodo jure 
Arceat : e contra refero, falluntur in hac re. 
Sternum regis jus permanet omnipotentis, 
Ecclesiceque bonum dabit ipse repente patronum. 
Principe sublato, monachorum supplicat ordo, 
Fletibus ad veniam scelerum flectendo sophiam. 
Summe Deus, cohibe ne possint sseva patrare, 
Cui cupiunt labidi famulantes perniciei. 
Ecce furit rabies, vocat et trahit ad scelus omnes. 
Com prime ne valeant actu complere quod optant. 
Christe ducem praebe, qui pacem justitiamque 
Diligat ac teneat, populumque tuum tibi ducat. 
Justitiaj virga turgentum percute dorsa, 
Ut secura tibi tua plebs possit famulari ! Semper Amen. 



A.D. 1135.] VERSES OIT THE DEATH OF HEKRT I. 153 

"The invincible monarch, the wise duke, the illustrious 
hero, who governed so many nations under a just adminis- 
tration, alas ! is dead ; and the sorrow for him is universal. 
The Normans and English alike are threatened with general 
slaughter. His wealth and justice, prudence and worth, 
extended his power far and wide. There was no better 
prince than him in all the world, in times when it was 
overrun with excessive wickedness. He was, as I think, 
the best of kings. His brilliant acts prove this. May this 
defender of the church, and lover of peace, live for ever with 
Christ, the king of the universe ! Amen. 

" King Henry died on the 1st of December. His sorrow- 
ing country feels his loss in all her members.^ Already, 
every one covets the pillage of his neighbour's property, 
and abandons himself to unbridled injustice. The infernal 
furies pursue mankind ; they prepare arms, summon to the 
fight, and distribute darts. The Normans abandon them- 
selves to robbery and pillage ; they butcher one another, 
make prisoners, and bind them in fetters ; burn houses and 
all that is in them, not even sparing monks, or respecting 
women. The lady of rank groans, stripped by the hands of 
furious robbers ; public law is without force to save her 
wardrobe. The beardless youth is murdered; the ruffian 

1 Ordericus gives a favourable view of the character of Henry I. 
throughout his history. See particularly vol. iii. p. 386, and the notes. 
Henry of Huntingdon treats it with far more impartiality. We can only 
refer to the passages at the beginning of the eighth book of his history, 
and in his " letter to Walter, on the illustrious men of that age;" pp. 261 
and 313, of Bohn's edition in Antiq. Lib. William of Malmesbury 
eulogizes this king, like most of the monkish clergy. He thus describes 
his person and habits : " In stature, he was above the very short, but less 
than the very tall ; he had black hair, which clustered thick about his 
forehead ; his eyes were mild and serene ; his chest brawny ; his body 
fleshy. He was facetious in proper season, nor did multiplicity of business 

prevent his indul;:;ence in pleasantry when he received company 

He was plain in his diet, rather satisfying the calls of hunger than surfeit- 
ing himself by a variety of delicacies. He never drank but to allay thirst, 
execrating the slightest excess both in his court and all others. His sleep 
was heavy and interrupted by frequent snoring. His eloquence was 
rather unpremeditated than laboured, not rapid but deliberate." Hist. c. v. 

The length of his arm probably still constitutes the standard for 
measures of length in England. " He corrected the false ell of the 
traders, and appointed the measure of his own arm to be the standard, 
which he established throughout England." lb. 



154 OEDEEICTJS VITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XX. 

has no pitj even for a boy. Heathens as they were, the 
Koman legions committed no such crimes. It is as clear as 
light that peace is insupportable to these people, and they 
broke it as soon as they heard of the king's death. Greedy 
for plunder, they rejoiced in the loss of their prince, and 
suppose that there is now no master to restrain them. I 
think they are mistaken in this. The eternal laws of the 
Almighty King still subsist, and He will quickly give his 
church a generous protector. Having lost their prince, the 
monks supplicate the Supreme "Wisdom, with tears, to avert 
and pardon offences. Most high Grod, suffer not these fierce 
workers of iniquity to perpetrate the cruelties they wish. 
Lo ! their furious rage calls and summons the people to 
crime. Eestrain them from carrying into execution what 
they design. O Christ, give us a prince who shall observe 
and cherish peace and justice, and be the guide of thy 
people ! Smite the backs of the rebellious with the scourge 
of justice, that thy faithful people may ever serve thee in 
security! Amen." 

Ch. XX. — Accession of King Stephen — He is crowned in 
England — The Normans, after some demur, acknowledge 
him as Duke. 

As soon as Stephen, count of Boulogne, heard of his uncle's 
death,^ he immediately crossed over to England, and being 
well received by William, archbishop of Canterbury, and the 
other bishops and temporal lords, ascended the throne, and 
was cro'^Tied on the eighteenth of the calends of January 
[15th December], being the fourth king of the Norman race 

^ Stephen was probably at Boulogne when he heard of his uncle's 
death, and he lost not a moment in taking a swift vessel and crossing over 
to England. The auguries were unfavourable, for, on the morning of his 
embarkation, although it was in the depth of winter, there was a violent 
thunder-storm, and the peals were so loud, that people thought, we are 
told, that the end of the world was come. 

2 The coronation took place not on the 15th, but, according to most of 
the chroniclers, on the 2Gth of December, the feast of his patron saint. 
The ceremony was performed by William de Curboil, archbishop of 
Canterbury, with such carelessness, that he let the consecrated host fiill on 
the ground. Perhaps his conscience was troubled by his perjury; of which 
all present were guilty, commencing with the archbishop himself, of whom 
it was predicted, that he would not outlive the year, in punishment of his 



1135 — 1136.] THE IfOEMAKS ACKNOWLEDGE STEPHEN. 155 

who reigned in England. IMeanwhile, tlie Normans, holding 
a counsel at Neubourg, inclined to place themselves under 
the government of Theobald, his brother ; but hearing, while 
they were assembled, from a monk who was Stephen's 
envoy, that all the English had submitted to him and 
intended to make him their king, the meeting unanimously 
resolved, with Theobald's consent, to serve under one lord, 
on account of the fiefs which the barons held in both coun- 
tries.^ In consequence, Theobald, indignant at not being 
called to the throne, although he was the elder brother, 
departed in haste to transact important affairs which ui'ged 
his attention in Erance, and by his negligence allowed 
Xormandy to be oppressed for a long time. The duchy 
was therefore left without a ruler, while Stephen was other- 
wise occupied in England ."^ 

treason ; and this actually happened. It must be recollected, that Henry- 
had caused all the great men of the realm to take the oath of fealty to his 
daughter, as his successor, twice at least ; once at the council of North- 
ampton, before she left England to be confined at Mans, the other ceremony 
dated back to a period anterior to Matilda's second marriage, probably in 
the winter or early spring-time of 1127. On this occasion, it was very 
solemn. The archbishop was the first of the ecclesiastics who took the 
oath, and after him followed all the bishops and abbots. Then came the 
king of Scots, Stephen count de Mortain, and the earl of Gloucester ; 
and there was a great discussion among them as to which of them should 
swear first. It appears that there was a third oath of fealty after the birth 
of Prince Henry ; but several of the great men who had taken the first, 
and among others Roger, bishop of Salisbury, pretended to be released 
from their obligation, the king having married his daughter to a foreigner 
without consulting them. 

1 It has been observed already, that Geoffrey and Matilda were un- 
popular in England. We iihd here, that they were not less so in 
Normandy, where Count Theobald, Stephen's eldest brother, presented 
himself as successor to Henry in the duchy, on no other ground than 
that he was a nephew of the late king. He was rejected in consequence 
of the intelligence of Stephen's having mounted the throne in England. 
and for a very politic reason, arising out of that circumstance, which must 
have had great weight with the Anglo-Norman nobles. But, meanwhile, 
the duchy was left without a government ; and it is extraordinary that 
Matilda and her husband could find no one to assert their rights. It 
appears that the whole country was plunged into a sort of stupor. 

^ In imitation of his late uncle's policy, the first thing Stephen did was 
to hniTy to \Mnchester and seize the royal treasure. He easily secured the 
concurrence of the two treasurers, Roger, bishop of Salisbury, and William 
du Pont d'Arche. The citizens of London and Winchester at once 
declared for him ; but his principal support was found in his brother 



156 OEDEEICTTS TTTALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XXI. 

Ch. XXI. The count and countess of Anjou enter Normandy, 
hut their pretensions are defeated — Disturbed state of that 
country. 

Ln" tlie first week of December, Geoffrey of Anjou receiving 
intelligence of king Henry's death, sent forward to 
Normandy his wife Matilda AA^ithout loss of time ; and 
Gruigan Algason, a man of low extraction but of great power, 
acknowledged her as his lawful sovereign, and yielded to her 
Argentan, Exmes, Damfrout, and some other places, which 
he governed under the king as viscount.^ Soon afterwards, 
Count Theobald himself followed, with "William Talvas, 
count of Ponthien, and the forces of Anjou and Maine, and 
received the submission of the garrisons of Seez and some 
other castles which were dependencies on the fief of Talvas. 
His troops, however, spread throughout the neighbouring 
country, committed many cruelties, violated the churches 
and cemeteries, outraged their hospitable entertainers, and 
caused much injury and loss to those who had treated them 
with Ivindness. But the Normans, who are naturally fierce 
and daring, feeling the evils inflicted on them by their 
guests, flew to arms, and making furious attacks oia the 
foreign troops, pursued the fugitives through the villages 
and woods, and, as it is commonly reported, destroyed more 
than seven hundred of them by fire and sword. The rest, 
terrified at the bloody dealings of the Normans, made an 
ignominious retreat, and, gaining their own country after 
being sharply punished at the point of the sword, had no 
desire to repeat the experiment. Besides, Kobert de Sable, 
son of Lisiard,^ and some other lords, revolted against Count 
Geoffrey, and, keeping him in his own territories by intestine 
hostilities, he could not return to Normandy. 

This province, however, though not disturbed by fo- 
reigners, by no means enjoyed security and peace, inasmuch 
as it was cruelly harassed by its own sons, and like a woman 

Henry, bishop of Winchester and legate of the Roman see, who procured 
for him the adhesion of the clergy. 

' This Viscount d'Exmes could offer but a feeble support against the 
nobility and clergy of Normandy. 

' Robert de Sable, lord of Gace, son of Lisiard de Sable, and great- 
grandson of Solomon de Sabl^, by Adelaide Giroie. See before, vol. i. 
p. 395. 



A.D. 1136.] HOSTILITIES IN KOEMAXDT. 157 

in childbirth, was always suffering the pangs of labour. If 
the Norman race lived according to God's law, and were 
united under a good prince, they would be as invincible as 
the Chaldeans under Nebuchadnezzar, the Medes and 
Persians under Cyrus and Darius, and the Macedonians 
under Alexander ; as their repeated conquests in England, 
Apulia, and Syria show. But as discord makes divisions 
among them, and fatally arms them against each other, 
while they are victorious in foreign lands they are con- 
quered by themselves, and cut each other's throats without 
mercy, while their enemies in the neighbourhood look on 
and laugh, and their mother's eyes are often full of tears. 

Ch. XXII. King Stephen 'being detained in England^ private 
Jiostilifies are carried on in Normandy. 

In the year of our Lord, 1136, the fourteenth indiction, 
while Stephen, king of England, delayed his coming over to 
Normandy, and the province was left without a protector 
and prince, altercations took place between the turbulent 
chiefs of that country, and the sons of iniquity multiplied 
their outrages. 

In the beginning of Lent, Eustace de Breteuil died at 
Pacey ; and after Easter, his son William overran the lord- 
ship of Breteuil with fire and sword, to assert his claims. 

At this time king Stephen betrothed his daughter,^ who 
was only two years old, to Waleran, count de Mellent. 
After Easter, the count hastened to return to Normandy, 
where sharp hostilities were carried on between Eoger de 
Toeni- and Eobert, earl of Leicester,^ to the miserable deso- 
lation of the whole neighbourhood. Between the Eogation 
days and AVliitsuntide, Eoger seized, by stratagem, the royal 
fortress of Yaudreil ; but three days afterwards, count "Wale- 
ran hastened thither with the commonalty of Eouen, and 
recovered the place for the king. Then, two days after 

- This was probably Mary de Blois, at first abbess of Ramsey, and then 
taken from the cloister, and mamed to Matthew of Flanders, third son of 
Thierri d'Alsace, count of Flanders. She re-entered the cloister in 1169, 
and died there in 1182. Waleran married, at a later period, Agnes de 
Montfort, lady of Gournai-sur-Marne. 

^ Roger de Toeni, of whom we have already spoken, p. 147. 

' Robert, earl of Leicester, sumamed Hunchback, lord of Breteuil, and 
brother of Count Waleran. 



158 OEDEEICrS YITALIS. [e.XIII. CH. XXIII. 

"Whitsuntide, lie attacked Acquigni with a strong force, and 
reduced it to ashes. But notwithstanding, on the next day 
Eoger marched against him and burnt three of his vills.^ 
Such were the sort of outrages committed by the Normans, 
gnawing themselves with their own teeth, like the beast 
allegorically represented in the Apocalypse. 

From Christmas to the octave of Whitsuntide, in conse- 
quence of the absence of the king, who was detained beyond 
sea by the multitudinous affairs of his kingdom, Count 
Theobald concluded a truce with the count of Anjou ; and, 
in the mean time, the Norman army waited with impatience 
for the king's coming over. The truce being ended, the 
people were left in great astonishment, having no ruler, and 
not knowing what to do. The villainous freebooters desired 
to see the day when they could, in full liberty, plunder and 
ravage the property of others ; while the unarmed popu- 
lation, and good and honest men, were in the greatest alarm 
at the designs of the sons of Belial, who had no fear of Grod. 

Ch. XXIII. A land of marauders make an incursion on tJie 
lands of St. Evroult — The inhahitants resist and hang the 
rohhers — The garrison of L' Aigle, in revenge, reduce the 
hourg to ashes and ill-treat the monks — The ahbey escapes 
the conflagration. 

EoBEET, surnamed Boet, a famous archer, attached to the 
service of Eicher de L'Aigle, drew around him a band of 
hardy ruffians and cut-throats, who committed daily murders 
and robberies, his skill in archery being only surpassed by 
his detestable villainy. This man, even desecrated by his 
nefarious enterprises, the week of Pentecost, which the Holy 
Spirit rendered illustrious by the sevenfold graces bestowed 
on Christ's disciples ; and, without troubling himself about 
futurity, was bent upon still more infamous projects ; like 
as the good are inflamed by the fires of the Paraclete with 
the love of Grod and their neighbour, to their soul's health, 

* The expedition of Roger against Vaudreuil, was e\ndently marched 
from that castle of Acquigr.i, on which Count Waleran took such fearfiil 
reprisals on May 13. This is the first occasion on which our author 
notices an expedition of the burgesses of Rouen beyond their own 
territory. The three domains laid waste by them were probably la Croix- 
Saint-Leuffroi, Cailli, and Ecardanville-sur-Eure, 



A.D. 1138.] THE BOTJEG OF ST. EYROTJLT BIJENT. 159 

SO the wicked, wildly raving in the spirit of the devil, are 
driven into every sort of evil. Thus, on the fifteenth of the 
calends of June [18th May],^ this banditti rushed like 
wolves on their prey, and avoiding the lands of warlike 
chiefs, and falling on those of the monks, they sought to 
drive off the cattle from the fields where they were quietly 
feeding. But as they were swift to shed blood, so, by just 
retribution of Grod, they soon found destruction and sorrow 
in their ways. Thirty robbers were plundering the honest 
people near Ouche, but on the cries of the shepherds being 
heard, the burghers rushed forth, and, taking twelve of the 
thieves, hung seven of them on the same oak. There Eobert 
Boet was, by an impulse of popular fury, raised to a great 
elevation, with six of his gang ; such was the triumph he 
obtained for his crimes. See how those, who had not feared 
to violate the respect due to the seven consecrated days of 
"Whitsuntide, in their eager haste to ruin their neighbours 
with robbery and murder, perished by hanging, to the like 
number of seven, on the Monday of the week following. 

The garrison of L'Aigle hearing of this on the same day, 
mustered, in great fury, to take revenge for the fate of their 
comrades ; and making a sudden onset on Ouche, and taking 
the place by surprise, set fire to the bourg of St. E\TOult, 
where, in the twinkling of an eye, eighty -four houses were 
reduced to ashes." The monks, thrown into the utmost dis- 
tress, tolled the bells, and chaunted psalms and litanies in 
the church, fearing that instant ruin threatened the monas- 
tery. Some of the brethren went forth among the soldiery, 

» The 18th of May, 1136, fell on the Monday after the octave of 

Whitsuntide. 

^ It is scarcely necessary to remark, in connection with the frequent 
burnings of which we read throughout our author's narrative, and of whole 
towns and villages being quickly reduced to ashes during the wars and 
private hostilities with which Normandy was afflicted, that almost all the 
buildings were constructed of timber. This must have been particularly 
the case at St. Evroult, which was then, as it still is, buried in the depths of 
a vast forest. A large bourg must have arisen in dependence on the abbey 
since 'the saint first planted his staff in the wilderness, for it to have 
contained the number of houses here mentioned. We question whether 
there are so many at the present day ; but it probably presents a more 
desolate appearance than it did in the flourishing days of the abbey. 

Our author, who excels in descriptions of this kind, was probably an 
eye-witness of the scenes which he brings so vividly imder our view. 



160 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.XIII. CH. XXIII. 

humbly intreating them to desist ; and, excusing their people, 
with tears in their eyes, for the punishment inflicted on the 
guilty, they offered justice and lawful satisfaction for that 
transaction. But the soldiers, maddened with fury and 
blind with rage, abused and insulted the mon]5:s ; they 
would listen to no reason, and some of them even dragged 
the religious servants of G-od from their palfries, and were 
for beating them. At last, without any reverence for heaven, 
they made a violent assault on the village, and, forcing their 
way in, pillaged the houses, and then setting them on fire, 
as I have before said, burnt the whole place to the ground. 
Such an expedition, to avenge a set of robbers, justly brought 
disgrace on the soldiers who took arms against innocent 
monks and their vassals, on behalf of ruffians banded to 
perpetrate every sort of crime. Such was the duty that 
Richer de L'Aigle, the godson of the monks, paid to his 
sponsors ! In the same spirit, he offered prayers for the 
souls of Boet, the famous robber, and the rest of the gang ; 
and such were the offerings he made to the church in which 
he was baptised! Baudri also, the priest of L'Aigle, 
marched at the head of his parishioners to the commission 
of this execrable outrage, and was the first to set fire to the 
lodgings of a brother priest ; and thus led the way for his 
flock into the pit of perdition, which yawned for him and all 
his followers. The fury of the flames almost reached the 
church, but through Grod' s mercy the wind changed, and 
drove the conflagration in another direction, to the great 
joy of the crowd who watched its progress. The abbey- 
church, therefore, and the monks' lodgings, with the books 
and ecclesiastical ornaments, were saved. The inhabitants 
of the bourg, with their poor households, in their present 
desolation, sought shelter in the abbey, waiting till Grod's 
providence should send them better times. 

The garrison of L'Aigle vaunted themselves on the spoils 
they took at Ouche, but their rejoicings were soon cut short. 
In the same month they sallied forth against Seez and Gace, 
and had frequent skirmishes with Eoger de Toeni. But 
after they sacked the vill of St. Evroult, no enterprise of 
theirs prospered ; on the contrary, by God's judgment, they 
suffered frequent losses, some of their band being slain and 
others being taken prisoners. It was but just that men who 



A.D. 1136.] KIKG STEPHEN DETAINED IN ENGLAND. 161 

had attacked unarmed and quiet people, whom no fear of 
God induced them to spare, should afterwards encounter, 
without intending it, brave and well-trained troops ; on 
which occasion they were frequently accosted in words of 
shame and derision such as these : " Come hither, soldiers : 
we are not such as wear the tonsure and the cowl, but 
men-at-arms like yourselves. "We, your comrades, chal- 
lenge you to fight, and you ought to learn by experience 
what we are made of" They had often to blush at such 
taunts, and many of them fell, after an obstinate resistance; 
others, seeing the ruin of their comrades, were brought to 
repentance. 

Ch. XXIV. Stephen'' s expedition to Normandy again deferred 
— The country torn hy intestine loars — Death of Boso, 
abbot of Bee. 

After Whitsuntide, King Stephen equipped his fleet for 
sailing over to Normandy ; but while he was waiting near 
the port for a favourable wind, a messenger brought intelli- 
gence of the death of Eoger, bishop of Salisbury, who had 
been entrusted with the government of the whole of Eng- 
land, under his uncle and afterwards by himself In conse- 
quence, Stephen deferred his voyage and returned to 
Salisbury, where finding the bishop in good health, his 
expedition was thus fruitlessly retarded till Lent. 

Meanwhile, Gilbert de Clare ^ engaged in an expedition 
against Exmes, and burnt the new bourg which King Henry 
had lately added to the place, with the church of the holy 
Mother of God. He also made desperate attempts to set fire 
to the old bourg ;^ but they were defeated by Count Talvas, 
who fell upon him suddenly, with other knights and men-at- 
arms, and Gilbert escaped with some difficulty. Henry de 

^ Gilbert de Clare, the brother-in-law of Count Waleran, tvas created, 
two years afterwards, earl of Pembroke. We shall presently hear of his 
brother Walter at Sap. Gilbert's origin was probably derived from 
Beinfaite, the principal fief of that branch of the family in this quarter. 

^ The Bourg-neuf was a small suburb of Exmes, situate to the east, 
and enlarged by Henry I. The church of Notre Dame stood on the spot 
where a priory of Benedictines was afterwards built. The old bourg 
means here the heart of the place. 

YOL. IV. M 



162 OEDEEICUS VITALTS. [b. XIII. CH. XXIV. 

Ferrers^ was taken prisoner in this ajffair, and great numbers 
of the king's partisans were either captured or slain. 

At this time, the counts Waleran and Robert demanded 
aid from Theobald, count de Blois, and engaged him for a 
hundred silver marks to march with them against Eoger de 
Toeni.^ Making an irruption on his territories with an 
immence force, on the feast of St. Barnabas the apostle,^ 
they burnt the cottages of many poor people in three vil- 
lages. Afterwards they fell on a large bourg called Bougi, 
and at the suggestion of the earl of Leicester, set fire to the 
neighbouring houses, and burnt the fine church of St. Mary 
Magdelene,"* with a number of men and women. 

On the same day, Eicher de L'Aigle and Alverede de 
Yerneuil passing with their troops near New Terrieres, 
were boldly set upon and routed by Eobert de Belesme, the 
Malvoisins, and other French knights who were partisans of 
Eoger de Toeni. They escaped with great difficulty, having 
lost many of their party, either slain or made prisoners.^ 

In the third week of June, Count Theobald laid siege to 
Pont-Saint-Pierre, and during a whole moath used every 
efibrt to take it. But William de Fontaines,^ with other 

^ Henrlcus de Ferrariis. He was probably a son of William de 
Ferrieres, near Bernai, who was, as our author has told us, one of the 
most faithful adherents of Duke Robert at the battle of Tinchebrai. 

^ Such was the hereditary hatred which had subsisted between these 
families for a century past. 

'^ The 11th of June, 11 3{). 

* Bougi-sur-Risle, the church of which is, in fact, dedicated to St. 
Mary Magdalene. 

^ This is one of the most obscure passages in our author. • Nothing is 
known of this Robert de Belesme : we shall find him afterwards bearing 
the surname of Poard. Roger de Toeni had taken into his pay the 
Mauvoissins, that is, the vassals of Mauvoissin, lord of Boissi-Mauvoisin, 
and other fiefs in the neighbourhood of Mantes, to oppose them to the 
soldiers of Count Theobald. But where was this New- Ferrieres where they 
encountered Richer de L'Aigle and Alverede de Verneuil ? Was it 
Ferrieres-sur-Risle, at two leagues from Bougi ? If it was recently 
founded, it is possible that our author, not knowing its exact name, called 
it New-Ferrieres, to distinguish it from older places of the same name. 

^ We have found before that the lord of Breteuil ceded his important 
domains in the valley of Andelle to the lord of Conches. The name of 
Gulidmiis de Fontihus is too vague for us to apply it to a person or locality 
that is known. It may, however, be remarked, that there was a family of 
that name in the diocese of Seez. 



A.D. 1136.] SOTJEI^ CONSUMED BY EIEE. 163 

brave soldiers and retainers in the service of Eoger, made 
such an obstinate resistance to the enemy, that they saved 
the place. 

Meanwhile, the venerable Boso, abbot of Bee, having 
worthily governed the abbey for nearly ten years, died on. 
the feast of St. John the Baptist, after a long illness, which 
that most learned man bore with the greatest patience. He 
was succeeded by Theobald the prior, who was elected by a 
chapter of the monks, according to ecclesiastical rule.^ 

On the morrow of the feast of St. John, Ealph, arch- 
deacon of the church of Evreux, was set on by the sons of 
Simon Hareng, while returning from Pacey, and escaped 
with great difficulty. He himself fled to a church which 
happened to be near, and was saved, but his servant and 
companion on the journey was slain while defending his 
master.^ 

Ch. XXV. A great fire at Rouen — The monastery of 
St. Ouen burnt. 

This tumultuous year was truly bissextile, and, as the 
common saying is, the bissext fell on the king and his 
people in Normandy and England. 

In the third week of September, the city of Eouen was 
burnt dovm by a fire which suddenly broke out, and by 
God's judgment the faithful suffered great losses. The 
noble monastery of St. Ouen was, alas! consumed by the 

^ Boso, who was first prior and afterwards (in 1 124) abbot of Bee, died on 
the 24th of June, 1136, at the age of seventy-one years. Our author is not 
more exact than usual in calculating the length of his administration. He 
was the most intimate friend of St. Anselm, who took him to England, 
employed him as his deputy at the council of Clermont, and introduces 
him as interlocutor in one of his dialogues. Mabillon has given extracts 
from the life of Boso, written by William Crespen. He had for successor 
Theobald, who was soon afterwards raised to the archbishopric of Canter- 
bury. 

^ This Simon Hareng probably belonged to the family of Hareng de 
Granville, though that commune is situated on the other side of Evreux. 
But the name of Simon is often afterwards found in it, particularly in 1245 
and 1318. The Simon of 1245 was excommunicated by the chapter of 
St. Evroult for some outrage of himself and his vassals on their property. 
Some part of the family of Hareng lived at Pontaudemer, and are often 
mentioned in the chartulary of Pr^aux. The chapel in which the arch- 
deacon took refuge must be that of St, Genevieve, to the north of the road. 
M 2 



lG4i OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [e.XIIT. CH.XXTI- 

flames, an edifice wMch had been scarcely completed, after 
much labour bestowed on it during eighty years. The 'same 
disaster happened to the convent of nuns built in honour 
of St. Amand, bishop and confessor. 

Ch. XXYI. Irruption of the Anjevins into Normandy — 
JRepulsed hefore Montreuil, Moutiers, Lisieux, and Sap — 
They make an ignominious retreat. 

0^ the Sunday following, the eleventh of the calends 
of October,^ G-eoffrey, count of Anjou, passed the river 
Sarthe, and entered Normandy with a large army. He had 
with him William, duke of Poitiers,^ Geoffrey de Yendome,^ 
the young "William, son of William count de Nevers,* and 
William, count de Ponthieu, surnamed Talvas. These lords, 
and many other commanders and officers joined their forces 
with the Anjevins, and, either to support their prince, or from 
the love of plunder, fell on the Normans, practising every 
kind of villainy. Hence they were called Hilihecs, in hatred 
and contempt, by those whom they harassed with so much 
insolence.''^ 

Pirst, the count of Anjou besieged Carrouges,'' and, in 
three days, took the citadel, which was defended by the 
knight W^alter, the castellan, but he recovered it soon after- 
wards, on the enemy's evacuating it. Ecouche'' was burnt 

* In 1136, the eleventh of the calends of October (21st of September) 
fell on a Monday. The reading should probably be the twelfth. 

■^ William, eighth of that name as coimt of Poitiers, and tenth as duke 
of Aquitaine (1127— April 9, 1137). 

3 Geoffrey de Vendome, second son of Geoffrey III., surnamed Grise- 
gonnelle, by Maud de Ch^teaudun. 

* Probably William III. de Nevers, who succeeded his father, William 
II., in 1147. 

^ It is impossible to give any explanation of this word. It is probably a 
nickname, which passed current among the people at the time, but of 
which there are no written traces except in our author's pages. It appears 
that the version of it given in the original manuscript in this place was 
Guirihecci, which reading we find just afterwards. 

" A bourg in the arrondissement of Alenpon. The first lord of this 
place of Avhom there is any mention was Roger de Carrouges, who lived in 
the time of Henry II. The probability is that Walter was placed in charge 
of the place by the sovereign, and that it had not yet become a feudal 
property. 

' Ecouche was a domain of the lords of Goumai, which they acquired 



A.D. 1136'.] IREUPTION OF THE ANJEYINS. 165 

bj the inhabitants, who abandoned the place, and fled from 
it, leaving the enemy, who advanced cautiously, only smoke 
and ashes. The garrison of Asnebec^ concluded a truce 
for a year ; as Eobert de JSTeubourg, lord of that castle, was 
an acquaintance of GeoiFrey, and, through Count Amauri, 
had long been on terms of intimacy and friendliness with him. 

The Anjevins marched towards the fortress of Montreuil,- 
and assaulted it three times ; but, being stoutly resisted by 
the garrison, they gained nothing but wounds, and retired, 
leaving many of their men dead. Richard, surnamed Basset, 
who, during the life of King Henry, attained great power in 
England, where he was chief justiciary, had a small fief, his 
paternal inheritance, in jNTorraandy ; on which, in the pride 
of his English wealth, he sought to magnify himself above 
his countrymen and equals by the grandeur of his works. 
He, therefore, built a very strong tower of squared stones at 
Montreuil; but on the king's death, AYiUiam de Mont- 
Pincon^ presently took possession of it, fortified it with men 
and arms, and, as I have already noticed, manftdly repulsed 
the as^ults of the Guiribecs. 

The Anjevins then invested the castle called Moutiers- 
Hubert, and, having defeated Paganel,* the commandant, 
who had committed many outrages that same year, obtained 
possession of the place, and exacted a heavy ransom from 
the castellan and thirty men-at-arms. 

through Basilia Fleitel, as part of the inheritance of Ralph T^te-d'Ane, 
her first husband, who died without leaving any issue. 

* Saint Georoes-d'Asnebec, near ^^couche. It came into the possession 
of the lords of Neubourg as their share of the vast inheritance of Roger de 
Beaumont. Henry of Warwick, Robert's father, confirmed the donation 
made to St. Wandrille by Roger Beaumont, of the churches of Asnebec, 
Ranes, and FaveroUea. 

^ Montreuil-au-Houlme, in the snme neighbourhood. We find from 
what follows that it gave origin to the family of Richard Basset, who filled 
so distinguished a post in the affairs of England during the reign of Henry 
I., when he was great justiciary. (See vol. iii. p. 328, note.) He married 
Matilda Ridel, a granddaughter of Hugh, earl of Chester, whose father 
perished in the shipwreck of the Blancke-Ncf. 

2 Mont-Pin9on, near Livarot. In passing by, Argentan, the count of 
Anjou gave the command of it to Enjuger de Bohun, and that of Domfront 
to Alexander. 

* Most probably William Paganel, the eldest brother of Ralph Paganel, 
sheriff of Yorkshire; Moutiers Hubert having always belonged to the elder 
branch of that family, of which it was doubtless the cradle. 



166 OEDERICTJS YITALIS. [b. XIII. CH. XXVI. 

Afterwards, while tlie feast of St. Michael the Archangel 
was celebrated, the enemy's army undertook to lay siege to 
Lisieux. But, while they were proceeding there by hasty 
marclies, "Waleran, Count de Mellent, and other Norman 
lords who were in the place, appointed Alan de Dinan^ to 
defend the city with a stout garrison, while they went forth 
to be more at liberty to obtain succour for the besieged ; 
but the}' watched from a distance, not without apprehension, 
the issue of the affair. Meanwhile, the Bretons, and other 
defenders of the place, observing the great numbers of the 
enemy long before they approached the walls, their courage 
failed, and they shrunk from either advancing to meet them 
or waiting for them in close combat. They, therefore, set 
fire to the city, and reduced it to ashes, thus warning 
the enemy, by their loss, against greater calamities. The 
enemy's army drawing near, and seeing the city, with all its 
wealth, in flames, were excessively enraged and grieved at 
their hopes of plunder being altogether frustrated by 
the booty they expected being consumed in the fire. 
Thus, they sorrowing learned the resolute character of the 
Normans, and admired the bitterness of their implacable 
hatred, which led them to prefer losing all their wealth in 
the conflagration, than to save it while they bent their 
necks to a foreign power. 

However, the violence of the flames was such that they 
were unable to get near the fortress, or find any means of 
giving the assault. They, therefore, wheeled the horses 
round, and, turning towards Sap," used every effort to 
obtain possession of the place. There had stood near the 
church of St. Peter the Apostle, from very ancient times, a 

^ One of the chiefs of the Bretons in the pay of Henry I. 

* Sap. This place, situated in the canton of Vimoutier, is called in the 
great charter of Robert of Leicester, le Sap de la Ferriere. The name is 
not derived, as might be supposed, from the northern languages (in which 
©ran is the term for a fir or pine; e. g., Greenwich, Groen-vigen ! (the bay 
of pines) but is of purely Latin origin — sapinus, a fir-tree. It is also 
remarkable that names of places derived from this word are only to be 
found in Normandy. From the details given in the text, it might be 
supposed that Sap was a place of recent origin, but we find (vol. i. p. .391) 
that it was in existence a century before. Its additional name of Ferri^res 
was given it from the vast quantity of iron ore which was smelted in forges 
there; of which the scoria are still to be seen in a great number of places in 
the neighbourhood. 



A.D. 1136,] THE AKJEYINS EETEEAT. 167 

tall pine tree, from tlie name of wMcli, in tlie vulgar tongue, 
the vill was called Sap, a name still preserved by the bourg 
or castle standing there. It was to this place that the 
Anjevins directed their march on retiring from before 
Lisienx, hoping to take it by surprise ; but they found the 
inhabitants drawn out to make a stout resistance, and pre- 
pared to give them a fierce reception, A sharp encounter 
ensued ; during which the houses were set on fire by both 
parties, the inhabitants and the foreigners. This occurrence 
totally disheartened the defenders of the place. The church 
of St. Peter and the whole village was burnt to the ground, 
and numbers of those who still made resistance being 
wounded, the ruined tower was taken. It was occupied by 
Walter de Clare,^ and Ealph de Coldun, his brother-in-law, 
who, with thirty men-at-arms, held it for a long time 
against the enemy ; but, overpowered by numbers, and 
their strength being exhausted, they were at last taken in 
the tower ; for nearly three thousand bowmen harassed 
them with their arrows, and a number of slingers launched 
stones like hail against the garrison, by which hurricane 
they were cruelly distressed. 

The Anjevins remained in Normandy thirteen days,'' 
securing by their irruption, not the dominion, but the eter- 
nal hatred of the Normans. Their expedition did not bring 
on a general engagement, because the Normans had at this 
time no prince ; but the enemy, making inroads here and 
there, plundering and burning, were defeated by the pea- 
sants, and their forces being diminished by the number of 
their comrades whom they lost in different ways in their 
various attacks, at last they took to flight. Innumerable 

' This Walter de Clare was son of Gilbert de Clare, grandson of Richard 
de Bienfaite, and great-grandson of Gilbert, count de Brionne. Nothing is 
known of Ralph de Coldun, here described as his brother-in-law. He had 
only two brothers, Richard de Clare, and Gilbert, earl of Pembroke (the 
father of Richard Strongbow, earl of Pembroke and Strigul, the conqueror 
of Ireland) ; and a sister named Rohais. 

* They entered Normandy on the 20th of September, and began their 
retreat on the 2nd of October; and reaching Maine on the 3rd, might 
reckon that they had spent these thirteen days much to their disgrace. 
We have seen them before Lisieux on the 29th of September, and on the 
1st of October at Sap. According to our author, the retrograde movement 
commenced on the 2nd, which would make only eleven days in the whole, 
and twelve, if the correction proposed be adopted. 



168 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.XIII. Cn.XXTI. 

were the outrages they committed, and they justly suffered 
similar disasters. Exhibiting no reverence for sacred things, 
they even impiously trod underfoot the sanctuary of the 
Lord, and, as if they were heathens, insulted the priests and 
ministers of God. Some of them, they irreverently stripped 
of their vestments before the holy altars, and others they 
slew while they were ringing the bells and invoking God. 
Nine parish priests went to the count at the same time, and 
made lamentable complaints of the violation of their 
churches and the pillage of the sacred vessels and orna- 
ments. On hearing this account, honest men, and such as 
feared God, deeply lamented these occurrences ; and in con- 
sequence, when Sap was attacked, the chiefs issued orders 
to the whole army, proclaimed by a herald, to prohibit the 
profanation of sacred objects. But, in such a great multi- 
tude, there were numbers of reckless thieves, who set at 
nought the orders of the chiefs ; for, free bands and sturdy 
plunderers had joined the expedition with no other inten- 
tion but, like wolves, to devour those who devoured others. 
Undisciplined vagabonds assembled, like kites, from all 
quarters, however distant, for no other object than pillage, 
slaughter, and conquest. Meanwhile, the leaders, who 
ought to have conducted properly their several commands 
in the expedition, lost sight, I think, in this warfare, of the 
rigour of Eoman discipline, and did not use the moderation 
which heroes employed even in the animosities of war. 
Hence, nearly all disgraced themselves, I think, by scandal- 
ous actions, without any regard to what was right, and 
giving way to every sort of wickedness, jeoparded both 
their souls and bodies, and rendered themselves abominable 
in the sight of God and man. 

The Aujevius slaughtered flocks and herds, and ate the 
flesh raw or half-cooked, without either salt or bread. The 
hides they attempted to carry off into their own country in 
a number of carts. Though, it being the season of autumn, 
provisions were abundant, and after a long peace under a 
good prince, the province was smiling with plenty, so that 
there was no lack of supplies of corn, fruits, meat, and food 
of all kinds ; cooks and bakers were wanting for the service 
of so great a multitude ; and in the disorders of a warlike 
expedition, the administration of many things of the first 



A.D. 1136.] THE ANGEVIKS EETEEAT. 169 

necessity for the use of man was found deficient. The 
Guiribecs, who, after their profanation of sacred things, had 
gorged themselves \vith crude eatables, were, by Grod's just 
judgment, attacked with bowel complaints, and suff'ered so 
severely from diarrhoea that, leaving foul tokens of their 
passage along the roads, numbers of them could scarcely 
crawl home. 

At last, on the calends [1st] of October, while making an 
assault on Sap, which was vigorously opposed by the garri- 
son. Count Greoffrey was severely wounded by a dart in his 
right foot ; the pain of his wound and the discomfiture of 
his host giving him some experience of the animosity of the 
Normans. The same day, towards evening, his wife joined 
him with a reinforcement of several thousand men, but it 
was too late. The next morning, at daybreak, the Angevins 
made a sudden retreat, while the inhabitants of the whole 
country round were stricken with terror. Thus, the fugi- 
tives were in dread of those who trembled before them. 
However, they fled in all haste, ravaging the lands of their 
enemies as well as their allies. It was late before the Nor- 
mans discovered their flight, and they were much grieved at 
not having pursued their enemies and driven them out of 
the country. Only Enguerrand de Courtomer,^ with Eobert 
de Medavi^ and a few other men-at-arms, occupied the fords 
of the Oldon,^ where they stopped many men and horses, 
and carts laden with bread, wine, and other efiects ; and 
forcing the Angevins to throw themselves into the stream 
in terror of death, where there was no ford, many of them 
perished in the depths of the Oldon. The count, who had 
entered Normandy on a foaming steed, with threats in his 

* He was surnamed I'Oison, The Goose. Robert de Courtomer, his 
father, gave the church of St. Stephen at Courtomer to the abbey of St. 
Martin at Seez in 1 089. 

'^ This lord was the son, or certainly the representative of Hugh de 
M^davi, mentioned at the end of the eleventh book. About the year 
1230, Agatha, domina de Meso-Davi, brought this domain to the house of 
Aunou the Falconer. 

^ Now called the Don, which unites with the Orne in the neighbourhood 
of Almenesches. It was probably between Marmouilld and Surdon that 
the Angevins attempted to cross the river. There was a ford at Chaillouet; 
but it was probably defended by the Normans who held the castle of 
Chaillouet. 



170 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XXVII. 

mouth, was now brought home pale and groaning, and car- 
ried in a litter. But, on his return, he lost more by his 
own people than by the enemy ; for, as he passed through 
the wood of Maleffre,^ the count's chamberlain was assassi- 
nated, and his trunks, containing his state dresses and 
precious vessels, were carried off. 

Ch. XXYII. 'Robert de Conclies makes irruptions in tJie dio- 
cese of Evreux — He is taken prisoner, with others. 

"While the Angevins were ravaging the territory of Lisieux 
in the manner already described, and, raving like heathens, 
were committing the most execrable crimes, without any 
fear of God, Eobert de Conches in the diocese of Evreux 
laid waste the neighbouring country, carrying the devouring 
sword and fire through the whole district. He had in his 
company "William de Percy, Eustace's son, Eoger le Begue^ 
and count Eerri,^ and they occupied the attention of count 
Waleran and all the mihtary force of the territory of Ouche, 
to prevent their marching against the Angevins. Boger 
made a vigorous attack on the castle which the count de 
Mellent had built at La Croix-Saint-Leufroi, and though 
he could not take the castle, he and his companions in arms 
violated, though not with impunity, the abbey long ago 
built by St. Ouen in honour of the holy cross which 
he had seen in heaven; committing it to the rule of the 
blessed Leufroi.^ They burnt the monk's bourg, assaulted 

^ Sylva quam Malasiam vacant. The woods of Malleffre, an ancient 
castle and fief in the commune of Arponnai, department of La Sarthe. 
They were so extensive, that they nearly reached the territory of Mont- 
Sor,"in the suburbs of Alen^on, on the left bank of the Sarthe. Henry II. 
built a castle there called Beauvoir. 

2 Roger le Begue, lord of Grossceuvre, son of William Louvel, lord of 
Ivri. 

3 We shall find presently this person called Ferri d'Etarnpes, and that 
his wife brought him the title of count. Who she was is not known, and 
all that we know of Ferri is a charter of his in favour of the priory of 
Longpont, in which he is called Fredericus, filius Pagani de Stamjois, qui 
fuit comes. 

* This is not quite exact. St. Ouen on passing this spot, on his way 
from Rouen to Clichi, in 683, had raised a cross and deposited some 
relics there in memory of a miraculous cross which he had seen in the 
heavens; but the abbey was not founded till some years afterwards by St. 
Leufroi, a native of the diocese of Evreux, and a disciple of St. Saens. 



A.P. 1136.] THE ABBEY ST. LETTEEOI PILLAGED. I7l 

the church, dragged out the monks who fled for conceal- 
ment to their cells in the interior of the monastery, and 
plundered the effects of the monks, and of those who had 
taken refuge with them. But by the avenging hand of the 
most righteous Grod, he lost all shortly afterwards. For the 
day after the retreat of the Ange\dns, which was the third 
of October, Hoger suddenly made a furious irruption, and 
laid waste the rich country in the neighbourhood of Yau- 
dreuil ; murdering, plundering, and burning, without respect 
of persons ; and reduced numbers to misery by stripping 
them of' all they possessed. He also burnt the church of 
St. Stephen,^ but received the punishment of his crime the 
same day. For on the Saturday,^ about vespers, while he 
and his companions were returning, carrying with them in 
great pomp, a large booty and many prisoners. Count Wale- 
ran and Henry de Pommeraie,^ with five hundred men-at- 
arms issued from the neighbouring woods,^ and ranged 
themselves in order of battle against the enemy's band. 
Eoger de Conches, who was very intrepid and courageous, 
had with him but a small force, having sent forward "William 
de Pacy and Roger le Begue to Acquigni with their troops, 
plunder, and captives. However, he made a brave though 
fruitless resistance, until overpowered and borne dovm. by 
numbers he was forced to yield, and being made prisoner, 
with count Terri, and Eobert de Belesme surnamed Poard,^ 
he mourned his misfortune, which filled his enemies with 
joy, and brought security to the peasants in the neighbour- 
hood. While Perri d'Etampes groaned in prison, his wife, 
in whose right he had the title of count, went to the court 

This place has also been called la Croix d'Helton, from the name of the 
proprietor of the land where the abbey was founded ; and MonasteHum 
Madriacense, from the name of the district in which it stood on the banks 
of the Eure. 

* St. Stephen of Vauvrai. This church, which is passed in going to the 
railroad at Louviers, is for the most part Romanesque; and it seems that 
it was not entirely destroyed, or that it was immediately rebuilt. It 
belonged to the abbey of Fecamp, to which it was given by Richard II. 

* The same day, Saturday, October 3. 

' This is the same Henry Pommeraie who commanded the garrison of 
Pont Autou, and engaged with the Count de Meulan at Rouge-Moutier, 
in 1124. 

* The woods of Vaudreuil. 

* See before, p. 162. 



172 OBDERICUS YITALIS. [b. XIII. CH. XXVIII. 

of King Lewis at Paris, and being pregnant, she injured 
herself in riding during her journey back, and soon after- 
wards died in a difficult child-birth. 

How sudden are the vicissitudes of the present life ! The 
joys of the world soon pass away and vanish in the twink- 
ling of an eye from those who pursue them Avith the 
greatest ardour. Temporal honoui's are like bubbles which 
burst and disappear in an instant, and only disappoint and 
deceive those who set their hearts upon them. The lovers 
of the world, pursuing corruptible things, become corrupted 
as they tread the downward paths of vice, and being quickly 
clogged with mire sink to the bottom. AVith toil and diffi- 
culty they attain their lofty honours, and puffed out with 
vain glory, their fall is sudden, and nothing remains of what 
they were, but well-sounding speeches dropped concerning 
them here and there from eloquent lips amongst those who 
survive them. The Omnipotent Creator, therefore, teaches 
mankind, and gives them salutary instructions in various 
ways, not to fix the anchor of their hopes in the sea of this 
fleeting world, nor to attach themselves fatally to transitory 
pleasures that have no profit. " We have here no abiding 
city," as the apostle says, "but we seek one above." ^ 

Ch. XXVIII. Death of several bishops — Their successors — 
JB[enri/ de Blois, bishop of Winchester, visits Normandy — 
its wretched state — An interdict laid on the territories of 
William Talvas. 

I]sr this bissextile year, there were many changes in the 
world after the death of king Henry, and many persons, 
both of the clerical and lay orders, and of the middle and 
lower classes, were snatched away. 

At this time died G-erard, bishop of Angouleme, a man of 
deep learning, who had a great reputation and much influence 
at the court of Eome in the times of the popes Paschal, 
Gelasins, Calixtus, and Honorius. Also, Guy d'Etampes, 
bishop of Mans, departed this life ; and was succeeded by 
Paganus, the archdeacon, a native of Saint Calais.^ More- 

' Hebrews xiii. 14. 

^ Guy d'Etampes, bishop of Mans, died on the 7th of February, 1 136. 
It does not appear why our author calls his successor Paganus. Perhaps, 
it was a surname. He certainly bore the name of Hugh de Saint-Calais, 



A.D. 1136-1137.] HENET DE BLOTS IN NOBMANDT. 173 

over, Anselm, abbot of St. Edmondsbury, and nephew of 
arcbbisbop Anselm, was appointed in place of Gilbert, sur- 
nanied the Universal,^ bishop of London, who was lately 
dead. On the death of William,^ archbishop of Canterbury, 
Henry, King Stephen's brother,^ was chosen to govern the 
metropolitan church, but as according to the canons, a 
bishop cannot be preferred from his own see to another, 
without the authority of the Eoman pontiff, the aforesaid 
bishop of "Winchester crossed the channel during Advent, 
and dispatching envoys to pope Innocent at Pisa, spent the 
winter himself in Normandy. 

There he learnt, from the melancholy accounts of the 
sufferers, the atrocious crimes committed by abandoned men 
in the bissextile year ; heard doleful complaints of the sad 
events which fflled JSTormandy with grief, and had the means 
of seeing with his own eyes undoubted evidences of these 
calamities : such were — houses reduced to ashes, churches 
uni'oofed and void, villages in ruins and depopulated, and the 
whole people sorrowing on their mother's bosom, insolently 
stripped of the necessaries of life, plundered both by their 
own countrymen and by foreigners, because they had no 
protectors, and still without the consolation of having the 
presence and support of a fitting ruler. 

Still more grievous persecutions of various kinds awaited 
unhappy JS'ormandy. In the diocese of Seez, a papal inter- 
dict,^ was put in force over all the territories of AYilliam 

because he was a native of that place, or belonged to the family of its 
lords. It was never the seat of an archdeacon. 

^ Gilbert the Universal, bishop of London (1127), did not die in 1136, 
as our author states, but while on his journey to Rome some time between 
the 8th and 12th of August, 1134. The election of Anselm to succeed 
him having met with opposition, he returned to his abbey at St. Edmund's, 
as before related. 

^ On the 21st of November, 1136. 

^ Henry de Blois, bishop of Winchester, and legate of the see of Rome. 
This ambitious prelate failed in his project, if indeed he ever seriously 
prosecuted it. The English cotemporary historians do not mention it. 
Theobald, abbot of Bee, Avas soon afterwards raised to the archiepiscopal 
see, with the consent of King Stephen, at a synod held in London, under 
Alberic, the pope's legate. 

* This interdict on the diocese of Seez appears to have been issued in 
1 136. John, the bishop, though he had been loaded with benefits by Henry 
I., was one of the most zealous partisans of the usurper Stephen. He only. 



174 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XXX. 

Talvas. The sweet chaunts of divine worship, sounds 
which calm and gladden the hearts of the faithful, suddenly 
ceased ; the laity were prohibited from entering the churches 
for the service of God, and the doors were kept locked ; the 
bells were no longer rung ; the bodies of the dead lay in 
corruption without burial, striking the beholders with fear 
and horror; the pleasures of marriage were forbidden to 
those who sought them ; and the solemn joys of the ecclesi- 
astical ceremonies vanished in the general humiliation. 
The same rigorous discipline was extended to the diocese of 
Evreux, and enforced through all the lands of Eoger de Toeni, 
in order to terrify and restrain the perverse and disorderly 
inhabitants. 

Meanwhile, Eoger himself lies fettered in close confine- 
ment, weeping and groaning for the loss of his liberty of 
action, and cursed by the church for the use he insolently 
made of that liberty, when he had it, in the profanation of 
sacred things ; and all his lands lie under a terrible inter- 
dict. Thus proud and desperate rebels are doubly crushed ; 
but the hard hearts of those who witness such spectacles, 
alas ! are not changed nor converted to amendment of their 
perverse designs. 

Ch. XXIX. A severe drought — Sufferings from it. 
Ik the year of our Lord 1137, the fifteenth indiction, there 
was such a severe drought throughout the world as no one 
in om* times had witnessed before. In many places the 
springs Avere exhausted, the ponds and cisterns were dried 
up, and the streams ceased fiowing. Men and beasts 
suffered the torments of thirst. In some districts they 
went as far as seven leagues for water, and some who were 
carrying it home for themselves or their families on their 
shoulders perished on the road from the excessive heat. 

Ch. XXX. King Stephen goes to Normandy, and is invested 
with the duchy — The Count of Anjou marches an army 
into Isormandy — Stephen, deserted by the Norman lords, 
concludes a truce — The Flemings in his pay. 

Kiis'G Stephen arrived in jSTormandy during the third week 

of all the bishops of Normandy and England, attended the council 
assembled at the Tower of London by Stephen in 1141. However, he 
was reconciled with William Talvas in 1143. 



A.D. 1137.] KING STEPHEN GOES TO NORMANDY. 175 

in March, and landed at La Hogue with a large retinue. 
The news of his coming filled with joy the hearts of the 
poor people, who for a whole year had been left to oppres- 
sion and desolation. 

At the same time William, dulie of Poitiers, touched with 
remorse for the evils which he had lately inflicted on Nor- 
mandy, went in pilgrimage to the shrine of St. James. 
Then, on the sixth day of Passion "Week, the fifth of the 
ides [9th] of April, having received the holy communion, he 
died most piously before the altar of the blessed apostle. 
His commands were that his daughter should be married to 
Louis le Jeune, king of France, and he appointed the king 
heir of all his states : and this was afterwards carried into 
effect. 

Some of the JSTorman lords having raised disturbances 
against King Stephen, he called in the aid of the French 
and Flemings to reduce them to submission. In the month 
of May, King Stephen had a conference with King Lewis, 
and being invested by him in the duchy of Normandy as a 
fief of the crown of France, made a treaty of alliance with 
him on the same terms as his predecessor had done. Being 
now more securely established, on his return he took arms 
against the rebellious Eabel, and besieging his fortresses of 
Lillebonne,^ Villers,^ and Mesidon, he carried fire and sword 
into them with his ovra. troops, and the allied forces his 
auxiliaries. 

Then Greoffrey of Anjou entered Normandy at the head 
of four hundred men-at-arms ; and, taking service on his 
wife's behalf, carried on an active campaign. Commencing 
hostilities in the beginning of May, he prosecuted them 
with great cruelty, chiefly selecting the district of Exmes 
for the theatre of destruction by fire, pillage, and slaughter. 
He burnt the castle and church of Basoches, the property 

^ Lillebonne could not belong to the cliaraberlain Rabel. It was a 
favourite seat of the dukes of Normandy ; secies regia, a dominis Norman- 
novum multum amata et frequentata, says Robert du Mont in his chronicle, 
under the year 1161. The word " liis," therefore, could not apply to this 
castle. Our author may have confounded it with that of Tankerville, 
which stood close by. 

'^ Villers-Chambellan, near Duclair. 



176 OEDEEICIJS YITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XXX. 

of Eoger de Moubrai/ Tvhere sixteen men perished in the 
flames. The monks of Dive* paid one hundred and ten 
silver marks to the count of Anjou, and thus saved their 
lands from utter ruin. In like manner, the monks of Fecamp 
ransomed Argences^ for one hundred marks. At this time 
Eobert, earl of Gloucester,^ and some others were suspected 
of favouring the enemy ; but the garrison of Caen faithfully- 
preserved their allegiance to the king, and safely guarding 
the fortress, Geoffrey and his troops were compelled to 
retirefrom Gue-Beranger^ without obtaining any advantage. 
There William d'Ypres and his troops were eager to engage 
with the Angevins, but as the Normans were jealous of him, 

* Basoches-au-Houlme. This lordship was still called the honour of 
Moubrai, when the register of Philip Augustus was made. 

2 The monks of St. Pierre- sur-Dive. 
^ The priory of Argences. 

* Robert, earl of Gloucester, possessed vast domains as son-in-law and 
heir of Robert Fitz-Hamon. He had gone over to England in 1136, in 
much embarrassment what line of policy he should adopt towards Stephen, 
but finding that he could not for the time make head against the king, who 
was very popular, and freely lavished the immense wealth which he 
derived from the treasury of Henry I., he swore allegiance to Stephen, but 
with the reservation, " so long as he was left undisturbed in his rights and 
dignities, and the king kept his covenants with him." The earl foresaw 
that it would not be long before he should be relieved of his engagement 
by some breach of faith on the part of the usurper, which happened within 
a year after. See William of Malmesbury's iModern History, p. 492, for 
an able view of the earl's position at this time. 

^ This place is mentioned in the history of Normandy as near the field 
of battle of Valesdunes, and as having given access to Duke William's junc- 
tion with the king of France in 1047. See the Roman de Rou, t. ii. p. 30. 
M. De Caumont places it on the Muance, near Argences ; but M. Le 
Prevost thinks, in common with Mr. Stapleton, that the ford was on the 
Semillon, between Vimont and Bellengreville, where it is found in the 
excellent map of the diocese of Lisieux by Danville. 

There was a fair at Gue-Beranger, the profits of which amounted to 
seven li\Tes in 1180, so that it must then have been a place of some 
importance. 

Here it was that the Angevin army received a check from the presence 
of William d'Ypres and his Flemings. It appears to have marched from 
the Hiemois by the road through St. Pierre-sur-Dive, which joins that of 
Lisieux at the Gue-Beranger. If King Stephen had been still engaged in 
his expedition against Mesidon, that encounter between the two 
armies, for which the English king showed so much impatience a month 
afterwards, must now have taken place. 



A.D. 1137.] THE FLEMINGS IN STEPHEN'S PAT. 177 

and refused to support his movements, lie drew off his 
forces, and abandoning his faithless allies, joined the king 
beyond the Seine. 

King Stephen, having concluded a peace with Eabel, went 
into the district of Evreux, and thrust Roger de Conches 
out of the prison in which he had been confined for six 
months;^ but he imposed upon him severe conditions in 
punishment for his outrageous conduct. Eotrou, count of 
Mortain, and Eicher de L'Aigle he gained over to his side, 
by gi'anting them all that their greedy ambition coveted 
To the count he gave the castle of Moulins,^ and Bonmoulins^ 
to Eicher, and having thus secured their allegiance, he 
opposed them to his enemies on the frontier of JN'ormandj ; 
thinking it more politic to make small sacrifices as the means 
of preserving what was more important, than by attempt- 
ing to grasp all, to run the risk of losing his adherents 
and the support they could render him. He had great 
confidence in William d'Ypres and the other Flemings,** and 
showed them great favour ; at which the Norman lords were 
much incensed, and withdrawing themselves with address 
from the king's service took every means of privately 

^ Reiner de L'Aigle was made prisoner in October. His captivity 
must, therefore, have lasted more than six months. 

^ MouIins-la-Marche. 

^ Bonmoulins. The last heir of these two castles perished, as we have 
seen, in the shipwreck of the Blanche-Nef. King Henry lost no time in 
taking possession of them and completing the fortifications. Those, 
indeed, of Bonmoulins appear to have been entirely his work. 

' The Flemings in the pay of King Stephen. It must not be under- 
stood that he had disbanded his other auxiliary troops, the Bretons ; but 
they were chiefly employed in England, where they were suffered to jiillagc 
the country with impunity. William d'Ypres was a willing instrument in 
all the king's boldest and most unscrupulous enterprises. There was work 
found for him and his Flemish bands in England also, among the other 
scourges of that unhappy country in these disturbed times. But he appears 
to have been a merely mercenary leader of condottieri, and was the lijst to 
fly at the battle of Lincoln. There is a curious passage in the Royal M.ti. 
of Henry of Huntingdon's History, unpublished in Saville's text, which 
represents the earl of Gloucester as saying before the battle: "Hitherto 
I have said nothing of that runaway William d'Ypres, for words have not 
yet been found to describe fitly the Aviles and crooked paths of his treasons, 
and the ditgusting loathsomeness of his impurities.'' His earlier career in 
his own country was stained with treachery and blood, as we have already 
seen in the preceding book, p. 83 of this volume. 

VOL. IT. F 



178 OEDERICUS VITA.LIS. [b. XIII. CH. XXX. 

annoying the Flemings, of whom they were jealous.^ The 
country people became, therefore, the prey of many disasters. 
Many fell by the sword of the enemy, and others met their 
fate from an unexpected quarter. 

In the month of June, King Stephen went to Lisieux, 
and assembled there a large force with the intention of 
laying siege to Argentan, or some other fortress where he 
should fall in with G-eoffrey of Anjou, being very desirous 
to bring him to a general engagement. But his lords were 
averse to it, and did all in their power to dissuade the king 
from giving battle. In this expedition there arose a violent 
quarrel between the Normans and the Flemings, who came 
to blows, and there was a dreadful slaughter on both sides. 
This threw the whole army into disorder, and most of the 
leaders left the camp without taking leave of the king ; each 
body of vassals following its own chief. The king, seeing 
his troops retire without facing the enemy, chafed with fury 
and pursued the deserters as far as Pontaudemer. There 
he overtook and detained Hugh de Grournai,^ the youthful 
"William de Warrenne,^ and other hot-brained young lords, 
using his utmost address to mollify them either with fair 
words or by working on their fears, but he did not succeed 
in soothing their malevolent and crafty minds. "Wherefore, 
as from certain circumstances he held them in suspicion, he 
did not venture to recall them to the war, but adopted the 
wiser counsel, as some think, of making a truce with the 
enemy for two years.^ In consequence, by Grod's assistance, 
in the month of June peace and tranquillity were restored 
to Normandy. The unarmed people, who had been dis- 
persed, returned to their cottages, and for a time remained 

^ The earl of Gloucester having followed Stephen to Normandy at 
Easter, William d'Ypres was employed by the king to involve him in 
snares, from which, however, he escaped. Stephen had recourse to all 
sorts of unworthy humiliations in his attempts at reconciliation with this 
powerful nobleman, who remained in Normandy after his own departure 
thinking himself more safe there, and in a better position to profit by the 
course affairs might take. 

2 Hugh III. de Goumai. 

^ William de Warrenne, earl of Surrey. 

* By the terms agreed on, Stephen was to pay yearly five thousand 
marks to the count of Anjou. He, also, engaged to pay his o\vn elder 
brother Theobald, count de Blois, two thousand marks yearly, in compen- 
sation for his prior claim to the throne of England. 



A.D. 1137.] DEATH OF WAEI]^, ABBOT OF ST. ETliOULT. 179 

quiet, and enjoyed some measure of security and repose, 
though in great indigence. 

Ch. XXXI. The last lioiirs of Allot Warin — His death and 
epitaph — Richard of Leicester elected allot. 

Meattwhile, Warin, abbot of St. Evroult, after serving God 
under the monastic rule for forty -three years, being now 
sixty-three years of age, made a happy end. On the 
seventeenth of the calends of July [15th June] he sang 
mass with great devotion in the morning, and buried the 
corpse of a soldier; but in the course of the day he took to 
his bed, and lay dangerously ill for five days, during which 
the sick man heard mass daily said, an office which he had 
regidarly performed himself for the thirty years of his 
priesthood. Seeing now that he was going the way of all 
flesh, he earnestly sought the viaticum for the great journey, 
and prepared to present himself at the court of the Most 
High King of Sabaoth by confessing his sins, with tears in 
his eyes, earnest and constant prayer, the holy unction and 
the life-giving participation of the Lord's body. At last, 
strengthened with these great aids, he departed on the 
eleventh of the calends of July [21st June], and having 
performed all that belonged to the faithful champion of 
Christ, and commended himself and his spiritual sons to 
the Lord God, fell asleep in the fifteenth year of his 
government. Gilbert, abbot of the monastery of Se'ez,^ was 
present at his death, and joined the sorrowing brethren in 
paying the last oEices to their lamented father. The clouds 
of tribulation were gathering over the whole province, at 
the time that Abbot Warin, the son of Eobert and Giselle, 
was snatched away, and buried in the chapter by the side of 
the tomb of Abbot Osbern. On his death, the monks of 
St. Evroult all assembled and held a general conference to 
provide against any lapse in the administration of the affairs 
of their monastery. Then on St. John Baptist's day, while 

^ Gilbert, the abbot of St. Martin of Seez. His father's name was 
Fridebourg. During his administration, Michael, bishop of Tarasco, gave 
to the abbey a chm'ch in the territory of Tudela, probably in acknowledg- 
ment of the services rendered by the soldiers of the diocese of Seez, and 
especially by Robert Burdet (before mentioned, p. 114) to the Christians 
beyond the Pyrenees. 

N 2 



180 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XXXI. 

tliey were celebrating the feast of tlie saint, they held a 
chapter, and taking into consideration the rule of St. Bene- 
dict, and the charter granted them by "William, duke and 
afterwards king, in concert with the bishops and lords of 
Normandy, as well as the privileges and ancient customs of 
the church, the brethren unanimously elected Richard of 
Leicester,^ a learned, pious, and eloquent monk, eminent for 
many great and illustrious gifts. He was absent at the 
time, and there was no one in that assembly connected with 
him by ties of kindred. He expected nothing of the kind, 
being laboriously employed in rural affairs in England for 
the service of the monks. Some time before he had been 
sent there by his abbot, and for the last six months had 
been diligently engaged on ecclesiastical business. Having 
been a canon of Leicester for nearly sixteen years, he had 
acquired a knowledge of the English people and language ; 
and before his profession was long resident at the court of 
Eobert, earl of Mellent, who employed him as judge of his 
causes, keeper of his conscience, and privy counsellor in 
transacting his affairs. The monks, taking into their con- 
sideration these and other proofs of his worth and fitness to 
rule, elected him to govern their church ; and their choice 
was ratified by King Stephen and his great lords. 

The monks of St. Evroult, always devoted to their 
masters and superiors, placed a white stone over the grave 
of the venerable Abbot "Warin; and for the love which I 
bore to my oldand dear associate, and afterwards my spiritual 
father, I composed the following epitaph to be engraved 
upon it : 

Hac tegitur petra Guarini corpus et ossa, 
Qui quater undinis utici monachus fuit aunis, 
Certator fortis contra tentamina carnis, 
Dante Deo, Celebris micuit virtutibus almis. 



1 Richard had the surname of Leicester, from his having before he 
embraced the monastic life, been for sixteen years one of the secular 
canons of the chapter of St. Mary-in-the-Fields, at Leicester, which was 
converted into an abbey by Robert the Hunchback, in 1143. This college 
was founded by Robert count de Meulan [earl of Mellent] his father. 
The authors of the Gallia Christiana speak of Abbot Richard as an 
Englishman by birth, but our author's account of him conveys clearly a 
contrary impression. 



A.D. 1137.] DEATH OP LOUIS LE GEOS. 181 

De grege, pro meritis, a fratribus ad moderamen 
Sumitur, \it sociis ferret speciale juvamen. 
Annis bis septem veneranter floruit abbas, 
Inter prsesentes, sitiens aeterna, ruinas. 
Viginti soles Junio complente, recessit 
Hie pater a vita, subjectis flentibus, ist^. 
Cuncta regens nomen det ei super aethera lumen ! 

Beneath this stone good Abbot Warin lies ; 
Loved for his virtues, gentle, pure, and wise; 
God gave him grace, for twenty years and two, 
To war with fleshly lusts, a monk of St. Evroult. 
Then by the brethren, to their special aid, 
Elected for his worth, and abbot made. 
Revered, he ruled this house for years twice seven, 
Till, "mid a ruined land he sighed for heaven. 
June's twentieth sun was sinking in the west. 
When father Warin found his long sought rest, 
His loving flock surrounding him in tears ; 
God give him light above the starry spheres ! 

Ch. XXXII. Death of Louis h Gros, and accession of 
Louis le Jeune — TrouUes in Normandy — Eccjploits of 
Bichard the Foreste?^ and Gelduin of Dol — King Stephen 
returns to England — A conspiracy there crushed. 
DuEiiTGl- tlae months of July and August tlie world was 
burnt up with excessive heat, which lasted till the ides of 
September [13th September], and occasioned various kinds 
of fatal maladies with which mankind were afflicted. At 
this time King Louis sent for his son Louis Tlorus,^ and 
appointing as his guardians Theobald, count palatine, and 
Ealph de Peronne, dispatched him vrith the army of France 
into Aquitaine, to marry the daughter of the duke of 
Poitiers, and take possession of the duchy, according to tlie 
will of the late Luke "William. 

Meanwhile, King Louis fell sick in the forest of Gros- 
Bois, from the effects of the great heat of the summer •; 

1 This surname is often given by Ordericus to Louis le Jeune. 

* See before, p. 148, what our author says of a former attack of the 
same malady, diarrhoea, which brought Louis le Gros to his end on August 
1, 1137. These attacks appear to have been caused by the intemperance 
to which Louis's father, as well as himself, was addicted. " Need T 
speak," says Henry of Huntingdon in his admirable Letter to Walter, to 
which we have often referred, " of Philip kin^r of France, and Lewis, his 
son, both of whom reigned in my time ; whose God was their belly, and, 
indeed, a fatal enemy it was ; for such was their gluttony, that they became 



182 OEDEEICTJS VITALIS. [b.XIII. CH. XXXII. 

and, liis illness increasing, departed this life on the second 
of the nones of August [4th August], and was buried with 
royal pomp among the kings of France in the abbey of St. 
Denis the Areopagite. On the following Sunday the boy 
Louis was crowned at Poitiers,^ and thus succeeded to the 
kingdom of France, as well as the duchy of Aquitaine, which 
none of his ancestors had held. 

In Xormandy the peace was broken by the turbulent 
Eoger le Begue,' and King Stephen led an army against 
him, and got possession of his castle called Grrosoeuvre in 
the territory of Evreux. This forced the rebellious freebooter 
to sue for peace with the king, and, after much suffering, 
that country had rest for a while. Afterwards the king 
razed to the ground the stronghold of Quitri in the Vexin,^ 
which was a den of thieves. In consequence, William de 
Chaumont and his son Osmond took arms against the king, 
and, to the ruin of their house, resolved on hostilities. 

In the territory of Avranches, Bichard, surnamed Silva- 
nus,* built a very strong fortress at Saint-Pois ; and having 

80 fat as not to be able to support themselves. Philip died long ago of 
plethora ; Lewis has now shared the same fate." 

The Prench historians make Louis die at Paris, and it is possible he 
may have been conveyed there from the forest of Iveline, near Rambouillet, 
which M. Le Prevost says is the place mentioned here. In the text it is 
called Grandis Sylva, literally, Gros-Bois. 

* Louis Le Jeune, here described as puer, was seventeen years old at 
this time. He was on his return after marrying Eleanor of Guyenne at 
Bordeaux, when he received the news of his father's death. On Sunday 
the 8th of August, he was crowned at Poitiers, not as king of France, as he 
had already been crowned by Innocent II., but as duke of Aquitaine. 

^ Roger Le Begue, lord of Grcssa;uvre (Grandis Svlva), near St. Andr^, 
of whom we have spoken before, p. 170. 

^ Quitri, between St. Clair-sur-Epte and Andelis. We have already 
spoken of this place and its lords. It is this Wiliiam de Chaumont 
who appears to have married a natural daughter of Louis le Gros. A 
charter of his exists, under the date of 1119, in the chartulary of St. Peter 
at Chartres. His son Osmond II. is little known. 

* Ricardus cognomento Silvanus. The French editors of Ordericus have 
been unable to discover the origin of this person, and consider him one of 
the adventurers who rose to importance in those troublesome times. We 
find him, however, in the possession of a castle and vill; and it is remarked 
that in the inquest made by Robert earl of Gloucester, after the death of 
Bishop Richard II., of the fiefs held of the see of Bayeux and the services 
due for them, there is found a " William son of Silvanus," who held five 
knights' fees (a considerable domain) under Hugh de Moutfort, out of 



A.D. 1137.] EICHAED SILYANUS SLAIN. 183 

collected marauders from all parts, after the death of King 
Henry, made a cruel slaughter of the people of God. He 
continued his ravages for a long time ; God, however, when 
he woLild, suddenly struck him down with the strength of 
his avenging arm. For this freebooter having salUed forth 
on a certain day, intent on pillage, during his absence a 
band of soldiers from the castles in the neighbourhood set 
on fire the village of Saint-Pois.^ Silvanus seeing the smoke 
of his burning village, put spurs to his horse, and wheeling 
round, hastened back with his followers by the road he had 
come. Swifter than' them, he was the first to encounter the 
enemy ; and being thrust through the body by the lance of 
a man-at-arms, he fell dead on the spot. Then the royal 
troops advanced to the fort, and summoned the guard to 
surrender the tower to the king. As they would not obey 
this demand, the others showed them the corpse of their 
deceased lord, which they cast with ignominy before the 
gate. The garrison perceiving this grievous misfortune, 
were struck with terror ; and having surrendered themselves 
and the fort to the royal troops in gloomy silence, buried 
the body of the deceased by the road-side, out of the 
cemetery. 

At the same time the Bretons flew to arms under Gelduin 
of Dol,^ their leader in every outrage, and made an inroad 

eight which Hugh himself held of the bishop. Silvanus, as every one 
knows, is equivalent to Forestarius, and in the Domesday book a Ricardus 
Forcstarius, who came in with the Conqueror, appears as holding in capite 
five manors in Staffordshire. From the identity of both the christian and 
surname it may be conjectured that this Richard Forester was the father 
of, or otherwise nearly related to, the Richard mentioned by our author. 
The Richard of the Domesday Book had a son, Orraus le Guidon, the 
founder of the family of Biddulph, who took the name from the principal 
estate in Staftbrdshu-e. The conjecture derives some slight confirmation 
from Ormus having married a daughter of Nicholas de Beauchamp, the 
viscount, whose family were seated at a place of that name very near 
Richard's castle of Pois, in the Avranches. 

^ Apud Sanctum Paternum. The place intended by oiu- author is 
not that celebrated as the abode and burial place of St. Paternus, 
bishop of Avranches, which appears to have, in early times, borne the 
name of Stssciacus. Richard's castle and vill stood at a place now called 
Saint-Pois, in the canton of Sourdeval, forming part of the old diocese of 
Avranches, while Saint Pair-sur-Mer belongs to that of Coutances. 

^ This adventurer, a leader of mercenary bands in Stephen's pay like 
William d' Ypres, was a Breton, and probably a native of Dol. 



184 OEDEEICTJS YTTALIS. [b.XIII. CH. XXXII. 

on the domain of St. Michael the archangel, in-peril-of-the- 
sea, and the adjoining territory.^ Taking much booty at 
various times, they inflicted grievous losses on innocent 
people. But after causing the peasants great damage, the 
divine vengeance scattered this band of robbers by crushing 
their head. On a certain day the fierce Gi-elduin led an 
expedition of one hundred and forty men-at-arms, with a 
large body of foot-soldiers, and having seized a vast quantity 
of plunder, and a number of captives, began to return in 
great triumph ; but the reflux of the tide kept them all on 
the shore. Meanwhile, roused by th^ cries of the poor 
people, twenty J^orman men-at-arms came in pursuit of the 
robbers. Upon this, G-elduin hearing the shouts in the rear, 
turned against the pursuers with ten horsemen, having no 
defensive armour except their shields. The jN'ormans 
charged them fiercely, and the Bretons giving way and 
taking to flight, Grelduin was slain before he could join the 
main body of his comrades. The routed freebooters lost 
their plunder, and making their escape had lamentable 
tidings to carry back to their friends. 

Thus was unhappy Normandy torn by such storms as 
these, mangled by blows mutually given by the swords of 
her own sons, and plunged in grief by the slaughter perpe- 
trated on all sides. She suflTered the most cruel calamities, 
and had daily to apprehend still worse evils, because she 
saw, to her sorrow, the country left without a governor. 
In this state of aflTairs, King Stephen received intelligence 
of intestine disturbances among the English, in consequence 
of which he lost no time in crossing over to England during 
Advent,^ taking with him the counts Waleran and Eobert, 
with nearly all the great jN^orman lords. However, he ap- 
pointed AVilliam de Eoumare, and Eoger the viscount,^ with 

^ Mount St, Michael stands at the extreme frontier of Normandy. The 
Bretons even assert that in ancient times it formed part of their province, 
and was separated from it by a change in the channel of the Couesnon, a 
river which has frequently varied its course. This gave rise to the follow- 
ing couplet : — 

" Couesnon, par sa folie, 
A mis le Mont en Normandie." 

^ It appears that it was very near Christmas : iii ipso vestihulo jVatalts 
Domini. 

^ Roger II. viscount of the Cotentin, brother and successor of Nigel III. 



A.D. 1137.] STEPHEI^" RETUEITS TO E2^^GLAND. 185 

others, justiciaries, commanding tliem to accomplish what 
he had been unable to effect in person, namely, to do 
justice to the inhabitants, and procure peace for the 
defenceless people. 

On his return to England he found the kingdom in a verj 
disturbed state, and a hotbed of cruelty and bloody treason. 
For some pestilent men had formed a conspiracy, and 
encouraged each other by clandestine plots to the wicked 
enterprise of massacring all the Normans on an appointed 
day, and giving up the government of England to the Scots. ^ 
This treason was first divulged to Bishop Nigel* by some of 

At his death his estates passed to his sister Letitia, who married Jourdain 
Taisson. 

^ The French editors of Ordericus question at least the ultimate object of 
this conspiracy, to which, they remark, the advanced age and pacific 
character of the king of Scots did not promise much success. They, also, 
observe with truth that, in the spring of 1136, the two kings, meeting in 
the north of England, had come to terms. But David had then invaded 
Northumbria and taken Newcastle, and was only deterred from prosecuting 
his advantages by the overwhelming force brought against him by Stephen. 
When the two kings met at Durham, David refused to do homage to 
Stephen, alleging his oath of fealty to the empress Matilda, but he allowed 
his son Henry to swear allegiance to the king of England. There is no 
doubt that the king of Scots from the first fomented the troubles in 
England in the interest of Matilda, who was his niece, though ; not as our 
author intimates, in his own. The pacification now made was only a 
hollow truce, and when the great English lords broke into open revolt two 
years afterwards, the Scots, in concert with them, invaded the north of 
England, and after committing great atrocities, formed part of the army 
which was signally defeated at the battle of " the Standard," which our 
author notices in its place. The author of Gesta Stepkani says that, at 
first, David prudently waited the result, watching in silence the course of 
events; but Henry of Huntingdon relates the irruption of the Scots into 
Northumbria, in the first month of Stephen's usurpation, and the occur- 
rences at Durham just mentioned. 

^ Nigel, bishop of Ely, nephew of Roger, bishop of Salisbury, was 
advanced to the bishopric " after Whitsuntide" [May 28th], 1133, by the 
especial favour of Henry I. Both Nigel and his uncle were two of the most 
powerful prelates and able statesmen of those times. Though it appears 
from the fact here stated by our author that he was the principal means of 
nipping in the bud, for the moment, the rising disaffection of the English 
nobles, we shall find him afterwards in arms against Stephen. 

But Bishop Nigel is most distinguished by having been one of the 
greatest financiers of the middle ages, and the founder of the system of 
keeping the public accounts in England. See the Pipe Rolls of the 31st 
year of Henry I., where he often appears under the name of Nigdlus nepos 
episcopi; and there is little doubt that this valuable record was made under 



186 OEDEEICTJS VITALIS. [b.XIII. CH. XXXIII. 

the conspirators, and communicated by him to tlie other 
bishops and peers of the realm, and the royal officers and 
ministers. Many of the traitorous conspirators were thus 
detected ; and, being convicted, suifered the penalty of their 
atrocious crime by death on the gallows, or other' kinds of 
capital punishment. Some, however, being sensible of their 
guilt, fled before they were informed against, and, accused by 
their own consciences, abandoned all their possessions and 
honours, and went into voluntary exile. The more powerful 
of those who were concerned in the rebellion took courage 
to make a bold resistance, and formed a league with the 
Scots and "Welsh, and other disaffected and disloyal people, 
for the ruin of the English nation. 

Ch. XXXIII. Affairs in tlie JEast — Fulk, King of Jerusalem, 
defeated hy the infidels — Besieged in the castle of Mont- 
Iteal — Crusaders march to his relief. 
At this time pilgrims arrived from the eastern parts, who 
spread through the countries of the "West gloomy reports, 
which deeply saddened the hearts of the faithful who were 
inflamed with the love of Grod and their neighbour. They 
brought the news that, in this same year. Pons, count of 
Tripoli,^ had fought a battle with the G-entiles in which he 
and many others fell by the sword. This so much encou- 
raged Amir-Sanguin," king of Aleppo, that, assembling his 
forces during the autumn, he marched with a great army 
into the territories of the Christians, and putting his troops 
in battle array, challenged them to fight. On hearing this, 
Fftlk, king of Jerusalem, sent messengers into every part of 
his kingdom, and summoned all who were able to bear arms 
to join his standard, so that he led to battle nearly six thou- 
sand men ; leaving only the women and unarmed clergy in 
charge of the towns ; all others were commanded to march 
to the war without admitting any excuse.^ 

his direction. After having had the glory of creating the English exche- 
quer under Henry I., he lived to restore it under Henry II., after the 
troubles and waste of the reign of Stephen had thrown it into disorder. 
He survived till 1169. 

^ Pons, count of Tripoli, the second husband of Cicely of France, fell, 
as our author relates, this year, 1137. He was slain under the walls of 
his own castle of Monte Pelegrino, in an engagement with the infidels. 

2 Emadeddin Zenghi, sultan of Moussoul and Aleppo. 

3 The details of these transactions in the East, like those given by our 



A.D. 1137.] DEFEAT OF FULK, KTSOr OF JEEUSALEM. 187 

At length the two armies met, and, an engagement fol- 
lowing, both sides fought with great braveiy. Thousands 
of the Pagans fell without number, but by a judgment of 
Grod, all whose decrees are just and righteous, nearly the 
whole Christian army was annihilated, all, except thirty 
knights and men-at-arms, being cut in pieces. The king 
only, with ten of his own household troops, and eighteen 
Knight-Templars, escaped from the slaughter and, took 
refuge in a certain castle which Baldwin I. had built before 
Damascus, called Mont-Eeal, where they stoutly defended 
themselves for a while, though they were closely besieged. 
Thus the whole army fell for the faith of Christ, except the 
few who, as already said, escaped with the king with much 
difficulty. 

Sanguin, elated with his victory, although it was accom- 
panied by the loss of so many thousands of his own troops 
by the swords of the Christians, pursued the fugitives and 
laid siege to the castle, pressing the remnant who had 
escaped and defended the place with repeated assaults of 
diiferent kinds. The besieged, in the midst of great straits 
to which they were reduced, suffered most from famine, and 
being in want of bread, were forced to satisfy their hunger 
with horse-flesh and other kinds of unclean and unheard-of 
food. In this state of want, the king himself became 
steward, and served out to each of his comrades morsels of 
the flesh of asses and dogs. 

Meanwhile Ealph, the bishop of Jerusalem, having heard 
of the calamitous condition of his friends, was greatly dis- 
tressed, and reflected deeply on the means by which he 
might afford relief to the beleaguered martyi's. First he 
paid visits to all the pious recluses who, intent on heavenly 
meditations, dwelt within the walls of Jerusalem, and 
implored them to join their earnest prayers with those of 
the other inhabitants of the holy city to the Lord Saviour of 

author towards the end of his tenth book, were probably derived by Orde- 
ricus from the reports of pilgrims, partaking of the inexactness and 
colouring Avhich would probably be conveyed from such a source; and he 
had no time to correct them from better materials before the close of his 
historical labours. Among other incongmities, one may be mentioned as a 
specimen of the rest; namely, the existence at this period of a patriarch of 
Jerusalem named Ralph, while William de Malines filled that see from 
1130 to 1144 or 1145. 



188 OEDEEICTIS YITALIS. [b.XIII. CH. XXXIII. 

all mankind for the common welfare of his people. He, 
then enjoined the same on both the clergy and laity, and 
instituted a fast by all for three days, not exempting women 
and children, or even the beasts, from this suffering, which 
resembled that of the Mnevites. This fast having been 
observed with willing and devout obedience, the patriarch 
proceeded to a seaport, and there, by God's will, that which 
he most desired met his eyes. 

He saw from afar four ships full of men nearing the 
shore, and by the sign of the cross of salvation which he 
perceived on their mantles, discovered that they were 
Christians. Pull of joy, he waited till they arrived in port, 
and respectfully saluted them as they disembarked from the 
ships. As soon as they had reached an open spot, he thus 
addressed them : " Te are tridy blessed and beloved of Grod, 
for the heavenly court expects you to become partakers of 
its blessedness. Lo ! now if a pure faith burns within you, 
doubtless an opportunity of martyrdom is oflfered to you simi- 
lar to that for which the holy champions of Christ, George 
and Theodore, Demetrius and Sebastian, devotedly contended 
against Satan and his crew, and gloriously conquering them 
after a sharp encounter, received in triumph the eternal 
cro\Mi from the King of Sabaoth. I pray that a like fortune 
may attend you, and that he may bestow on you a like 
reward! 

" Know, then, that the cruel Sanguin and his Gentile 
army lately invaded our territories, and having cut in pieces 
the army of Christ, are now closely besieging the king of 
Jerusalem with a few of his followers in a certain castle, and 
try all methods of forcing them to surrender. Our people, 
hoping in God, endeavour to make a stout resistance, and 
not unmindful of the wondrous things wrought by heaven, 
expect from thence speedy help, choosing rather, in the 
Lord's name, to follow their comrades in death, than, while 
life remains, to submit with ignominy to the yoke of the 
Gentiles. Tou have now heard enough of the circum- 
stances, and as you are men of prudence and feeling, you 
will understand what I wish, and what is necessary, to be 
done in such an emergency." 

At these words all willingly offered to march against the 
Pagans, and desired to succour their besieged brethren 



A,D. 1137.] FULK EELEASED UT CEUSADEES. 189 

wdth all their strengtli. Thereupon the joyful patriarch 
said: "We render thanks to God, the Almighty Adonai, 
who ever vouchsafes to relieve his people with ready conso- 
lation. Now, therefore, you who, for the love of heaven, 
have quitted your native land, leaving your beloved wives 
and long-sought wealth, and encountering many sufferings 
by sea and land, have come hither, following the example 
of the saints, take the shield of faith, and succour the sanc- 
tuary of Grod which you have sought from afar. The Lord ia 
with you who brought swift consolation to the besieged in 
Bethulia by the hands of a woman ; for by Judith, a widow, 
he cut off the head of the proud Holophernes, and overthrow- 
ing the Assyrians, refreshed in his goodness his thirsty 
people, giving them a victory which loaded them with vast 
spoils, and magnifying them above all the surrounding 
nations. By the prophet Ezechiel he promised security to 
King Hezekiah when he was shut up in Jerusalem, and the 
night following caused the destroying angel to consume a 
hundred and eighty-five thousand Assyrians, and put to 
a shameful flight the haughty king Sennacherib, who had 
uttered blasphemies and atrocious threats. Consider these 
and many other such divine operations, and trusting in the 
power of God, march to the battle." • , 

Having thus instructed the Christian bands with salutary 
admonitions, he led them in arms against the Tui'kish 
troops. The sentinels of the Pagans perceiving a large army 
of Christians advancing from the sea, immediately reported 
it to their prince, who sent able and eloquent envoys to 
meet the strangers, and inquire diligently who they were, 
and whither they were going. They replied : " We are 
Christians ; we desire to succour with all our might our 
brethren who, we hear, are besieged by the Pagans, and we 
ardently wish to avenge in battle the others who are slain." 
They were desired, in reply, to rest quiet for the present, 
and be ready for battle in three days. 

In the meantime, the crafty Sanguin demanded a parley 
with King Pulk, and among many wily proposals spoke 
thus : " I greatly compassionate your nobleness, and as you 
are a king, would save you if you will suffer me. I know 
perfectly your position and the weakness of your force. 
You, and all who are shut up with you, are enfeebled by 



190 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [e.XIII. CH.XXXIIT. 

famine, nor can you expect relief from any quarter. Make 
peace, therefore, witli me ; surrender the castle and all who 
are in it, and I will let you go free." Pulk replied : " Far 
be it from me to become a traitor to my brethren. This I 
am resolved never to do ; on the contrary, I will hold out 
with them even to death, and patiently expect the end of 
the struggle." Sanguin then said: " Confer with your fol- 
lowers, and take advice which is profitable to you and to 
them. I will spare you because you are a king and ought 
to be honoured. Give up the castle and all the prisoners 
you have taken from us, and receive in exchange all we have 
of yoiu' people, and then, having sworn to a firm peace, 
depart freely with all your men." 

Fulk, having heard this proposal, went back to his com- 
rades, and telling them all that the tyrant had said, asked 
them what he was to do in their present distress. They, 
being ignorant that relief was near at hand, hastened in their 
anxiety to give him their advice. They recommended that 
the Turks should be released for the deliverance of the 
Christians, and the fortress of Mont-Eeal be delivered to 
the people of Damascus, to save the besieged from the peril 
of death, and that Jerusalem, the holy city, might not be 
exposed to the mockery of the Gentiles for want of a pro- 
tector. Thereupon, King Pulli, swayed by his fears, 
accepted the advice of his comrades, and concluded the 
peace proposed by the Gentiles, to which he swore. San- 
guin received the fortress and his nephew, who had been 
taken prisoner ; and on his part he released the Christian 
captives whom he kept in chains. Then the tyrant in 
triumph and derision said to Fulk : " You have been out- 
witted, king!" showing him the camp of the Christians 
who had come to his relief. But, although the faithful were 
afflicted at this perfidious conduct, the agreement could not 
be altered. Pledges having been given, the king, the 
patriarch, and the faithful on both sides met together, and 
demanded permission of the tyrant to bury their brethren 
who had fallen in the conflict. Sanguin having consented, 
they searched for the bodies of the slain, and carefully gave 
them honourable interment ; but they could not draw from 
their fingers their gold rings. The survivors, therefore, 
gave devout thanks to the Lord Almighty, and reverently 



A.D. 1138.] KATMOJ^D, PRINCE OF ANTIOCH. 191 

laid in the earth the martyrs of Christ, without stripping 
them of their ornaments. 

Ch. XXXIV. The emperor, Jolm Comnenus, lays siege to 
Antioch — ^aymoncVs night attack — ]SFegociations,whicli ter- 
minate in Raymond's doing homage for the principality to 
the Greek emperor. 

At the same time, while the people of Jerusalem were 
thus miserably afflicted by the Gentiles, and Eaymond 
prince of Antioch, and other brave soldiers, having heard 
the distress of their brethren were hastening to their relief, 
John, the emperor of Constantinople, levied an army 
throughout all his dominions, which are wide enough, and 
laid siege to Antioch, the metropolis of Syria, claiming it as 
belonging to his empire.^ This Raymond, who then held the 
principality, was son of William duke of Poitiers. After the 
death of King Henry, the duke went to the East, where he 
married the daughter of Baldwin the younger, whose hand 
was bestowed on him by Fulk, his cousin ; and by the 
bounty of Grod, he acquired for himself a large principality 
in Syria. Eaymond was proceeding by hasty marches to 
the relief of the king of Jerusalem, as I have just said, when 
he received on the road intelligence, of the emperor's 
approach to lay siege to Antioch. Struck with dismay at 
this threateniug storm, he immediately retraced his steps 
with the troops that attended him, and hastened to the 
succour of his people who were shut up in the city, trem- 
bling in the absence of a protector. Drawing near to the 

• Events are still so disfigured in this part of our author's narrative, that 
instead of attempting to correct it, we must refer the reader to the histo- 
rians of the crusades. It is perfectly true that Raymond, the eldest son of 
William YII. count de Poitiers, and consequently uncle of Eleanor of 
Guyenne, went to the east in 1137, and that King Fulk gave him his 
young daughter Constance in marriage, with the principality of Antioch for 
her dowry. It is also correct that the Greek emperor, John Comnenus, 
sat down before Antioch in 1138, but, touched with compassion at the 
perils which surrounded the Latin princes in Palestine, consistently with 
his noble character, as traced by Gibbon, he contented himself with 
receiving the homage of Raymond, and joined his arms to those of the 
Christians. The death of Fulk king of Jerusalem, was not caused by the 
privations he suffered during a siege in which he acted as steward to the 
garrison, as our author tells us in the preceding chapter, but by his horse 
falling while he was hunti:ig a hare on the plains of Ptolemais. 



192 OEDERICUS TITALIS. [b. XIII. CH.XXXIY. 

place, and being apprehensive that he could not break 
through the besieging army and force his way in, he con- 
sulted with his friends upon the matter, and one of them 
who I think was truly magnanimous, said : " "We know full 
well that the Grreeks are of consummate prudence, and 
surpass other nations in eloquence ; but under difficulties they 
fail in spirit and courage. Hence, brave comrades and tried 
warriors, if you are willing to follow my advice, manfully 
put on your armour, and penetrate in silence, under arms, 
through the Greek army to the very tent of the emperor, 
as if you w^re part of the imperial troops. Then raise ter- 
rible shouts which shall reach the emperor's ears, and boldly 
declare who you are." 

On hearing this, the others were inspired with courage to 
undertake the dangerous enterprise, and under cover of 
night gallantly executed the plan of the magnanimous sol- 
dier. The Franks, having penetrated to the imperial tent, 
raised loud cries, and began to deal heavy blows on all who 
opposed them. Buried in false security, the emperor's army 
were suddenly roused by the fierce shouts of the Franks, and 
their panic was such that they were thrown into disorder ; 
and not knowing what to do, abandoned everything and fled 
for three miles, as if each saw a sword threatening his throat. 
Duke Ra}Tnond, seeing the Greeks and their emperor flying, 
halted his troops, being unwilling to pursue such a host ^^-itll 
his small force ; and setting bounds to their triumph, he 
entered his city, and by God's grace filled the hearts of the 
citizens of Antioch with joy. "When the sun rose, they went 
out and found vast stores of wealth in the tents of the 
Greeks, which they greedily pillaged, and carried ofl" their 
plunder with joy to the city. 

Meanwhile, the emperor resting from the fatigue of flying 
with his army, indignant and in confusion, inquired by 
whom he had been routed ; and was much ashamed when he 
learned the bold enterprise of the Aquitanians, and its success- 
ful issue. Having collected his scattered troops, he invited 
the prince of Antioch to a conference. The brave warrior who 
had before advised the attack, now recommended the duke 
noti to reject terms of accommodation, as it would not 
only be honourable, but greatly advantageous, to treat for 
peace. Baymond assented and on his proceeding to the 



A.D. 1138.] batmo:n^d does homage to the empeeor. 193 

conference the emperor said to him : " The city of Antioch 
belongs to the empire of Constantinople. Prince Bohemond 
did homage to my father, and, with the other western lords, 
swore that all the territories which the Turks had dismem- 
bered from it, and which he should recover, he would restore 
to the holy empire. I demand, then, from you, who now 
call yourself prince of Antioch, the fulfilment of this con- 
tract, and claim the restoration of this city belonging to my 
empire, the possession of which you usurp." Eaymond 
answered : " I will not argue with you on the covenant made 
by our ancestors. I received this city from the king of 
Jerusalem with the prince's daughter, and I promised him 
fealty as my lord. I will, therefore, make known your 
demands to him, and shall obey his directions in all things, 
and will not deliberate on this affair without his instructions." 
Upon his saying this, the emperor approving Raymond's 
intention of preserving his fealty to his lord, agreed to a 
truce, to allow of his communicating with the king of Jerusa- 
lem, and inquiring of him what he should do consistently with 
his loyalty. The matter was laid, by Eaymond's envoys, 
before the king, who was then sick ; whereupon, having con- 
sidered it with his intimate friends, he replied: "We all 
know, as we have heard long since from our forefathers, that 
Antioch belongs to Constantinople, and was taken from the 
emperor by the Turks fourteen years ago, and subjected to 
themselves ; and for the rest which the emperor alleges 
respecting the treaties of our predecessors, it is true. Ought 
we to deny the truth and resist what is right ? Certainly 
not ; especially when I am confined by d severe infirmity, 
which disables me from affording aid to my cousin. In 
truth, the toils and sufferings to which I was exposed, and 
the improper sustenance I was compelled to take, while un- 
happily besieged in Mont-Real, have brought on me a fatal 
malady, under which my comrades also suffer, and it prevents 
my assisting my cousin in the war. Knowing, therefore, 
the excuse I have, return to your lord, and tell him from me 
to make peace with the emperor, and by my order accept 
the investiture of Antioch from him as its rightful suzerain, 
and so loyally hold it ; for the emperor is a Christian, he is 
very powerful, and honoured by the Franks. If he be so 
disposed, he can render them great services." 

yOL. IT. o 



194 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XXXV. 

The envoys, on their return, reported the king's reply in 
suitable terms; and the two princes concluded a peace 
advantageously to the pilgrims, and to all the faithfal in 
Christ who dwelt in Greece and Syria. Eaymoud, there- 
fore, received the investiture of Antioch as the vassal of the 
emperor, who promised him his alliance and support against 
Damascus and all the Gentiles. Thus a war, which had 
lasted to no purpose for forty years, and undertaken and 
carried on by the Bohemonds and their successors against 
Alexis, was the cause of thousands being thrown into cap- 
tivity or slain, and of much loss, was now, by the mercy of 
God, brought to an end under the princes, John the emperor, 
and Eaymond of Poitiers, to the great joy of numbers on 
both sides. 

Ch. XXXV. Lewis le Jeune crowned at JBoiirges — Tlie anti- 
pope Peter Anaclete dies — TJie emperor Lothaire invades 
Apulia. 
Ik the year of our Lord, 1138, the first indiction, Lewis le 
Jeune, king of France, was crowned on the feast of the 
nativity at Bourges,^ where a great concourse of the nobles 
and commons assembled from Prance and Aquitaine, as well 
as from the other neighbouring countries. There, were 
gathered the metropolitans and their suffragan bishops ; and 
there, flocked counts and other men of rank, and did homage 
to the new king. 

Peter Anaclete, who for nearly seven years had usurped 
the apostolical see, died sudenly while sitting in his chair on 
the eighth of the calends of Eebruary [January 25th].- It 
is said that his corpse was conveyed away privately by his 
brother's, Peter Leon's, sons, who had great authority at 
Home ; so that no one knew where it was buried. 

In the month following, a report was widely spread of 
the death of Eoger duke of Apulia,^ who had been crowned 

* We find no other notice of this coronation at Bourges ; but there are 
full accounts of the difficulties which occurred in the election of the arch- 
bishop of this see in 1140. 

^ Peter Anaclete died on January 25, 1138. 

^ Ordericus, or his copyist, had originally written this sentence in the 
form of a positive assertion of the duke's death, Sequenti quoque mense, 
Rogerius Apulice dux, defunctus est. 



A.D. 1138.] SIEGE OF BEDFOED. 195 

king of Sicily by the schismatical pope, and receiving his 
sister's hand in marriage, had been his instrument in dis- 
turbing the peace of the church. The emperor Lothaire 
having received intelligence of Soger's death went into 
Apulia with much haste and took measures for bringing it 
under submission to himself, according to ancient custom 
and the constitution of the Eoman empire.^ 

Ch. XXXYI. King Stephen returns to England — Lags siege 
to Bedford — The truce in Normandg hroken — Partisans 
of the em])ress — Stephen's governor of the duchy slain. 

Meaij^while, King Stephen, having arrived in England, and 
learned the plot which some persons had entered into against 
the common welfare of the realm, was so indignant that he 
took arms unadvisedly against the rebels and, against the 
advice of his brother Henry, bishop of Winchester, laid 
siege to Bedford ;- but as it was the season of Christmas, and 
the winter was very rainy, after great exertions he had no 
success ; indeed, the sons of Eobert de Beauchamp^ defended 
the place Avith gi'eat resolution, and until the arrival of the 
bishop, the king's brother, rejected all terms of submission 
to Stephen. Not that they resolved to deny the fealty and 
service they owed to him as their liege lord, but having heard 
that the king had given the daughter of Simon de Beauchamp* 

^ It is possible that reports of Rojjer's death were spread in 1138 ; but 
they were without foundation, as he did not die till 1154, and as the empe- 
ror's invasion took place the year before, it could not have originated in 
these rumours. 

2 The siege of Bedford was undertaken on Christmas eve, in 1 ] 37, to 
the great scandal of all England. The author of Gesta Stephani gives a 
good account of the obstinate resistance made by Milo de Beauchamp, and 
the family circumstances out of which it arose. 

3 This Robert Beauchamp was viscount of Arques in 1108. See 
before, vol. iii. p. 431. 

* This lady must have been the niece of Paganus de Beauchamp, to 
whom the barony of Bedford was granted by William Rufus. Our genea- 
logists are, therefore, wrong in representing Simon de Beauchamp as having 
died without issue. Hugh the Poor, created by Stephen earl of Bedford, 
was the third son of Robert, earl of Mellent ; and it was through the great 
influence of his brother Waleran with King Stephen that the king impru- 
dently embarked in this rash enterprise. Nor was it any wonder that the 
sons of Roger de Beauchamp should oppose the alliance of their cousin- 
german with a person of such mean substance as this Hugh; an alliance, 
also, which conveyed large domains out of the family. 

o 2 



196 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.ZXXYI. 

in marriage to Hugh, surnamed the Poor, with her father's 
lordships, they feared that they should lose their whole 
inheritance, and, by the advice of their friends, made 
an obstinate resistance. At length, when five weeks after 
the bishop came to Bedford, they submitted, and following 
his advice, which they thought good, and by his help, they 
were reconciled to the king and surrendered the place. 

In Normandy, Eaymond de Dunstanville,^ a son of King 
Henry, disturbed the Cotentin, and, taking his sister's side, 
supported the Angevins. He was joined by Baldwin de 
Eeviers^ and Stephen de Mandeville,^ with other enemies of 
King Stephen ; but Eoger the viscount vigorously opposed 
them, and protecting the country, gallantly distinguished 
himself by his resistance to their treasonable enterprises. 
At first he seemed very formidable to the enemy, but in the 
vicissitudes of this world no power is of long duration. His 
enemies, envious of his success, laid snares for him, and 
plotted his destruction. One day they sent out light troops 
to pillage, while some men-at-arms lay in ambush, eagerly 
waiting to take his life. Shouts were raised, and Eoger and 
his men seized their arms, and pursuing the plunderers 
loaded with booty, fell into the hands of the party who lay 
in ambush. They burst from their lurking-place like hungry 
lions, and fell on the others unawares, butchering Eoger 
without mercy, though he loudly called on them to spare his 
life, and made great promises. The governor being slain, the 
whole country was reduced to a state of desolation, and the 
savage fury of the freebooters exercised on the peasants is 
to this day unbridled. 

In the month of January,* Simon the Eed^ a son of Bald- 

' Raymond de Dunstanville, one of the natural sons of Henry I., was 
afterwards created earl of Cornwall. He took his name from a place in 
the neighbourhood of Dieppe, either from having been born there, or 
because it Avas given to him as an appanage. 

2 Baldwin de Reviers, lord of Ndhou, often mentioned before. He had 
been driven out of England, in 1136, after an obstinate defence of Exeter 
Castle, the details of which are described in the Gesta Stejphani, pp. 337 
—344. 

^ Stephen de Mandeville was probably the son of Robert de Mande- 
ville, an ally of Prince Henry (afterwards Henry I.) in the Cotentin, while 
he occupied that country, 

* 1138. 



A.D. 1138.] IF KORMANDT, THE TEUCE BEOKEN". 197 

win,- by leave of Eobert Griroie,^ took possession of tlie castle 
of Echoufour,^ and gathering a band of retainers, began to 
ravage the territory of Eobert earl of Leicester, in the 
diocese of Evreux. This Simon was a most active soldier, 
bold and enterprising, liberal to his comrades, indefatigable 
in hardy exercises, and, therefore, ready to hazard the most 
difficult and cruel attempts. As soon as he began to ravage 
the country, his brother joined him in his outrages, and 
received him into his fortress called Pont Echanfre. There- 
upon, William EresneP and his six brothers, and Alain de 
Tanee,^ and Ernald the count's steward," with the garrison 
of Glos,'' rose in arms and burnt Pont Echanfre, Montreuil,^ 
and the neighbouring bourgs. Both sides became so infu- 
riated, and all were plunged into such a sea of wickedness, 
that no respect was paid to consecrated places, nor did they 
spare men of religion, innocent peasants, or women, nor 
keep their hands and hearts unstained by crime, even during 
the holy season of Lent. 

The truce for two years, concluded between the king and 
Geoifrey of Anjou, was broken in various ways. During 
Lent, the partisans of the countess seized Ealph d'Esson,^ 
a powerful man, and delivered him to their lady to be kept 
in confinement. She detained him for a considerable time, 
and refused to release him until he placed his fortresses in 
her hands. On the other hand Engelran de Sai ^° and other 

' He must have been a nephew of the valiant Ralph the Red, a devoted 
servant of Henry I., who perished, as we have seen, in the shipwreck of 
the Blanche-Nef. Here we find three families who remained faithful to 
the lawful heiress of their late sovereign in the midst of the prevailing 
perjury and treason. Unfortunately, we cannot say as much of our 
author, who warmly espouses the cause of the usurper. 

2 Robert Giroie, lord of St. Ceneri. 

2 l^choufour, a castle and bourg in the neighbourhood of St. Evroult. 
See note to p. 288, vol. ii. It stood on the confines of the diocese of 
Evreux. 

* William Fresnel, lord of La Ferte-Fresnel. 

* Tanee is a hamlet halfway between St. Evroult and Cisai-Saint-Aubin. 
^ Evnald du-Bois-Arnaud, steward of the earl of Leicester. 

' Glos-la-Ferri^re, in the same neighbourhood. 
^ Montreuil-l'-Argillier, the property of the family of Giroie. 
^ Esson is in the canton of Thierri-Harcourt. The family of Tesson 
gave the church of this parish to the abbey of Fontenai. 

'" Engerrand de Sai, near Argentan, We are now carried back to the 



198 OKDEBICrS TITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XXXYII. 

adlierents of the king, perseveringly tracked Reynold and 
Baldwin outside the castle of Houlme, and coming to close 
fight with them, took Baldwin and several other prisoners. 
On this occasion, when the battle was at its height, and it 
appeared doubtful on which side victory would turn, some of 
the kinsmen and friends of Eoger the viscount, having found 
the time and opportunity for revenge, drew the sword against 
their own party, and slaying several of his murderers, pro- 
cured the honour of victory for the opposite side ; thus as 
the Lord has said, " He that draweth the sword shall perish 
by the sword." And see how this fierce band who shortly 
before cruelly butchered Eoger, the son of Nigel, were sud- 
denly attacked by his friends, and fell in the midst of their 
own party. 

About the same time, Thierri, count of Flanders, gave his 
daughter in marriage to the son of King Stephen, and put- 
tmg into his hands the whole county of Elanders, went 
on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem,^ and on his return .... the 
boy to whom he had betrothed his daughter.^ .... 

Ch. XXXYII. Hostilities reneioed in Normandy — The earl 
of Gloucester inclines to the side of the malcontents — The 
English nohles openly revolt — Inroad of the Scots, ivho are 
defeated. 

lis the month of May, Count AYaleran and "William d' Ypres 
took ship, and saiimg over to Normandy endeavoured to 
relieve that aflicted country. They first took arms against 
Eoger de Conches, but in the changes of fortune they found 
that warlike knight prepared to resist them. They, there- 

Cotentin, where we find again Reynold de Dunstanville, Baldwin de 
Riviers, and his castle of V Isle-Marie. ^ _ 

^ None of the details given in this paragraph are correct. Thiem, 
count of Flanders, did not give his daughter in marriage to Eustace, the 
son of King Stephen ; nor did he put him in possession of Flanders, 
when he went to the Holy Land in 1139 ; but he left it to his son and 

heir, Philip. i » x xv j 

2 The latter clause of this sentence, from "Jerusalem to the end, 
was added to the original text in the MS. of St. Evroult, and afterwards 
erased. Duchesne omits it ; the MS. of Dupuy reads, fillam spopon- 
derat mortuuvi invenit, " [to whom] he had betrothed his daughter, 
he found dead." In Dom Bouquet, for the last tsvo words, we read, hellii 
cxercet ; " he makes war on." 



A.D.113S.] EABL ROBERT JOITfS THE COUNT OF ANJOU. 199 

fore, turned their fury on the peasants, and both of them 
taking to plunder, devastated the whole district, burning 
and plundering as they went, so that even the necessaries of 
life being pillaged, the unarmed people were reduced to 
want. In the month of June, Geofi'rey, count of Anjou, 
entered Normandy with a body of troops, and by entreaties 
and promises drew over to his side Eobert, earl of Glouces- 
ter, through whom Bayeux, Caen, and several other towns 
submitted to him.^ 

In England, the bishops and several lords of castles hear- 
ing tliat the earl, who was very powerful in both countries, 
supported the party of Anjou, openly avowed the evil designs 
which they had hitherto secretly entertained, and broke into 
rebellion against the king. In the month of July Count 
Waleran and AVilliam d'Tpres, distressed at finding the 
enemy prevail through intestine treason, and that the Nor- 
mans, who had been conquerors in foreign lands, were often 
trodden down at home, called in to their assistance Ralph 
Peronne,^ with two hundred men-at-arms, and assembling 
other auxiliary forces from all quarters, determined to march 
against the Angevins. But Eobert de Courcy^ dispatched 
a messenger in all haste to Count Greofirey with information 
of the designs of his countrymen, and recommended him to 
lose no time in withdrawing from Normandy, and to wait 
for a more favourable opportunity of advancing his cause. 
On receiving this intelligence he drew ofi" his troops in great 
alarm, so that the enemy, who had mustered a large body of 
men, were extremely disappointed at the sudden retreat of 
the army of Anjou, But in order that a thousand soldiers 
might not appear to have been embodied to no purpose, and 
return home without any feat of arms, they marched 
towards Caen, wasting the country all around ; and tried to 
draw the garrison out of the place. But Earl Eobert had 

^ The earl acted with great prudence, and still held aloof, as we find in 
the sequel of this chapter ; but his hostility to Stephen was scarcely dis- 
guised. Caen appears to have been his principal seat, beyond sea; whence 
the Normans called him Robert de Caen. 

' Probably the son of that Simon de Peronne who was engaged against 
Henry I. at Pontaudemer in 1123. 

^ Courci-sur-Dive. We have before had frequent occasion to notice 
this place and its lords. This Robert must have been the son of Robert 
de Courci, and son-in-law of Hugh GrantmesniL 



200 OEDEKICUS YITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XXXTII. 

great fears of both factions in the present quarrel, and, 
therefore, wisely shut himself up in the castle with a hun- 
dred men-at-arms. Only forty horsemen sallied out, and meet- 
ing the enemy in a narrow byeway on the banks of the Orne, 
an engagement ensued, which was sharply fought on both 
sides. There Eobert Bertrand^ and John de Jors,^ two 
noble and handsome knights, were slain, and many of both 
parties were wounded ; for whose misfortune numbers were 
pluDged into grief. 

Tins earl of Grloueester, whose defection had been the 
cause of these serious disturbances, possessed, through the 
grants made him by his father. King Henry, great power in 
England, where he had at his command wealth, fortresses, 
and fierce vassals. He was keeper of the castles of 
Grloueester and Canterbury, and possessed himself the very 
strong fortresses of Bristol,^ Leeds, and Dover."* Hence the 

^ Robert Bertrand of Briquebec, the second of that name. 

2 Jean de Jors, near Coulibeuf. In book V. our author calls this 
place Jort; he ought to have given the right orthography of the name, as 
his abbey possessed property there. 

^ Bristol castle was the earl's principal seat in England. He added 
greatly to its exterior fortifications, and rebuilt the interior with regal 
magnificence. There, his sister Matilda held her court, and King Stephen 
was held in captivity. 

* Of the castles mentioned in this paragraph, Robert held Gloucester in 
right of his earldom ; but Milo, afterwards created earl of Hereford, was 
constable of it under Robert, his liege-lord, as Flor. of Wore, calls him. 
Bristol (Brihstoic), the earl of Gloucester's principal seat and fortress in 
the West of England, will be noticed in the course of the narrative. In 
what right, or how, the earl became possessed of Canterbury and Dover 
castles does not appear. He did not hold them long. 

Leeds (Ludas) is not the place of that name in Yorkshire, the Latin 
name of which is Loidis, and in that neighbourhood the earl ihad no 
holding, but Leeds castle in Kent. This is further suggested by *its con- 
tiguity to two other important fortresses mentioned in this sentence. Our 
author speaks of it again, at the close of the paragraph, by the name of 
Eslcdas, without any intimation of its being the place he had just called 
Ludas ; but that it is the same is proved by an entry in the Doraesday- 
book, Adclhold tenet de episcopo Esledes. After the Conquest, it had been 
granted to Odo, bishop of Bayeux, and on his forfeiture, the Conqueror 
gave it to Haraon de Crevecceur, one of the eight knights who held lands 
by castleguard, and had the charge of Dover castle. It afterwards passed 
to the family of Fairfax. We also find in Roger de Hoveden's enumera- 
tion of the castles held by Robert, earl of Gloucester, one called Sledas. 
The earl took possession of it in 11 37, but, as Lambard tells us in his 



A.D.1138.] CASTLES OF MATILDa's ADHEEENTS. 201 

revolt of his numerous partisans was a great injury to tlie 
king ; and, excited to fury, they caused great disturbances in 
the neighbouring provinces, which they ravaged in all 
manner of ways. 

First, Geoffrey, surnamed Talbot,' seized the city of Here- 
ford, and there assembling his guilty associates, raised the 
standard of rebellion against the king. "Walkelin, surnamed 
Maminot, held Dover ;'^ Eobert, son of Alured de Lincoln, 
the castle of Wareham ; Morgan, the "Welshman, TJsk f and 
William de Mohun, Dunster.* The young "William, sur- 
named Peverel, had four castles, namely, Bryn, Ellesmere, 
Overton and Geddington ;^ and, elated at this, he augmented 
the force of the rebels. Ealph Louvel held the castle called 

Dictionary, Stephen recovered it in the following year ; and this agrees 
with what our author relates just below. 

' Geoffrey Talbot, second of that name. He was the son of Geoffrey 
I. and Agnes. On this person and his family, see before, vol. iii. p. 452. 
We shall presently find him driven out of Hereford ; and there is a 
curioiis account of an enterprise of his at Bath in Gesta Stephani, p. 351. 

2 Walkeline Maminot belonged to a family settled in Kent, which had 
litigations with Archbishop Lanfranc concerning certain invasions of the 
property of that see. This Walkeline, as well as Gilbert Maminot, the 
bishop of Liseux so often mentioned by our author, must have been 
descendants of the famous knight, Roger de Courb^pine. Walkeline 
figures in several acts in the time of King Stephen, one of which, in the 
Monastic. Anglican, ii, 522, proves that he was a nephetv of William 
Peverell. Walkeline Maminot was another of the eight knights who held 
lands in castle guard for the defence of Dover castle. 

^ Morgan Gualus, UcJiam : M. Delisle having thus corrected the text of 
Duchesne, which reads, Guarham et Morgtian Gualcelmus Ucham, we 
relinquish our first impression, that the place was Oakham, in Rutland- 
shire (which, indeed, we never find written in Latin Ucham), and naturally 
look for it in Wales, or on the borders. Was it Usk, where there was " a 
large and strong castle," called by Girald. Cambr. casfrum Osckce? or 
could it be Oxwich or Pennarth Castle, below Swansea ? This conjecture 
derives some confirmation from Oxwich having belonged to the lords of 
Gower, of whom Robert, earl of Gloucester was the representative, in right 
of his wife, the daughter of Robert Fitz-Hamon. 

* GuUelmi de Moun, Doverstorium : Dunster castle, near Watchet, on 
the Bristol channel, the seat of the Moiun, or Mohun family. 

* Brunam, Eksmeram, Ovretonam, et Guitentonam. Of these four 
castles belonging to William Peverell, there is no difficulty about Ellesmere 
in Shropshire. Overton we find to be one of the chain of border castles 
already referred to. There are no traces of it remaining ; but it stood on 
a high bank above the meadows bordering the river Dee in Flintshire, 



202 OEDEBICTJS VITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XXXVII. 

Cari, and "William Fitz- John fortified Harpetro ;^ and joining 
the other rebels, did his utmost to create confusion in his 
native land. Besides, David king of Scots was induced to 
support the pestilent disturbers of the kingdom in favour of 
the Ange\in party, either by the perfidious invitation of the 
factious by whom he was called in to ravage the country, 
or by the oath of fealty to his niece, which he had taken at 
the command of King Henry. He held Carlisle,^ a very 
strong fortress, built, as they say, by Julius Csesar, and had 
placed a very fierce band of Scots in garrison there. These 
made a cruel inroad into England, and carrying war into the 
neighboui'ing districts, exercised on the people the barbarity 
natural to their race in the most brutal manner. They 
spared no one, butchering young and old, all alike, and even 
ripping open the bowels of pregnant women whom they 
slaughtered.^ 

According to tradition, it had been the residence of Madoc-ap-Meredyth, 
king of Powys. After the Conquest, it was granted to Robert Fitz-Hugh. 

Guitenton is not Geddington, a royal seat in Northamptonshire, as we 
were at one time led to believe from its being near Malton, another castle, 
held by Eustace Fitz-John in the same cause, but Whittington in Shrop- 
shire. This castle, formerly belonging to Tudor Trevor, was, after the 
Conquest, held by Roger, earl of Shrewsbury ; and on the forfeiture of 
Robert de Belesme, granted to William, sister's son of Paganus Peverell. 
Warine de Metz, a noble Lorrainer, won the daughter of William Peverell, 
with the lordship of Whittington, in a tournament at Peverell's Place, or 
castle of the Peak, and theii posterity, the Fitz-Warines, held this castle 
for four centuries. 

Brunam would seem to be a version of Bryn ; and there are several 
places of that name on the border, where we should naturally look for it in 
connection with the other castles here named. We rather think, however, 
that the place intended is Burne castle, in Cambridgeshire, the ancient 
barony of the Peverells. 

^ Castle Cary and Harptree are in Somersetshire, S.W. of Bristol and 
Bath. In the Gesta Stephard, p. 355, there is an account of both these 
castles being besieged and taken by Stephen. 

^ To this list of castles held by the adherents of Matilda, Henry of 
Huntingdon adds, besides Malton already noticed, Ludlow, held by 
Paganus, and Shrewsbury, by William Fitz-Alan, the reduction of which 
our author presently relates. We owe to the editor of the recent Paris 
edition of Ordericus, the expression of our regret that the identification wo 
supplied of the castles mentioned in this paragraph was, in some instances, 
less correct than that which has resulted from further inquiries. 

' The English historians concur with our author in attributing these 
barbarities to the Scots in this irruption. 



A.D. 1138.] STEPHEN EESISTS THE EEBEL LOEDS. 203 

Notwithstanding, King Stephen turned his sharp sword 
against this band of rebels, numerous as they were, and 
those he could not gain by gifts and promises he reduced to 
submission by the strong hand of his forces. Eobert de 
Stotesbury,^ a brave and loyal knight, he made earl of 
Derby, and Gilbert de Clare," earl of Pembroke ; and by 
their mediation drew over to his side "Walkelin Maminot 
and Louvel, who were friends or kinsmen of theirs. But 
with many of the rebels, as I haye observed before, the 
courageous king was much enraged, and he tried to reduce 
the fortresses of his enemies by three expeditions. First, 
he laid siege in person to the city of H ereford, which stands 
on the river "Wye on the border between England and 
"Wales, and being favourably received by the citizens and 
people of the country as their rightful lord, he took the 
castle ; and, Greoffrey Talbot being driven out, he mercifully 
spared the rest of the besieged. 

The queen,^ on her part, laid siege to Dover on the land- 
side with a powerful force, and sent word to her friends, 
kinsmen, and subjects at Boulogne to blockade the enemy 
by sea. The Boulognese wdlHngly obeying their lady's 
commands, performed the service they owed her, and sent a 
great number of vessels to close the straits, which are 
narrow, and prevent the besieged from procuring any suc- 
cour on that side. Meanwhile, Eobert de Ferrers, who had 

^ Rohertum, de Stoteshuria. Robert de Ferrers, as this person is called 
by our author shortly afterwards, took this name of Tutbury from the 
castle of Tutbury, in Staffordshire, which, with seven other lordships in 
Staffordshire and the earldom of Derby, was conferred by the Conqueror 
on Henry de Ferrariis, the grandfather of this Robert. For the family of 
Ferrers, see vol. i. p. 508, and ii. p. 376. 

2 Gilbert de Clare, earl of Pembroke, father of Richard, Earl Strong- 
bow. He died in 1148. 

3 Matilda, countess of Boulogne in her own right, a woman of great 
spirit, who not only by the help of her Boulognese now recovered Dover, 
but maintained her hold of the county of Kent during her husband's 
captivity. There were three queens in England at one time during these 
troubles : this Matilda, Stephen's queen ; Alice, the widow of Henry I., 
•who had married William D'Aubigny and lived in retirement at Arundel, 
where she hospitably received her daughter Matilda on her first landing ; 
and the other Matilda, the empress-queen, if we may so call her, her title 
to the throne having been only partially recognized, and her reign lasting 
but a few months ; indeed, it does not appear that she was ever crowned. 



204 OEDERICUS VITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XXXYII. 

been appointed by tbe king earl of Derby, as I have already 
said, had a conference with his son-in-law AYalkelin, and 
reconciled him with the king; whereupon he surrendered 
Dover castle, of which we have spoken. Grilbert de Clare 
also besieged "Esledas" castle,^ and so pressed the garrison, 
that, at last, they surrendered. 

William Fitz-Alan, constable and viscount of Shrewsbury, 
who had married the niece of Robert earl of Grloucester, 
wishing to do him service, revolted from the king and held 
the place just named against him for nearly a month. At 
last, in the month of August, overpowered by the king's 
forces, he took to flight ; and the king stormed the place by 
a vigorous assault. Arnulf de Hesdin,^ the uncle of this 
young man, a bellicose and venturesome soldier, arrogantly 
refused the peace which the king offered him on several 
occasions, and obstinately forced others who wished to 
suiTcnder themselves, to persist in their rebellion. At last, 
when the fortress was reduced, he was taken amongst many 
others, and brought into the presence of the king, whom he 
had treated with contempt. The king, however, finding 
that his gentleness had lowered him in the eyes of the 
revolters, and that in consequence many of the nobles sum- 
moned to his court had disdained to appear, was so incensed 
that he ordered Arnulf and nearly ninety-three others of 
those who had resisted him to be hung on the gallows, or 
immediately executed in other ways. Arnulf now repenting 
too late, and many others on his behalf, supplicated the 
king, offering a large sum of money for his ransom. But 
the king preferring vengeance on his enemies to any amount 
of money, they were put to death without delay. Their 
haughty accomplices were greatly terrified when they heard 

1 Esledas, spelt by Duchesne Escedas, is, as we have seen in a recent 
note, Leeds castle in Kent, which our author before calls Ludas.. Gilbert 
de Clare, just mentioned as earl of Pembroke, to whom it was surrendered, 
held the neighbouring castle of Tunbridge which his ancestor, Richard de 
Bienfaite, received in exchange for Brionne, the hereditary fief of this 
family in Normandy. See vol. ii. pp. 490, and 492—3. Leeds castle, 
which stands on the high road between Maidstone and Ashford, still 
preserves much of its ancient grandeur. 

2 It seems clear that this person derived his name from Hesdin in 
Artois. He is called Ermdf de Hesding in a charter of the empress 
Matilda. See Rvmer, i. 14. 



A.D. 1138?] BATTLE OF THE STAl^DAED. 205 

of the king's severity, and came in haste three days after- 
wards to the king, offering various excuses for having so 
long delayed their submission. Some of them brought the 
keys of their fortresses, and humbly offered their services 
to the king; and thus, the seditious deserters being some- 
what humbled, the lovers of peace rejoiced. 

In the same week, a like good fortune smiled on King 
Stephen in another part of the kingdom. For the earl of 
Albemarle and Eoger de Mowbray had an engagement 
with the king of Scotland,^ and having put to the sword a 
multitude of the Scots, avenged the cruel slaughter which 
these people had made of the English without any respect 
for the Christian religion. The Scots, it appears, fearing 
the sword whicli threatened them, fled towards the water, 
and rushing into the river Tweed where there was no ford, 
in their attempt to escape death, met it by drowning.^ After 
the w^ar had continued for a length of time between the two 
kings, and it had been accompanied by great atrocities on 
the one side and on the other, to the general loss, envoys 
were sent, by dmne inspiration, to treat of peace "between 
the two kings, now weary of pillage and slaughter, as well 
as of continual anxiety and toil ; and thus their alliance 
was renewed. 

Henry, the son of David king of Scots, gave his full 
consent to this return of amity. He was much attached to 
Adeline, the daughter of "VVilliam earl of Surrey, and 
demanded her in marriage. Cemented by this bond, his 
close connection with the Normans and English became 
permanent; for he perceived, on advising with prudent 
men, that it would tend much to the welfare and advantage 
of himself and his people. 

^ William, comte d'Aumale, Walter d'Espec, and Gilbert de Lacy, are 
joined with the earl by the English historians, as leaders of King Stephen's 
troops. 

"^ This is the famous battle of The Standard, fought at AUerton, in 
Yorkshire, in the month of August, 1141, of which a fuller account is 
given by Huntingdon and Wendover. Our author anticipates, in noticing 
it in this place. Indeed, he very naturally treats only in a cursory manner 
of events in England during these troublesome times ; while his details of 
detached enterprises in Normandy, where every castle was a den of free- 
booters, are only rivalled by those which give so much interest to the 
work of the anonymous author of the Gesta Siephani. 



206 OEDERTCUS TITALIS. [b.XIII. CH. XXXVIII. 

Ch. XXXVIII. Boger de Toeni hums Breteuil—Tlie count 
of Anjoio foiled hef ore Falaise, and at Touque-sur-JBonneville. 

]Mea:n'WHILE, the Normans were spending their fury in the 
bosom of their mother country, and crimes of all sorts were 
perpetrated in every quarter. On the 7th of September, 
Eoger Toeni gathered a gallant band of men-at-arms, and 
burning to revenge the many outrages he had formerly re- 
ceived, attacked Breteuil. The count of Hainault,^ with 
eighty men-at-arms, Peter de Maule, with forty, and Simon 
the Eed, with twenty, marched with him; and, besides, 
he had a powerful body of men, levied throughout his own 
territory. 

The ardent Eoger, at the head of this brilliant force, 
came unexpectedly on the place, and throwing firebrands 
into it, caused great losses to the inhabitants, taken as tliey 
were by surprise. It so happened that the husbandmen 
were threshing the corn, after harvest, in the open streets, 
and great heaps of straw and chaff lay scattered before the 
houses, as is the case in autumn ; so that food for the flames 
was easily found. In this manner, a wealthy town was 
reduced to ashes in the twinkling of an eye. The church of 
St. Sulpice, bishop and confessor, with much wealth belong- 
ing to the JDurghers deposited there, was burnt, and all who 
were in the church perished in the flames. The garrison of 
the castle, finding themselves taken by surprise, fled to the 
fortress with many of the inhabitants, having had a narrow 
escape from being cut ofl". The same year, peace was made 
between Eoger and the two brothers,^ by whom he was 
taken to King Stephen's court in England, and reconciled 
with him on honourable terms. 

On the calends of October [1st October] Geoffrey of 
Anjou laid siege to Falaise, and toiled before it in vain for 
eighteen days. On the nineteenth day he drew off" his 
troops, having gained no advantage. Eichard de Lucy 
com^manded in the place, and valiantly defended the fortress 
at the head of the garrison. He even in derision threw 
the gates open every day to the besiegers with the utmost 

1 Baldwin IV., count of Hainault. He was brother-in-law of Roger de 
Toeni. 

2 Waleran, earl of Mellent, and Robert, earl of Leicester. 



A.D. 1138.] GEOFFREY PLAJITAGENET EEPULSED. 207 

audacity ; and as the besieged had abundant stores of pro- 
visions and arms, he challenged tliem in mockery to the 
assault. The enemy laid Tvaste all the country round, and, 
breaking into the churches, and carrying off the sacred 
vestments and vessels without any fear of Grod, profaned the 
holy places ; nor did they spare any one, for they plundered 
the poor people of everything they could lay their hands 
on. At last, in a sudden panic, inspired by G-od, they fled 
in the night time, leaving in their rout their tents full of 
clothes and arms, and carts loaded with bread and wine and 
other necessaries, which the garrison and inhabitants took 
possession of in great joy. 

Ten days afterwards, however, the Angevins suddenly 
retraced their steps, and making a rapid circuit round 
Falaise, swept off the property of those who had returned 
to their homes and were dwelling in seciu-ity. Tor three 
weeks Normandy was unceasinglv subjected to slaughter 
and ravage by the count's fierce inroads, and great losses 
were sustained. In the beginning of November he came 
to Touque, where he found a wealthy bourg ; his full inten- 
tion being to assault the neighbouring fortress of Bonneville 
on the morrow.^ The enemy found large houses in the 
bourg, although they were all deserted; but quartering 
themselves in them without any precautions, they sat down 
to carouse in a splendid manner. 

Meanwhile, in the depth of the night, while the enemy's 
troops were resting securely in other people's houses, 
William, surnamed Troussebot,^ the governor of Bonneville' 
having discovered the enemy's want of caution, suddenly 
took advantage of it with great address. Having assembled 
the garrison and animated them by words of exhortation to 
a daring enterprise, he sent some wretched boys and 
common women to Touque, with instructions which he had 
carefully meditated, what they were to do. Accordino- to 
their orders, they crept into the bourg with great secrecy 
and dispersing through it boldly set the four quarters on 
fire m forty-five different places. The Angevins, who had 

^ Touque stands on the river of that name, about three quarters of a 
league from Bonneville, a strong castle which was a favourite residence 
of the dukes of Normandy. See before, vol. iii. p. 211. 

* For William Troussebot and his family, see ih. p. 328. 



208 , OEDEEICTTS VITALIS. [b.XITI. CH. XXXIX. 

just taken possession of the village and captured their 
hosts in their own houses and seated in their own chairs, 
were awoke by the crackling of the flames and the shouts 
of the sentinels, and, panic struck, fled at once, abandon- 
ing their arms and horses, with many other necessaries. 
"William Troussebot and his garrison, in full armour, sallied 
forth from Bonneville to fall on the enemy, but the smoke 
was so thick that in the obscurity neither party was able to 
distinguish the other. At last, the count, all in confusion, 
halted in a certain cemetery, and there gathering his scat- 
tered force, waited till daylight. As soon as the dawn 
appeared, he fled with the utmost speed, and having had 
some experience of Norman daring, never held bridle till he 
arrived, not without disgrace, at Argentan. 

To such alarms were the unarmed population of JSTor- 
mandy exposed, to their sorrow ; and having no ruler, could 
only invoke the aid of the Most High. The lords lent 
themselves to perfidious and wicked enterprises ; many of 
them treacherously favoured the enemy ; and as for their 
owD people, so far from protecting them, they pillaged and 
oppressed them, and made them the victims of their atrocious 
tyranny. 

At this time, Theobald, abbot of Bee, was elevated to the 
metropolitan see of Canterbury in England;^ and, in his 
place, Letald, a monk of a good conversation, was appointed 
to govern the church of Bee. 

Cir. XXXIX. The council at Home under Innocent 11. — 
Ouen^ hislioiJ of Evreux, dies in England — Death of 
Thurstin, archbishop of York. 

In the year of our Lord 1139, the second indiction, Pope 
Innocent II. held a great council at Rome in the middle of 
Lent ;- a,nd enjoined the prelates, who assembled in great 
numbers, to observe inviolably the decrees of the holy 
fathers. Many of the prelates summoned to the council 
came from distant countries, and for this purpose had 
encountered a perilous journey in the winter season, and so 

^ Archbishop Theoljald was chosen at a synod held at London under 
Alberic, bishop of Albano, the pope's legate, during Advent, in 113.9. 

^ This council was opened on April 4, 1 1 39. The canons enacted by it 
may be seen in Mansi, xxi. 526. 



A.D. 1139.] DEATH OF OUETs', BISHOP OF EYEEU.X. 209 

bad come in view of the walls of Eome at a great expense.^ 
The 25ope laid before tbem many extracts from old books, 
and compiled an excellent text of the sacred decrees. But 
the overflowing wickedness of the world hardened the hearts 
of men against ecclesiastical canons. Hence, although 
when their teachers returned home, the apostolical decrees 
were generally published in all countries, they afibrded, as 
it is quite clear, no relief to the oppressed and those who 
required help, inasmuch as they were slighted by the princes 
and nobles, as well as by the people, their subjects, 

Ouen, bishop of Evreux, went to England in Easter 
week, and died there on the sixth of the nones of July [2nd 
July], in the college of canons at Meliton,^ where ho was 
buried. Born in the territory of Bayeux, he devoted him- 
self to the study of letters, and becoming a proficient in the 
liberal arts, was one of the most learned men of the times. 
Admitted to King Henry's confidence and placed in his 
household, he gave him entire satisfaction as one of his 
principal secretaries. At length, he was preferred from the 
chapel royal to the bishopric of Evreux, and governed the 
diocese for twenty-four years ; instructing his clergy and 
the people under his charge to observe the law of Grod, and 
ably performing the service of the church. He also restored 
from the foundation the church of St. Mary, mother of Grod, 
which was burnt to the ground in his time. Eotrou, arch- 
deacon of Eouen, who was son of Henry earl of Warwick, 
succeeded to the bishoprick of Evreux, and was consecrated 
by the lord Hugh, archbishop. 

In the same year, I think, Thurstin, archbishop of York, 
the before-named Onen's brother, died.^ 

Ch. XL. King Stephen's C[uarrel with the hishops — They 
are arrested and compelled to surrender their castles. 

At this time there was a great commotion in England. 
Eoger, bishop of Salisbury,* relying on his wealth, his power- 

1 Among these, it presently appears, was our author's own abbot, 
Richard of St. Evroult. 

^ Our author probably means the priory of Merton, in Surrey, 

' Thurstin, archbishop of York, died on Jan. 21, 1139. 

* Roger, bishop of Salisbury. He was, as our author intimates, the 
able and attached minister of Henry I., and naturally sympathized with 

TOL. IV. P 



210 OBDEBICUS YITALTS. [b.XIII. CH.XL. 

ful connexions, and strong castles, as he had been at the 
head of alFairs throughout all England during the whole of 
King Henry's lifetime, obtained a bad reputation above all 
the great men of the realm for being disloyal to his king 
and lord, Stephen, and favouring the party of Anjou. He 
had accomplices intimately attached to him, in a son who 
was the king's chancellor,^ and two nephews of great influ- 
ence, one of whom was bishop of Lincoln, and the other 
bishop of Ely.^ Emboldened by their vast wealth, these 
men presumed to harass the lords of their neighbourhood 
with various outrages. Eoused by these sharp attacks, 
many of them formed a league against the bishops, and 
when an opportunity offered, took arms by common agree- 
ment, and tried to obtain satisfaction for the wrongs which 
they had suffered. 

The two brothers, Waleran and Eobert,^ with Alain of 
Dinan, and several others, raised a quarrel at the city of 
Oxford with the retainers of the bishops, and falling on 
them, several men were slain on both sides, and the bishops 
Eoger and Alexander were arrested. But the bishop of 
Ely, who was not yet come to the king's court, being lodged 
with his attendants in a vill outside the city, had no sooner 
heard the dreadful news than, moved by his evil conscience, 
he fled with all haste to the strong castle of Devizes. He 
then, having laid waste with fire the whole country round, 
put the castle in a posture of defence, and determined to 

his daughter the empress, countess of Anjou. William of ]\Ialmesbury 
has treated of this bishop's character fully and impartially. See his 
Modern History, p. 507. Henry of Huntingdon, who, on the whole, 
speaks favourably of him, says that he died worn out with age, and grief 
for the severity with which Stephen had recently treated him. 

^ His name was Roger, and he was a son of the bishop of Salisbury by 
his concubine, Maud of Ramsbury, as our author mentions in the course 
of his narrative. 

* Alexander, bishop of Lincoln, 1123 — 1147. Nigel, bishop of Ely, 
1133— 11G9. 

^ Waleran, earl of Mellent, and Robert, earl of Leicester, the two most 
powerful supporters of King Stephen's cause. Of the former, Henry of 
Huntingdon says, in his " Letter to Walter," that he was " the most 
sagacious in political affairs of all who lived between this and Jerusalem ;" 
and then proceeds to sketch his character and career in that happy style 
which makes his " Letter to Walter" one of the most interesting docu- 
ments of the age. See the translation of it appended to Huntingdon's 
works in the Anti^. Lib., p. 308—10. 



A.D. 1139.] DETIZES CASTLE SUREENDEEED. 211 

defend himself in it against the king with all the force 
he could muster. The king, much incensed on hearing 
this, marched an army towards the place, and, sending 
forward William d'Ypres, charged with severe threats, 
swore that bishop Roger should be kept without food till 
the hostile castle was given up to him. He also seized 
E-oger, surnamed the Poor, the bishop's son, and gave orders 
that he should be hung before the castle gates in sight of 
the rebels ; for his mother, Maud of Eamsbury, the bishop's 
concubine, kept possession of the main building of the 
fortress. 

At last, the bishop of Salisbury, by the king's leave, had 
a conference with his nephew,^ and much blamed him for 
not retiring to his own diocese, but stealing away in a rage 
to a place belonging to another, when he found that the 
peace was broken ; and reducing thousands to want by the 
devouring flames. But his arrogant nephew, with his fol- 
lowers, persisting in their rebellion, and the incensed king 
having commanded that Roger should be immediately hung 
on a gallows, his trembling mother being informed of the 
lamentable condition of her son, in her anxiety for him 
leapt up and said : " It was I that bore him, and I ought 
not to lend a helping hand to his destruction. Tea, rather 
I ought to lay down my own life to save his." Accordingly 
she immediately sent a message to the king, offering him 
the strong fortress which she held, as a ransom for her 
friends. The bishop of Ely was so humbled, that with the 
rest of his associates he sorrowfully consented to the sur- 
render. At length peace was restored among them, the 
castle was surrendered to the king, and the bishops departed 
in peace to their dioceses. Bishop Roger died soon after- 
wards,^ and the bishop of Ely was proclaimed a traitor.^ 



^ The bishop of Ely. See William of Malmesbury's account of these 
traRsactioT's, and that given by the anonymous author of Gesta Stephani, 
both of whom supply much fuller details. Our author's narrative is taithful 
so far as it goes ; and we are indebted to him for preserving the incident 
respecting Maud of Ramsburv. 

2 He died December 4, 1139. 

^ Nigel, bishop of Ely, after the death of his uncle, Bishop Roger, 
broke into open revolt against Stephen. See the account of his defence of 
the Isle of Ely in Huntingdon's History, p. 371. 

p 2 



212 OEDEEICUS TITALTS. [b.XIII. CII.XLI. 

Ch. XLI. The Countess Matilda and 'Robert, earl of Glou- 
cester, land at Arundel, and proceed to Bristol — Botrou of 
Mortain obtains possession of Bont Bclianfre — Bands of 
the Welsh ravage England. 

In the autumn, Matilda, countess of Anjou, crossed the sea 
to England, with her brother Eobert of Caen, Guy de Sable, 
and several others ; and being well received at Arundel, she 
obtained leave from the king to pass without interruption to 
tlie castles which belonged to her partisans.^ It may be 
remarked that this permission given by the king was a sign 
of great simplicity or carelessness, and prudent men regret 
that he was regardless of his own welfare and the kingdom's 
security. It was in his power at this time to have easily 
stifled a flame which threatened great mischief, if, with a 
policy becoming the wise, he had at once driven away the 
wolf from the entrance of the fold, and, for the safety of 
the flock, nipped the growth of malignancy in the bud, and, 
like his fathers, crushed the deadly eflbrts of those whose 
enterprise threatened the country with pillage, slaughter, 
and depopulation, by smiting them with the sword of 
justice. 

In the month of November, Eotrou, count of Mortain, 
being taken into the king's pay, marched to Pont Echanfre,^ 
and the eight stipendiary men-at-arms who were in it 
being half-famished, came to terms with him, and he obtained 
possession of the place ; and permitting the wretched gar- 
rison to depart, gave the fortress in charge to Eoger de 
Planes. Then Eibold, Simon the Eed, and the other 
nephews of Ealph the Eed,^ were quickly driven out of the 
country, and suddenly lost the lordship of the castle which 
they had hitherto possessed. 

Eobert of Caen hospitably entertained under his own roof 
his sister Matilda after her arrival in England, and calling 

^ The carl of Gloucester (Robert of Caen), with his sister, the countess 
of Anjou, landed in England on August 31, 1139. She was kindly- 
received by her step-mother, Alice, the queen-dowager, at Arundel castle, 
which that princess, who had married William D'Aubigny, held in dower. 
From thence she proceeded under safe conduct to the earl's castle at 
Bristol, whither, meanwhile, he had made his way by cross roads. 

^ Pont Echanfre is now called Notre-Dame du Hamel. 

2 Ralph the Red perished in the shipwreck of the Blanche Nef. These 
nephews of his have been often mentioned in preceding chapters. 



A.D. 1139, 1140.] 4TE0CITIES OF THE WELSH, 213 

in the "Welsh to his aid, atrocious villanies were perpetrated 
in all parts. They say that more than ten thousand of these 
barbarians spread themselves over England, and that having 
no reverence for religion, they did not even spare the conse- 
crated places, but gave themselves up to pillage, and burning, 
and bloodshed. It is impossible for me to describe in detail 
the great afflictions which the church of God suffered in the 
persons of her sons, who were daily butchered like sheep 
by the knives of the Welsh. 

Ch. XLII. Philip de Sarcourt made hisliop of Bayeux, con- 
trary to tlie injluence of Henry de JBlois — Death of JRichard 
d'JEscures, abbot of St. JEvroidt — Se is succeeded by Ralph, 
prior of Noyon. 

Iisr the year of our Lord 1140, the third indiction. King 
Stephen assembled his council, and took into consideration 
the state of the commonwealth, with the assistance of his 
peers. There was a great division among them respecting 
the nomination of a bishop of Salisbury. Henry, the bishop 
of Winchester,^ was anxious to introduce his nephew Henry 
de Sulli,'^ and, as the majority were against him, he left the 
king's court in high dudgeon. Waleran, count de Mellent, 
named Philip de Harcourt f and for very good causes the 
king freely approved that choice. However, he bestowed on 
his young nephew the abbey of Fecamp, in which religion 
had greatly flourished in the times of his four predecessors. 
In the same year, Eichard, abbot of St. Evroult, after his 
return from the council at Eome, was compelled by urgent 
affairs to cross the sea to England soon after Christmas ; 
and there, exhausted by his long journeyings, he was seized 
with fever during Lent. Having suffered severely for many 

^ Henry de Blois, King Stephen's brother, bishop of Whichester, 1 129 — 
1171. The circumstance here related by our author shows that his 
influence with Stephen was now on the wane. Shortly afterwards he 
deserted his cause. 

2 Henry de Sulli, abbot of Fecamp (1140—1189), was probably the 
issue of a marriage between William de Blois, brother of King Stephen 
and of Henry, bishop of Winchester, with the heiress of the house of SuUi. 
He is called ne'pos regis, in a document of 1135 {Monast. Anglic, ii. 482), 
and in a charter, without date, published in Madox's Hist, of the Ex- 
chequer, i. 14. 

' Philip de Harcourt was raised to the see of Bayeux in 1142, and died 
in 1164. 



214 OEtJEEICTIS YITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XLIII. 

days, lie duly prepared himself for his end by confession 
and prayer. After Easter his physicians administered to him 
a potion, Avhich proved too powerfid, and he sunk under the 
effects ; and falling into a swoon on the 7th of May,^ died 
on the ides [15th] of the same month, in the third yjear of his 
rule. He was carried to Thorney, and buried there by the 
lord Eobert, abbot of that monastery, before the crucifix in 
the church of St. Mary.^ As soon as the monks of St. 
Evroult were informed of their loss, they held a chapter, and 
elected for their abbot Ealph, prior of Noyon,^ who had 
then lived under the monastic discipline with great credit 
for forty years. The brother-elect crossed the sea to England, 
carrying certificates from Hugh, archbishop of Eouen, and 
John, bishop of Lisieux, testifying his unanimous election 
by the convent ; and King Stephen, on the production of 
these episcopal letters, granted him the abbey, and gave him 
a confirmation of his ecclesiastical appointment. On his 
retrn-n from England, he presented himself to Bishop John 
with the king's letters patent; and being kindly received 
by the venerable bishop, his episcopal benediction was con- 
ferred upon him on the eighth of the ides of November 
[6th November]. 

Ch. XLIII. The earl of Chester surprises Lincoln castle — 
The haitle of Lincoln — King Stephen taken prisoner — 
Bishop Henry de Blois joins the party of the empress. 

In the year of our Lord 1141, the fourth in diction, there 
were grievous troubles in England, and great changes oc- 
curred, to the serious loss of many persons. Then it was 
that Eanulf, earl of Chester, and his half-brother "William de 

* The French editors are at a loss to reconcile the two dates here given, 
taking the word deficit to be equivalent to the subsequent phrase here 
used, defunctus est, " departed this life," But the translation we have 
adopted, the true sense we think of deficit in this passage, obviates the 
difficulty. The seventh of the ides of ilay is the 15th day of that month. 
The necrology of St. Evroult, and an extant poem on the death of Abbot 
Richard, fix the date of his death on the ides of May. 

2 For Thorney abbey, see vol. iii. p. 421. Robert de Prunelai suc- 
ceeded Abbot Gontier, of Mans, in 1113. 

3 Ordericus {ih. 4"20) has already mentioned this Ralph, or R;inulph, 
prior of Ncyon-sur-Andelle. The period of the death of this last of the 
abbots of St. Evroult under whom our author lived is unknown. 



A.D. 1141.] LIXCOLX CASTLE SEIZED. 215 

Eoumare, revolted against King Stephen, and surprised the 
fortress which he had at Lincoln for the defence of the city. 
Cautiously choosing a time when the garrison of the tower 
were dispersed abroad and engaged in sports, they sent their 
wives before them to the castle, under pretence of their 
taking some amusement.^ While, however, the two coun- 
tesses stayed there talking and joking with the wife of the 
knight whose duty it was to defend the tower, the earl of 
Chester came in, without his armour or even his mantle, 
apparently to fetch back his wife, attended by three soldiers, 
no one suspecting any fraud. Having thus gained an 
entrance, they quickly laid hold of the bars and such wea- 
pons as were at hand, and forcibly ejected the king's guard. 
They then let in Earl William and his men-at-arms, as it 
had been planned before, and in this way the two brothers 
got possession of the tower and the whole city. 

Bishop Alexander and the citizens sent intelligence of 
this occurrence to the king, who became greatly enraged at 
it, and was much astonished that two of his dearest friends, 
on whom he had lavished honours and dignities, should have 
acted so basely. In consequence, after Christmas, he assem- 
bled an army, and marching directly to Lincoln, took by a 
night surprise about seventeen men-at-arms who lay in the 
town, the citizens giving him their help. The two earls had 
shut themselves up in the castle, with their wives and most 
intimate friends ; and finding the place suddenly invested 
on all sides, became very anxious, not knowing what to 
do. 

At last, Hanulf, who being the youngest was the most 
active and venturesome, crept out by night with a few 
horsemen, and made for the county of Chester, among his 
own vassals. He then announced his quarrel with the king 
to Eobert, earl of Grloucester, his father-in-law, and others 
his friends and relations, and raising the Welsh, with the 
disinherited and many others, in arms against the king, 
gathered forces in every quarter to enable him to bring 
relief to the besieged. He also sought a special interview 
with Matilda, countess of Anjou, and pledging his fealty to 

^ We are indebted to Ordericus for these and some other incidental 
details connected with the surprise of Lincoln castle, and the conduct of 
the earls. 



216 OEDEKICUS YITALIS. [b.XIII. CH.XLIII. 

her, earnestly entreated her aid, -wliicli ^vas most graciously- 
granted. 

The two earls, having assembled a vast body of men nnder 
arms, marched towards the besieged place, and were prepared 
to give battle if any resistance was oifered. But the king 
slighted the reports which he daily received of the enemy's 
advance, and could not be persuaded that they were capable 
of, or would venture on, such an enterprise. Meanwhile, 
he constructed engines and prepared for the assault of the 
besieged, who implored his mercy. At length, on Sexagesima 
Sunday, while they were celebrating the feast of the Purifi- 
cation,^ the king in person having ascertained that the enemy 
was near, he called together his great lords and asked for 
their counsel under present circumstances. Some were of 
opinion that he should leave a large body of troops with the 
loyal citizens to defend the town, while he should march out 
with all honour and levy an army from every part of Eng- 
land ; with which he should return, when opportunity offered, 
and reduce the castle by storm with royal severity. Others 
recommended him to show due reverence to the feast of the 
Purification of St. Mary, mother of Grod, and by an exchange 
of messages with a view to terms of peace defer the engage- 
ment ; that through this delay neither party might be utterly 
prostrated, and human blood might not be shed to the 
sorrow of multitudes. However, the obstinate prince dis- 
dained to listen to these prudent counsels, and thought it 
dishonourable to defer the engagement for any considera- 
tions : he, therefore, gave orders for his troops to arm for 
battle. The armies met near the city, and being drawn up 
in order on both sides, battle was joined. 

The king divided his army into three bodies, and the same 
order was observed on the other side. The front rank of 
the royal army was composed of Flemings and Bretons, 
Tinder the command of William d'Tpres and Alain de 
Dinan. Opposed to them were a wild band of Welshmen, 
under their chiefs Meredith and " Kaladrius."^ The king 
himself, with some of his men-at-arms, dismounted, and 
fought on foot with great resolution for his life and king- 

1 Sexagesima Sunday fell that year (1141) on 2nd February, the feast of 
the Purification. 

2 Mariadoth et Kaladrius : Cadwallader (?) 



A.r. 1141.] BATTLE OF LIICCOLIT. 217 

dom. In like manner, Eanulf, earl of Chester, with his 
cavalry, also dismounted, and encouraged the bold infantry 
of Chester to the work of slaughter. As for Eobert, earl 
of Gloucester, who bore the most distinguished part in this 
expedition, he commanded that the men of Bath, and other 
disinherited gentlemen, should have the honour of striking 
the first blow for the recovery of their inheritances. 

At first, the battle was fought on both sides with great 
desperation, and there was much effusion of human blood. 
The best knights and men-at-arms were in the king's army ; 
but the enemy outnumbered them in infantry and the Welsh 
levies. It is certain that William d' Fpres with his Flemings, 
and Alain with his Bretons, were the first to give way ; 
thereby emboldening the enemy, and spreading panic in the 
ranks of their confederates. This engagement was disgrace- 
fully distinguished by the most scandalous treachery ; for 
some of the great lords, with a few of their retainers, accom- 
panied the king, while they sent the gi'eat body of their 
vassals to secure the victory to his adversaries.^ Thus they 
deceived their lord, and may justly be considered as perjured 
men and traitors. Count Waleran and his brother AYilliam 
de Warrenne, with Gilbert de Clare, and other knights of 
high renown, both Norman and English, as soon as they 
saw the first rank routed, turned their backs and fled in 
alarm for their own safety. On the other hand, Baldwin de 
Clare, Eichard ritz-IJrse, Engelran de Sai, and Ilbert de 
Lacy, stuck closely to the king during the battle, and 
fought stoutly by his side till the day was lost. 

As for King Stephen, mindful of the brave deeds of his 
ancestors, he fought with great courage ; and as long as 
three of his soldiers stood by him, he never ceased dealing 
heavy blows with his sword and a Norwegian battle-axe, 
with which some youth had supplied him. At last, worn 
out with fatigue and deserted by all, he surrendered to Earl 
Eobert, his cousin ; and being made prisoner, was by him 

^ This circumstance, which reminds us of the policy pursued in more 
modern times by some of the nobles who joined the Stuart pretender, is 
not mentioned by the English historians. On the whole, Ordericus gives a 
very faithful account of the important battle of Lincoln. It tallies, in the 
main, with Henry of Huntingdon's, which is the best we have met with 
and supplies many details not to be found in our author's narrative. 



218 OEDEHICUS YITALIS. [e.XIII. CH.XLIII. 

soon afterwards presented to the Countess Matilda. Thus, 
by a turn of the wheel of fortune, King Stephen was hurled 
from his throne, and, alas ! incarcerated in the important 
fortress of Bristol in anguish and misery. Baldwin de 
Clare and the other brave young soldiers, who dismounted 
with the king and fought gallantly, as I have just said, were 
made prisoners. 

The night before, while the people of Grod were keeping 
the eve of the feast dedicated to the honour of the Virgin 
Mother, and waited for matins, when a high mass was to be 
celebrated according to the rites of the church, a great 
storm of hail and rain fell in the western parts, that is, in 
Erance and Britain, and terrible claps of thunder were 
heard, accompanied by vivid flashes of lightning. 

On the very day of the battle, while the king was hearing 
mass before the engagement, and his mind was agitated, if 
I mistake not, by anxious care and thought, the consecrated 
w^ax- taper broke in his hand, and fell thrice to the ground 
in the presence of many witnesses. This was remarked by 
some judicious persons to be a manifest token of evil to 
come ; and the fall of the prince on the same day clearly 
explained the omen. The king's disaster filled with grief 
the clergy and monks and the common people ; because he 
was condescending and courteous to those who were good 
and quiet, and, if his treacherous nobles had allowed it, he 
would have put an end to their nefarious enterprises, and 
been a generous protector and benevolent friend of the 
country. 

The townsmen of Lincoln who had taken the king's side, 
as they were bound to do, he being also the lord of the 
place, finding that the enemy had obtained a complete 
victory, abandoned their wives and houses and all that they 
possessed, and fled to the neighbouring river, intending to 
save themselves by becoming exiles.^ E-ushing in great 

^ Henry of Huntingdon records the omen mentioned in the preceding 
paragraph, with the addition that the pix fell from the altar during the 
mass ; but he does not mention this disastrous attempt of the inhabitants 
of Lincoln to escape atter the battle. He only says that the city was 
given up to plunder. Notwithstanding that he was a canon of Lincoln, 
and, from the circumstantiality of his narrative, may be supposed to have 
been resident there at the time of the battle, Ordericus has been able to 
glean a variety of details omitted by the English historian. 



A.D. 1141.] HEIN'ET DE BLOIS CHAIfGES SIDES. 219 

crowds to the boats, in their haste they so overcrowded 
them with their numbers, losing all order and self-possession 
in the imminent fear of death, and those who came latest 
jumping in upon those who were first, that the boats were 
upset in a moment, and nearly all who were embarked (some 
say as many as five hundred of the principal citizens) perished. 
"William, a famous soldier and nephew of Geofirey, arch- 
bishop of Eouen, fell on the king's side. Of the others, as 
those report who were present, not more than a hundred 
were slain. 

Count Eanulf and his victorious comrades entered the 
city, and piUaged every quarter of it like barbarians. As 
for the citizens who remained, they butchered like cattle 
all whom they found and could lay hands on, putting them 
to death in various ways without the slightest pity. 

After this battle and the capture of the king, a great division 
arose in England. Henry, bishop of Winchester, immedi- 
ately joined the party of the Angevins ; and receiving the 
countess with respect in the royal city, entirely deserted his 
brother, the king, and all who were on his side. Earl 
Waleran, William de AYarrenne, Simon, and several other 
lords adhered to the queen, and pledged themselves to fight 
resolutely for the king and his heirs. ^ Thus the mischief 
spread on all sides, and England, which formerly overflowed 
with wealth, was now miserably desolated, and abandoned to 
rapine, fire, and slaughter. 

Ch. XLIY. Geoffrey^ couni of Anjou, comes into Normandy 
■The principal lords submit to him — Death of John, 
of Lisieux — Louis le Jeune marches to Thoulouse. 
Geoffeet, count of Anjou, as soon as he heard that his 
wife had triumphed, hastened to Normandy, and sent mes- 
sengers to the lords, requiring them, on their fealty, to 
surrender their castles into his hands and remain quiet. 
Eirst, in the ensuing Lent,^ Rotrou, count of Mortain, con- 
cluded a peace with Geoflrey, and, breaking the treaty 

' Stephen's queen, Matilda, supported by these lords and William 
d'Ypres' band of mercenaries, maintained herself in Kent until Stephen's 
release from captivity. The Simon here mentioned was Simon de Senlis, 
e:irl of Northampton. In the last words of the sentence our author pro- 
bably means the heirs of the late king. 

■^ March, 1141. 



220 OEDERICUS YTTALTS. [b.XIII. CH.'xLIV. 

whicli lie had made Trith the king, gave his support to the 
Angevins. He had lately found occasion for resentment 
against the king, for having given him no satisfaction when 
he appealed to him for the release of his nephew Eicher. For, 
one Sunday in September, during the feast of the Nativity 
of the blessed Mary,^ while Eicher de I'Aigle was peaceably 
on his road to England with a retinue of fifty soldiers, and 
arrived unarmed at the bourg called Lire,^ he Avas suddenly 
captiu'ed by Eobert de Belesme, who lay in ambush for him, 
and with whom he supposed that he was in profound peace. 
He lay six months in the dungeon at Breteuil, and this 
freebooter ravaged his lands and burnt his villages, without 
any pretence, in the most cruel manner. 

Count Eotrou, his uncle, was greatly afflicted at these 
furious outrages, and set his heart on getting his nephew 
liberated, and his domains out of his enemy's hands. He, 
therefore, took great pains to have Eobert de Belesme' s 
steps frequently watched by armed men. At last, in the 
end of October, by God's permission, Eotrou, having with 
him a strong troop, fell in with the miscreants, and capturing 
Eobert de Belesme, his brother Maurice, and several others, 
and loading them with fetters, their imprisonment afforded 
great security to the honest peasants. 

In the middle of Lent,^ the principal lords of Normandy 
assembled at Mortain, and had a conference concerning the 
affairs of the state. In consequence, Hugh, archbishop of 
Eouen, and some of the lords went to Theobald, count de 
Blois, and offered him the kingdom of England and the 
duchy of Normandy. However, like a religious and prudent 
man, he declined to burthen himself with the weight of such 
vast cares, but ceded his right to the throne, on certain 
conditions, to Geoffrey, King Henry's son-in-law. These 
conditions were, that Geoffrey should give up to him the 
city of Tours, which belonged to his fief; release his brother, 
Xing Stephen, from prison ; and restore to him and his heir 
all his ancient territories, as he held them during the life of 
his uncle. 

Then Eobert, earl of Leicester, concluded a treaty with 

1 Sunday, September 8, 1140. 

■■' Lire is in the canton of Rugles in the department of Eure. 

3 About March 9, 1141. 



A.D. 1141.] CASTLES SUEEEI^-DEEED TO GEOEEEET. 221 

Eotrou, and, at the instance of the counts who were present, 
set at liberty Eicher de I'Aigle. He also obtained a truce 
with the Angevins for himself and his brother AYaieran, 
until he returned from England. The garrison of Yerneuil, 
within whose circuit was comprised a population of thirteen 
thousand men who formerly assumed a menacing attitude 
towards the king, considering that the majority had sub- 
mitted to him, after a long resistance, began to abate their 
former obstinacy, and surrendering the fortress, transferred 
their allegiance to Count Greoffrey and Matilda. The garrison 
of JN^onancourt soon afterwards did the same.^ 

John, bishop of Lisieux, who was advanced in years and 
had gained much experience, being now left without any 
expectation of support, and no longer willing to submit to 
the hostilities of the Angevins, especially as he found their 
power everywhere established on the left bank of the Seine, 
and that many of the neighbouring garrisons were peaceably 
surrendered to them, after consulting his friends, concluded 
a peace with the count in the last week of Lent.^ On his 
return from Caen towards Lisieux, before Whitsuntide,^ his 
health gave way in consequence of the excessive heat of the 
season and the great fatigue he had undergone ; and after 
lying sick for a week, he died on the twelfth of the calends 
of June [21st May], in the thirty-fourth year of his episco- 
pate. Then Eotrou, bishop of Evreux, with Ealph, abbot of 
St. Evroult, and other abbots of the diocese of Lisieux, 
assembled, and buried his corpse in the church of St. Peter 
the Apostle, before the altar of St. Michael in the north 
aisle. 

After this, Lewis le Jeune, king of France, assembled a 
large army, and, at the feast of St. John the Baptist,* began 
his march to lay siege to Thoulouse, intending to make war 
on Count Alfonso, Raymond's son.^ 

^ Vemeuil and Nonancourt are in the arrondissement of Evreux. 
2 Between March 23 and 30, 1141. 
2 May 18 of the same year. 
^ June 24, 1141. 

^ Alfonso- Jourdain, count of Thoulouse, the son of Raymond IV. de 
St. GUles. 



222 OEDEEICTJS VITALIS. [B-XIH. CH.XLY. ^ 

Ch. XL v. The author concludes his history — Shortly reca- 
pitulates the events of his own life — And commends himself 
to the divine mercy. 

^And now, worn out by age and infirmities, I liave a strong 
wish to bring this book to a close, and from various circum- 
stances I have good reasons for so doing. I am now in the 
sixty-seventh year of my age, after a life spent in the service 
of my Lord Jesus Christ ; and while I see the great men of 
this world crushed by severe disasters and reduced to great 
adversity, I find myself, by God's grace, strong in the secu- 
rity given by my submission to discipline, and happy in the 
poverty it enjoins. See, how Stephen, king of EDgland, is 
kept in a doleful prison ; and Lewis, king of France, having 
led an expedition against the Groths and Grascons, is a prey 
to many anxious cares! See, how the episcopal chair at 
Lisieux is void ; and I know not when it will be filled, or 
what sort of bishop the successor to that see will prove. 
Need I say any more ? 

To thee, then. Almighty Grod, I address my discourse, and 
doubly implore thy mercy to have pity on me. I give thee 
thanks, Most High King, for that thou didst give me exist- 
ence without any merit of mine, and hast ordered the years 
of my life according to thy good pleasure. For thou art my 
King and my God, and I am thy servant and the son of thine 
handmaid ; and as far as I have been able I have served thee 
from the earliest days of my life. 

I was baptized on the Saturday of Easter, at Attingham, 
a village in England which stands on the bank of the great 
river Severn. There, by the ministry of Ordericus the priest, 
thou didst regenerate me with water and the Holy Spirit, 
and gavest me the name borne by this priest, who was my 
godfather. When I was five years old I was sent to school 
at Shrewsbury, and I oflfered to thee my services in the 
lowest order of the clergy in the church of SS. Peter and 
Paul, the Apostles. While there, Siward, a priest of great 

^ The touching recital which follows requires no observation. The 
principal occurrences in the life of Ordericus have been already noticed in 
the first volume of this work, and have again come under review in a 
Notice by M. Leopold Delisle, on its general scope and value, the chrono- 
logical system pursued by the author, and other matters connected with 
the History ; a translation of which is prefixed to the present volume. 



A.D. 1141.] THE author's biogeapky. 223 

eminence, instructed me in letters for five years from 
Carmenta Nicostrates, and taught me psalms and hymns 
with other necessary learning. Meanwhile, thou didst 
honour the church before named, which stood on the river 
Meole and belonged to my father, by causing a venerable 
monastery to be constructed on the site, through the pious 
devotion of Earl Eoger. 

It was not thy good pleasure that I should long serve 
thee in that place, subject to disquietude from my relations, 
for such are often a burthen and hindrance to thy servants ; 
and, therefore, thou didst not permit me to incur any obstacle 
to my observing the divine law, through the carnal affection 
of my kindred. Wherefore, glorious God, who bidst 
Abraham to depart from his own land and his father's house, 
and the society of his kinsmen, thou didst put it into the 
heart of my father Odelerius to separate me entirely from 
himself, and devote me, in body and soul, to thee. He, there- 
fore, amidst floods of tears, delivered me, also weeping 
bitterly, to the monk Eeynold, and sending me into exile 
for the love of thee, never saw me afterwards. Being then 
a young boy, it was not for me to oppose my father's will ; 
and he promised me, for his part, that if I became a monk I 
should partake with the Innocents the joys of Paradise. 
Having willingly made this covenant between me and thee, 
through my father's words, I left my country, my parents, 
and all my kindred, acquaintance, and friends, who took 
leave of me in tears, and commended me with affectionate 
prayers to thee, the Most High Grod, Adonai. Vouchsafe, 
I beseech thee, to receive their petitions, gracious King 
of Sabaoth, and mercifully grant the prayers they offered 
on my behalf ! 

I was ten years old when I crossed the British sea, and 
arrived in Normandy, an exile, unknown to all and knowing 
no one. Like Joseph in Egypt, I heard a language to which 
I was an utter stranger. iBut, supported by thy merciful 
goodness, I found the utmost kindness and attention amongst 
these foreigners. I was professed as a monk in the monas- 
tery of St. Evroult by the venerable Abbot Mainier, in the 
eleventh year of my age ; and I received the tonsure, as a 
clerk, on Sunday the eleventh of the calends of October 
[21st September]. He gave me the name of Yitalis, in 



224 OEDEEICTJS YITALTS. [b.XIII. CH.XLT. 

place of that I received in England, which seemed barbarous 
to the Normans. This name he borrowed from one of the 
companions of St. Mauricius the martyr, whose feast was 
celebrated on that day. In this monastery, through thy 
goodness, I have lived fifty-six years, loved and honoured 
by all my brethren and associates far more than I have de- 
served. Bearing the heat and cold and the burthen of the 
day in the vineyard of Sorech,^ I have laboured among thy 
servants ; and as thou art faithful, I fear not but I shall 
receive the penny which thou hast promised. 

I have reverently obeyed six abbots as my fathers and 
masters, because they were thy vicars ; namely, Maimer, Serlo, 
Roger, "Warin, Richard, and Ralph. They were the lawful su- 
periors of the convent of St. Evroult ; they watched over me 
and others as those that must give account ; they used their 
best endeavours in the interior and exterior concerns of the 
abbey ; and, with thy countenance and aid, they procured 
for us all things necessary. On the ides of March [15th 
March], when I was sixteen years old, at the instance of 
Serlo, then abbot-elect, I was ordained subdeacon by Gril- 
bert, bishop of Lisieux. Two years afterwards, on the 
seventh of the calends of April [26th March], Serlo, who 
had then become bishop of Seez, conferred on me the order 
of deacon, in which I did thee willing service for fifteen 
years. At length, in the thirty- third year of my age, on 
the twelfth of the calends of January [21st December], 
"William, archbishop of Rouen, laid on me the burthen of 
the priesthood. On the same day he ordained two hundred 
and forty-four deacons, and one hundred and twenty priests, 
in whose company I devoutly approached thy altar, under 
the influence of the Holy Spirit ; and I have now faithfully 
performed my sacred ministrations to thee, O God, in joy- 
fulness of heart for thirty-four years. 

Thus, Lord God, my creator and life-giver, thus through 
these various degrees hast thou bestowed thine unmerited 
gifts upon me, and justly set apart the years of my life for 
thy service. In all places to which from times long past I 
haVe been led by thee, thou hast caused me to be loved by 

^ Judges xvi. 4 : " And it came to pass afterwards, that he (Samson) 
loved a woman in the valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah." The 
allusion appears to refer to our author's labours in a strange land. 



A.D. 1141.] HE COMMENDS HIMSELF TO GOD. 225 

thj servants, not for my own worth, but of thy free good- 
ness. I give thee thanks, gracious Father, for all the 
benefits conferred upon me, and praise and bless thee with 
my whole heart. With tears in my eyes, I implore thy 
mercy for my innumerable offences. Spare me, O Lord, 
spare me, and bring me not into confusion. According to 
thy unwearied goodness, behold with compassion the work 
of thy hands, and pardon and cleanse me from all my sins. 
Give me the will to persevere in thy service, and never- 
failing strength against the malignant wiles of Satan, until, 
by thy help, I obtain the inheritance of eternal salvation. 
And those things which I ask for myself now and hereafter, 
O merciful God, I beseech also for my friends and benefac- 
tors. I implore them also for all thy faithful, according to 
thy good providence. And as our merits are not of sufficient 
efficacy to procure for us those eternal blessings to which 
the desires of the perfect ardently aspire, Lord God, 
omnipotent Father, creator and governor of angels, the true 
hope and everlasting bliss of the just, may the glorious 
intercession of the holy Mary, virgin and mother, and of all 
the Saints, be our help with thee, through the grace of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of all men, who liveth 
and reigneth with thee, in the unity of the Holy Spirit, one 
God, world without end ! Amen. 



THE EKD. 



YOL. rv. 



THE 



CHRONICLE OF ST. EVROULT. 



THE 

CHRONICLE OF ST. ETEOIJLT.' 



A.D. 

1. Christ was born, a.u.c. 752, in the twelfth year of the 

Emperor Octavian. 
12. Christ hears the doctors in the temple, and asks of them 

questions. 
15. The Emperor Octavian died, and was succeeded by 

Tiberius. 

27. Pontius Pilate is procurator in Judea. 

28. Yictorius commences his cycle with this year, in which 

there was a double consulship. It was the fifteenth 
year of Tiberius, who succeeded to the empire, a.d. 
15. 

30. Christ was baptized, and his miracles began. 

31. The passion of John is placed in the Chronicles under 

this year. 
33. Our Lord Jesus Christ suffered. 

37. On the death of Tiberius, Grains, sumamed Gaicula, 

became emperor. He released Herod from prison, 
and made him king of Judea. 

38. At this time Matthew wrote his gospel. 

39. Herod the tetrarch coming to Eome, is accused by 

Agrippa. He loses his tetrarchate, and fleeing to 
Spain with Herodias, dies of grief. 
42. Pilate being ill-treated by Gains, kills himself. 

^ This Chronicle is printed for the first time in the appendix to the fifth 
volume of the History of Ordericus Vitalis, lately published at Paris by the 
Societe de VHistoire de France. The text was supplied by two manu- 
scripts in the Imperial Library, one of which (A) is bound at the end of 
the Necrologe de Saint Evroult (^Suppl. Lat. 801), the other (D) forms part 
the Mesidu Saint-Germain (paq. 97, No. 5, Art. 8)< 



230 CHEONICLE or ST. EYEOULT. 

A.D. 

43. On tlie death of Graius, Claudius becomes emperor. 

47. Peter fixes his see at Eome. 

48. Mark publishes in Egypt the gospel which he had 

written at Eome. 

52. Claudius expelled the Jews from Eome. „ 

53. The great famine to which Luke refers. 

56. On the death of Claudius, Nero succeeded, under whom 
was the first persecution. Festus was procurator of 
Judea, by whom Paul is sent bound. Nero's admi- 
nistration being as yet humane, after two years he 
was set at liberty and permitted to preach. 

62. St. James, the brother of our Lord, suffered martyr- 

dom by being stoned to death. 

63. Mark the Evangelist was martyred. 

67. Peter ordained Linus and Cletus as bishops to perform 
the outward functions of the ministry, whilst he gave 
himself up to prayer and the word. 

70. Vespasian succeeded Nero. 

71. Peter was crucified. Paul was beheaded. 

72. Linus was bishop. Clemens succeeded Peter. 
The destruction of Jerusalem under Vespasian. 

78. Cletus, pope or bishop. 
80. Titus, emperor. 

82. Domitian, the brother of Titus. 

83. The second persecution. 

John is banished to the isle of Patmos. 

86. Cletus died. 

87. Clemens is pope. 

96. Sfc. Dionisius, the martyr. 

97. Nerva succeeded Domitian. His first edict recalled all 

the exiles. In consequence, John also returned to 
Ephesus. 

98. The Emperor Trajan succeeded Nerva, a.u.c. 850. 

99. John, the apostle, returned from exile. Pope Clemens 

died. 
101. This apostle John dies in the sixty-eighth year after 

our Lord's passion, and the ninety-eighth (?) of his 

own age. 
Symeon is bishop of Jerusalem. 
Ignatius, bishop of Antioch, is thrown to the wild 

beasts at Eome. 



CHRONICLE OF ST. EVEOTJLT. 231 

A.D. 

103. Pliny fhe Second, the historian, flourished. 

104. Evaristus is pope. 

114. Alexander becomes pope. He institutes the use of 

holy water. 

115. Simon, bishop of Jerusalem, is crucified. 

117. The Emperor Hadrian Helius restored Jerusalem and 
rebuilt the walls, commanding it to be called Helia, 
after his own name. This emperor made a final 
slaughter of the Jews, who had again rebelled, and 
deprived all Jews of the liberty of entering Jerusalem. 

119. Aquila, the interpreter, flourished. 

124. Pope Xistus. He appointed the hymn, " Holy, holy, 
holy," {Sanctus, &c.) to be sung in the oflice of the 
mass. 

134. Telesphorus, pope. He introduced the angelical hymn, 
Gloria in eoccelsis Deo (Glory to God in the 
highest), on fast days. 

138. The Emperor Antoninus Pius, with his sons, Aurelius 

and Lucius. 

139. Justin, the philosopher; Yalentinus and Marcion, 

heretics. 
145. Pope Higinus. 
149. Pope Pius, in whose time Hermes wrote his book 

called The Shepherd. 
157. Polycarp coming to Eome, freed many from heresy 

161. Marcus Antoninus Yerus, emperor ; with his brother 

Lucius Aurelius Commodus-. 

162. The fourth persecution. 
Galienus the physician flourished. 

163. The heresy of the Cataphrygse began. 
168. Pope Anicete. 

179. Pope Soter. 

180. Commodus succeeded Antoninus. 

181. Irenaeus, the famous bishop of Lyons, flourished. 
183. Theodotion, the interpreter, lived. 

188. Pope Eleutherius. Lucius, king of Britain, sent him 
a letter requesting to be made a Christian. 

193. Commodus being slain, Pertinax Severus becomes 
emperor. 

195. Symmachus, the interpreter, lived. 

196. The fifth persecution. 



232 cHEONiCLE or st. eveoult. 

196. JSTarcissus, bishop of Jerusalem, and Theophilus, bishop 
of Caesarea, flourished. 

202. Pope Victor. He decreed thstfc Easter should be cele- 
brated on a Sunday, as his predecessor Eleutherius 
had ordered. 

212. Antoninus Caracalla succeeded Severus. 
Pope Zephirinus. 

215. Tertullian flourished. 

218. Agbarus reigned about this time. 

219. Pope Calixtus. 

On the death of Antoninus, he was succeeded by 
Macrinus. 
221. Emmaus, in which village the disciples recognized the 
Lord, is enlarged to a town. 

224. Alexander succeeds Aurelius, 

225. His mother, Mammea, sends for Origen to Antioch, 

and treats him with great honour. 

226. Pope Urban. He appointed that the bishop's chair 

should be elevated like a throne. 

227. Origen becomes eminent at Alexandria. 
230. Pope Pontianus. 

235. Pope Antheros. 

237. Maximus succeeded Alexander. 

238. The sixth persecution. 
Pope Antheros. 

240. Maximus being slain, Grordian reigns. 

241. Africanus becomes distinguished among writers of 

eminence. 

242. Pope Fabian. 

243. Heraclias flourished. 

247. Philip, the first Christian emperor, ascends the throne. 
249. The year 1000 from the building of Eome. 

254. Decius succeeds Philip. 

Pope Cornelius. He raised the bodies of the apostles 
from the catacombs in the night-time, and deposited 
that of St. Paul on the Ostian Way, where he was 
beheaded, and that of St. Peter near the spot where 
he was crucified. 

255. On the death of Decius, Oallus becomes emperor, with 

his sou, Yolusianus. 

256. The seventh persecution. 



CHEONICLE OF ST. EVROULT. 233 

A.D. 

256. The ISTovatian heresy. 

257. On the death of Grallus, Yalenanus and his son, Gai- 

lienus, succeed ; under whom Cornelius, the pope, and 
Cyprian, the bishop, were crowned with martyrdom. 
Pope Lucius. 

259. The eighth persecution. 

261. Pope Stephen. 

265. Xistus pope, and Laurcutius deacon. 

268. Pope Dionysius. 

270. Claudius succeeds Yalerian. 
Pope Felix. 
Paul of Samosata founded his heresy. 

273. Aurelian succeeded Claudius. While he was raising a 
persecution of the Christians, a thunderbolt fell at 
his feet, to the great terror of those who stood round 
him. 

275. The eighth persecution. (?) 

278. On the death of Aurelian, Tacitus is raised to the 

empire. 

279. Probus succeeds Tacitus. 

The Manichean heresy took its rise. 
281. Pope Caius. 
283. On the death of Probus, Cams becomes emperor. 

285. On the death of Carus, Diocletian and Maximian 

succeeded. 

286. The tenth persecution. 
293. Pope Marcellinus. 
301. Pope Marcellus. 

306. On the death of Diocletian and Constantius, the 
Emperor Constantino succeeded. 
Pope Eusebius. 
St. Mallon, bishop of Eouen. 
308. Pope Melchiades. 
310. The Emperor Constantino. 

The year 1061 from the building of Rome. 
312. St. Silvester, the twenty-third pope. In his time the 
council of Nice was held: also that of Aries, at 
which Avician, archbishop of Eouen, was present. 
325. Severus, archbishop of Eouen. 
332. St. Martin was born. 
335. Pope Marcus. 



234 cHEo:s-iCLE of st. eveoult. 

A.D. 

326. Constantine was succeeded by Constantius, with his 
brothers, Constantine and Constans. 

337. The relics of Andrew and Luke are translated to Con- 

stantinople. 

338. Pope Julius. 

Maximin, bishop of Treves, enjoyed a great reputation. 
He gave refuge to Athanasius of Alexandria, when 
he was driven into exile. 

340. Hilary of Poitiers returned to the church. 

341. St. Nicholas departed. 
Eusebius, archbishop of Eouen. 

352. Pope Liberius. 

359. Pope Pelix. 

360. The pagans burn the bones of St. .John the Baptist, at 

the city of Sebaste, and scatter the ashes. 

361. On the death of Constantine, he is succeeded by Julian. 

362. Julian dies, and is succeeded by Jovian. 
Pope Pelix. 

363. On the death of Jovian, he is succeeded by Yalentinian. 

365. This is the seventeenth year of the Emperor Constans ; 

in which Anthony, the monk, died. 
At this time, Peter, the famour orator, flourished at 
Saragossa. 

366. Hilary of Poitiers died. 
Marcellinus, archbishop of Eouen. 

367. Pope Damasus. 

368. At this time St. Ambrose was ordained bishop at 

Milan. 

373. Hilary, the bishop, died at this time. 

374. On the death of Yalentinian, Yalens began to reign, 

with Gratian and Yalentinian. 

375. This emperor afflicted Ambrose by a perfidious siege, 

and did not desist from his nefarious enterprise until, 
by a revelation of Grod, the relics of SS, Grervase and 
Proteus, were brought to light undecayed. 
379. On the death of Yalens, he was succeeded by Theodo- 
sius, who reigned six years while Grratian lived, and 
eleven years after his death. 
At this time was held, under Damasus, the council of 
Constantinople against Macedonius and Eunomius, at 
which one hundred and fifty fathers were assembled. 



CHEOTTICLE or ST. ETEOITLT. 2c5 

A.D. 

385. Pope Siricius. 

386. Peter, archbisliop of Eonen. 

387. St. Martin was ordained bishop. 
395. Arcadius succeeded Theodosius. 
400. Pope Anastasius. 

403. Pope Innocent. He sent a decretal letter to Yictri- 
cius, archbishop of Eouen, and established the fast 
on Saturday, because on that day the Lord lay in the 
tomb. 

405. St. Yictricius, archbishop of Eouen. 

407. Donatus, a bishop of Epirus, was illustrious for mira- 
cles. He killed by his spittle an enormous dragon, 
which eight yoke of oxen had great difficulty in 
dragging to the place where it was burnt. 

409. Honorius succeeded Arcadius. 

410. At this time the bodies of St. Stephen, the martyr, 

and his companions, were found. 

412. The obit of St. Martin, archbishop of Tours. 

413. At this time lived St. Jerora, the priest. 

417. St. Innocent, archbishop of Eouen. 

418. Pope Zosimus. He instituted the benediction of 

candles. 

419. Boniface. 

420. Jerom, the priest, died. 

423. Honorius was succeeded by Theodosius, son of Arcadius. 
Pope Celestine. The council of Ephesus was held ; at 

which two hundred bishops assembled under the 

presidency of Cyril of Alexandria. 
At this time died the bishop Augustine, who opposed 

Nestorius, bishop of Constantinople. 

425. In this age the kingdom of the Pranks was founded. 

The first king was Pharamond. 

426. St. Evodus, archbishop of Eouen. 

430. Clovis, second king of the Pranks. 

431. Pope Xistus. At this time the devil appeared to the 

Jews in Crete under the form of Moses, and promised 
to lead them back to the promised land dryshod 
through the sea ; but after many of them had perished, 
the rest were converted to the grace of Christ. 

432. Maximus, bishop of Tours, was in great repute for the 

eloquence with which his sermons were composed. 



236 CHEOKICLE OP ST. EYEOTJLT. 

A.D. 

434. Silvester, archbishop of Eouen. 

437. Merovee, the third king of the Eranks. 

439. Pope Leo. He ratified the council of Chalcedon. 

442. Malson, archbishop of Eouen. 

449. Marcian and Yalentinian succeeded Theodosius. 

At this time the council of Chalcedon, at which six 
hundi'ed and thirty bishops were present, was held 
against Eutychius, the abbot, and Dioscorus. 

450. On the death of Merovee, his son Childebert reigned 

in his stead. 

451. Germanus, archbishop of Eouen. 
455. jNlaician succeeds Leo. 

459. Crescentius, archbishop of Eouen. 
461. Pope Hilary. 
467. Pope Simplicius. 

472. Leo again succeeded Leo. 

473. On the death of Childeric, Clovis is king. On the 

death of Leo, Zeno becomes emperor. 
At this time flourished St. Eemigius, archbisbop of 
Eheims ; St. Gildard, archbishop of Eouen ; and 
Laud, bishop of Coutances, who was consecrated by 
Gildard. 
482. Pope Felix. 

488. This year Clovis was baptized by the blessed Eemi- 

gius. 

489. On the death of Zeno, Anastasius is emperor. 

490. At this time St. Mamert, bishop of Vienne, instituted 

the yearly performance of litanies, that is, Eogations. 

491. Pope Gelasius. He composed treatises, hymns, and 

books against Eutyches and Nestorius. 

492. Theodoric succeeded Clovis. 
495. Pope Anastasius. 

497. Pope Symmachus. 

499. At this time flourished St. Elavius, archbishop of 

Eouen. 
509. St. Benedict died. 

512. Pope Hormisdas. 

513. Justin the elder is emperor. 

514. Theodebert succeeded Theoderic. 

517. On the death of Anastasius, Justin the elder succeeded. 
In this year was born our second father, St. Evroult. 



CHEONICLE OF ST. EVEOITLT. 237 

A.D. 

521. Pope John. 
523. Pope Pelix. 
525. Justinian succeeded Justin. 

527. Tlieodebald succeeded Theodebert, and reigned one 
year. He left four sons, of whom Caribert reigned 
at Paris ; Guntran at Orleans ; Chilperic at Soissons ; 
and Sigobert at Metz.^ 

Pope Boniface. 

At this time Dionjsius compiled the paschal cycle at 
Rome. 

Phen, Priscian was profoundly versed in grammar. 
530. Pope John [II]. 

At this time flourished Arator the poet, a subdeacon of 
the E/oman church. 

Pope Agapeto. 

St. Pretextatus, archbishop of Kouen. 

Pope Silverius. 

Yigilius. 

At this time Sigebert, king of the Pranks, was treach- 
erously slain by his brother, Chilperic, against whom 
he had engaged in war ; and his kingdom fell to his 
son Childebert, a boy: his mother, Brunichilde,^ 
governed it as regent. 

Pope Pelagius. 

Justin the Younger is emperor. 

Pope John [III]. 

Tiberius succeeded Justin. 

Chilperic, king of the Pranks. 

Pope Pelagius. 

Mauritius succeeded Tiberius. 

Pretextatus, archbishop of Eouen, is assassinated. He 

was succeeded by Melantius, who was unworthy' ot 

the honour, because, as it is reported, he was accused 

of having been concerned in his predecessor's death. 

585. Childebert, king of the Pranks. Benedict, pope. 

588. King Lothaire. 

St. Ouen was born in this year. 

589. King Childebert gave his sister, Ingunda, to Erminald 

» See before, vol. ii. p. 283. 
' Brunehaut. See ib, 
' See vol. iii. p. 145. 



238 CHRONICLE OF ST. EYEOULT. 

A.D. 

Levitgitd, king of the Yisigoths, ^Y]lo was converted 
to tlie catholic faith by the exhortations of Leander, 
bishop of Seville, joined to those of his wife. 

591. Pope Gregory. He added to the canon of the mass 
the words, Diesque nostras in tua pace dispone: 
" Grive peace in our days." 

594. Hildulf, archbishop of Rouen. 

596. St. Evroult, the abbot, died. 

At this time the monastery of St. Benedict^ was laid 
in ruins by the Lombards. Constantine was the 
successor of St. Benedict. After him came Simpli- 
cius ; then Vitalis ; and then Bonitus, in whose time 
the monastery was destroyed. 

598. Theodebert, king of the Franks, and Theodoric, made 
war on theii* cousin Clotaire, and grievously afflicted 
him. 

603. On the death of Maurice, the first of the Grreek 
emperors, he was succeeded by Phocas. 

605. St. G-regory, the pope, died. 

606. Pope Sabinian. 

608. Pope Boniface [lY]. 

609. On the death of Phocas, he was succeeded by Hera- 

clius. 
611. At this time St. Columban flourished, and built Luxeuil, 

and afterwards Bobbio, in the lower part of Italy. 
615. Deusdedit, pope. 
617. At this time Theodebert, king of the Pranks, was slain, 

and a great battle was fought between them. 
Pope Boniface. He obtained from the Emperor Phocas 

the temple called the Pantheon. 

620. King Dagobert. 

621. Pope Honorius. 

622. St. Eomanus, archbishop of Eouen, flourished, and was 

eminent for his wonderful sanctity. 
625. Hionysius's cycle of ninety and five years occurred now. 
It commences from the thirtieth year of our Lord's 
nativity, and ends in the six hundred and twenty- 
sixth year. This calendar of ninety years, called by 
the Greeks Evvbu xai dsxadsza, was adopted by the 
holy fathers in the Nicene council, in which the 
Monte Cassino. 



CHRONICLE or ST. EYEOTJLT. 239 



A.D. 



fourteenth paschal moon is found every year without 
any error. 

633. Clovis, son of Dagobert, is king. Severinus is pope. 

634. John [IV], pope. 

635. Pope Theodore. St. Ouen is ordained bishop. 
637. Heracleon succeeded Heraclius. 

640. On the death of Heracleon, he is succeeded by Con- 
stantine. On the death of Constantino, his brother 
Constantine reigns. 

Pope Martin. 

Paul, bishop of Constantinople, founds his heresy. 

Pope Eugenius. 

Pope Vitalian. 

St. Philibert. 

St. Wandrille, abbot. 

On the death of Clovis, his son Clothaire reigns. 

Pope Adeodatus. 

Pope Donus. 

On the death of Constantine, another Constantine 
succeeded. 

Pope Agatho. 

An eclipse of the moon. 

A very grievous mortality. 

Pope Leo [II]. 

Pope Benedict [II]. 

Pope John [Y]. 

St. Ouen departed in the Lord, and was succeeded in 
the archbishopric by St. Ansbert. 

Theodoric succeeded Clothaire ; . . . . and Childeric 
usurped the kingdom. 

Pope Leo [II]. 

On the death of Childeric, Theodoric is king. 

Benedict, [Pope Benedict II.] 

On the death of Constantine, he is succeeded by Jus- 
tinian the younger. 

Pope John [YI]. 

Conon is pope. 

Pepin is the first mayor of the palace. According to 
Isidore, this was the 5998th year from the beginning 
of the world. 

Pope Sergius. 



240 CHEOWICLE OF ST. ETEOTJLT. 

A.D. 

690. Cedwall, king of the Angles, died at Eome. Theodore, 
archbishop of Canterbury, died. 

694. On the death of Justinian, he was succeeded by [the 

emperor] Leo. 

695. St. Ansbert, archbishop of Eouen, died. He was 

succeeded by G-ripo. 

696. "Willebrod was ordained by Pope Sergius bishop of the 

Erisians. 

697. Tiberius succeeded Leo the emperor. 

698. Clovis succeeded Theodoric. 

700. Clovis was succeeded by his brother, Childebert. 
704. On the death of Tiberius, Justinian succeeded. 
708. Pope John [VII]. 

710. Philip succeeded Justin. Sisinnius is pope. 

711. On the death of Philip, Anastasius succeeded. 
Pope Constantino. 

713. St. Wulfran. 

714. Theodosius succeeded Anastasius. 

715. On the death of Theodosius, Leo succeeded. 

716. Childebert dies, and is succeeded by Dagobert. 

717. Charles, the son of Pepin, becomes mayor of the 

palace. 

718. A battle was fought in the Yimeux, between Charles 

Martel and the usurper Eainfrid, who was defeated, 
and Anjou granted to him. 
Pope G-regory [IV]. 

719. Eaniland, archbishop of Eouen. 

720. On the death of Dagobert, the Pranks raised to the 

throne Daniel, a clerk. 
722. Hugh the archbishop. He was not only [arch] bishop 

of Eouen, but also presided over the churches of 

Paris and Bayeux, and the abbeys of Jumieges and 

Pontenelles. 
724. The Emperor Leo died, and was succeeded by Con- 

stantine. 

729. Beda flourished. 

730. St. Hugh, archbishop of Eouen, died; Eadbert suc- 

ceeded. 
Tatwine succeeded Berth wald as archbishop of Canter- 
bury. 
734. Pope Gregory [III]. 



CHRONICLE OF ST. EVROFLT. 241 

A.D. 

738. On the death of Grrimo, the archbishop Ramfrid suc- 
ceeded. 

741. Charles [Martel] dies, and Carloman and Pepin become 
mayors of the palace. 

743. Pope Zachary. 

746. Carloman went in pilgrimage to Eome, and became a 
monk at Mount Sarepta, where he built a monastery 
in honour of St. Silvester. Thence he removed to 
the abbey of St. Benedict at Monte Cassino. 

752. Pepin is made king. 
Pope Stephen. 

753. Guy, abbot of Fontenelles. 

754. The Emperor Constantine, the son of Leo, assembles 

a council of three hundred and thirty bishops at 
Constantinople. 

755. In the course of this year, the Lord Eemigius was 

placed in the see of the church of Eoueu, Kainfrid 
having been expelled from the archbishopric. 

756. St. Stephen, the pope, gave the benediction at Paris 

to King Pepin, with his sons, Charles and Carloman, 
and his daughter, Sigila, while a solemn mass was 
being celebrated, under the invocation of SS. Peter 
and Paul, and St. Denis. 

757. St. Boniface, archbishop of ISfentz. 

758. Pope Paul. 

761. The Emperor Constantine sends presents to Pepin. 

763. This winter was extremely severe. 

766. Pope Paul died. 

767. Constantine is pope. 

768. King Pepin died on the eighth of the calends of Oc- 

tober [Sept. 24]. 
Pope Stephen [III]. 

769. The beginning of the reign of King Charles [Charle- 

magne] . 

771. Carloman, the brother of Charles, died on the second 

of the nones of December [December 4]. 
Pope Adrian. 

772. Meinard, archbisliop of Eouen. 

774. Charles goes to Eome. On his return thence he took 
Pavia, and made King Desiderius prisoner. He also 
reducedandpillaged all the cities of Italy [Lombardy?], 

YOL. IV. E 



242 CHE0^'ICLE or st. eveoult. 

A.D. 

776. The Saxons are converted. 

778. Charles razed to the ground the city of Pampekma 
and, uniting his army at Saragossa, after taking 
hostages, and receiving the submission of the Sara- 
cens, he returned through Xarbonne and Gascony. 
This year Charles entered Spain, and went into 
Saxony. 

780. Saxony was reduced. 
Gilbert, archbishop of Eouen. 

781. Charles goes to Rome. 

783. The Emperor Leo, the son of Constantine, reigned five 
years. Witichingis and his companions having been 
baptized at Andernach, they made an offering of 
part of the kingdom. 

786. The sign of the cross was used on garments. Charles 

goes again to Eome, and then to St. Benedict's [Monte 
Cassino] and Capua. 

787. Constantine reigns jointly with his mother Irene. 

788. Charles passes through Germany to the territory of 

Bavaria. 
790. Duke Tassilo comes to France, and Bavaria is reduced. 

792. Charles marches against the Sclaves, who are called 

"Wiltzes. A council is held at Frankfort, under 
Theophilatus and Stephen, bishops, and legates of 
the apostolical see ; and by the authority of the holy 
fathers, Felix, a bishop, who had set forth the doc- 
trine that the Lord Jesus was the son of God, not 
properly, but by adoption, was condemned and sen- 
tenced to perpetual banishment. 

793. King Charles ravages the kingdom of Hungary. 
796. Pope Leo [III]. 

799. There was a tremendous earthquake, which was felt 

through nearly the whole of Italy, and laid in ruins 
the greatest part of the church of St. Paul [^fuori 
muri, at Eome], and brought to the ground the 
timbers of the roof. 

800. The lord King Charles was made emperor at Eome, 

and saluted by the Eomans with the title of Augustus. 
He condemned to death those who had dishonoured 
Pope Leo, but at the pope's request spared them 
from capital punishment, and banished them. For 



CHRONICLE or ST. EYEOULT. 243 

A.D. 

Pope Leo had crowned and consecrated him as 
emperor. 

804. Pope Leo came to Prance, and celebrated the Nativity 

of our Lord with the Emperor Charles at the vill 
of Cressy. 

805. Mcephorus, the brother of Irene, rules Constantinople. 
808. St. Liudger, bishop and confessor, Charles's own chap- 
lain, departs this life. 

810. Charles makes an alliance with Nicephorus, emperor of 

Constantinople. 

811. Nicephorus died, and was succeeded by his son-in-law, 

Michael, who sends ambassadors to the Emperor 
Charles to renew the alliance. 

813. Charles crowns his son Lewis as emperor at the palace 

of Aix-la-Chapelle. He assembled synods for the 
promotion of Christianity in four parts of his empire ; 
namely, Mentz, Rheims, Tours, and Chalons. 

814. Leo, the son of Bardas, reigned six years [at Constan- 

tinople]. 

The Emperor Charles died. 

The beginning of the reign of Lewis, the son of Charle- 
magne. 

815. Bernard, king of the Lombards, had his eyes put out 

and died. 

819. The Emperor Lewis went into Brittany, and Mormann 

was slain. 

820. Michael is emperor. 
Pope Stephen [lY]. 

821. Pope Paschal. 

822. A severe famine. 

823. The vision of Yuetan. 

Charles, the son of Lewis, was born at Erankfort on 
the ides of June [June 13], where the emperor spent 
the winter in the new palace. He was crovnied at 
Eome by Pope Paschal, with the title of emperor, on 
Easter-day. 
825. King Lewis again marches into Brittany. 

827. Pope Eugenius. 

828. Theophilus, emperor of Constantinople. Eagnoard 

takes the archbishopric of Eouen. 
831. In this year Lewis was set aside, and Lothaire elected. 

E 2 



244 CHRONICLE OF ST. ETEOULT. 

A.T). 

83 L. Pope "Valentine. 

833. Lewis was recalled to the throne. 

834. Pope Gregory. 

836. The relics of St. Philibert were translated from the 
island of Herio,^ on the sevcDth of the ides of June 
[June 7], when the Northmen ravaged Brittany and 
other territories. 

838. In this year Grumbald received the hishopric of Eouen. 

839. Michael, the son of Theophilus, succeeded his father. 

840. The Emperor Lewis died on the twelfth of the calends 

of July [June 20], and Drogo, his brother, caused 
his body to be carried to the city of JMetz for inter- 
ment. 

841. There was a battle between the three brothers, Lewis, 

Lothaire, and Charles [the Bald], sons of the Em- 
peror Lewis, in the neighbourhood of Auxerre, on 
the seventh of the calends of July [June 25], in which 
the Christians engaged on both sides mutually 
slaughtered each other. The empire was divided. 

842. The translation of the relics of St. Ouen, bishop, on the 

ides of May [May 15], at the time that the ISTormans 
sacked Eouen and burnt his monastery. 

848. Pope Sergius [II]. 

849. Paul was consecrated archbishop [of Eouen]; 

851. At this time the Northmen came into the Seine. 

852. Pope Leo [IV]. 

The Northmen came for the second time. 
855. The Emperor Lothaire, son of Lewis, died. Paul the 
archbishop died. This same year TVanilo was con- 
secrated archbishop. 

859. This year it began to freeze on the second of the 

calends of December [Nov, 30], and the frost lasted 
till the nones of April [iVpril 5]. 

860. Pope Benedict [III]. 
862. Pope Nicholas. 

865. The Northmen landed In the middle of July. 

866. Basilius, having murdered his sovereign, Michael, 

reigned twenty years. 
Wanilo, the archbishop, died, and was succeeded by 
Adelard. 
^ The island of Noirmoutiers, at the mouth of the Loire. 



CHEONICLE OF ST. EVEOULT. 245 

A.D. 

868. A severe famme. 

869, A famine again, accompanied by great mortality among 

men and a murrain of cattle. Adelard died, and was 
succeeded by Riculf. 

871. A great storm of wind. 
Pope Adrian [II]. 

872. Biculf died, and was succeeded by John. 

874. John, archbishop of Eouen, died. 

875. Witto died, and was succeeded by Franco. 

876. The death of King Lewis. Charles makes a second 

expedition to Italy, and Carloman enters that 
country from another quarter. Charles becomes 
terrified, and retreating, dies on his journe3\ 
Pope John [VIII]. 

This year, EoUo and his bands penetrated into Nor- 
mandy on the fifteenth of the calends of December 
[November 17]. 

879. Lewis, king of Saxony, makes an inroad on Bavaria, 
while his brother, Carloman, was still living. The 
war between the Franks and the Pagans [Saracens] 
began. By God's help they gained a victory under 
Lewis, the son of King Lewis, and great numbers of 
the enemy were put to the sword. 

884. The Northmen settled at Dieubourg. 

886. Pope Marinus. 

887. Leo and Alexander, the sons of Basil, reigned twenty- 

two years. 

888. The Emperor Charles died. Arnulf is elected em- 

peror. 
Pope Adrian [III]. 

889. Pope Stephen [VI]. 

893. The beginning of the reign of Charles-the-boy [Charles 

the Simple]. 
At this time, the city of Evreux was taken, but the 

bishop, whose name was Sevar, by God's mercy 

escaped. 
898. The Huns invaded Italy, and committed great ravages. 

The Emperor Arnulf died, and Lewis was raised to 

the throne. 
At this time EoUo and his army laid siege to Chartres ; 

but the bishop of that see, Gualtelm by name, a most 



246 CHEOXICLE OF ST. ETEOULT. 

A.D. 

religious prelate, summoned Eichard, duke of Bur- 
gundy, and Ebles, count of Poitiers, to his aid, and 
carrying in his hands the tunic of the Virgin Mary, 
routed Duke Eollo by God's help, and saved the 
city. 
900. King Zuintibold killed the son of Arnulf.^ 
904. A battle was fought between the Frank princes, Con- 
rad and Adalbert, in which Conrad fell. 

908. Alexander reigns at Constantinople for one year. The 

Huns devastate Saxony and Thuringia. 

909. Constantino Porphyrogenitus, son of Leo, with his 

mother Zoe. 
911. Lewis, son of Arnulf, died. King Burchard is slain. 
Conrad, the son of Conrad, is made king. 
This year Eollo was baptized by Franco. 

913. Eomanus, the Armenian, with Constantino before- 

named, reigned twenty-six years. 

914. Peace was made between Charles and Eollo, and 

Charles gave him his daughter Gisela in marriage, 
by whom he had no son. 

915. At this time the relics of St. Ouen were carried back 

from France to ISTormandy. 

917. On the death of Grisela, Eollo married Popa, daughter 
of the Count [Berenger of Bayeux], by whom he had 
a son named William. 
Eollo, the first duke of jSTormandy, died, and was suc- 
ceeded by his son William [Longsword]. 

919. The King [emperor] Conrad died, and was succeeded 
by Henry. 
At this time Franco died, and was succeeded by Gun- 
hard, 

922. This year died Charles, and was succeeded by Lewis. 

927. At this time an alliance was made between Lewis, king 
of France, and Henry, king^ [emperor] of Germany, 
at the treaty for which, William, duke of ISTormandy, 
and Eichard, duke of Burgundy, were present. 
William, on his journey back from the conference, 
was sponsor for Lothaire, Lewis's son, who was bap- 
tized at Lyons. 

934. Henry died, and Otho succeeded him. 

^ This entry occurs twice, being repeated under the year 902. 



cheo:n'icle oe st. eveoult. 247 

A D. 

934. At this time a battle was fouglit between Count "Wil- 
liam and the treacherous Ealph, and other rebels 
against Count William, at a place called "Battle- 
Mead." 

938. Constantino, with his young son Eomanus, reigned 
fifteen years. 

942. William, duke of Normandy, the son of Eollo, was 
slain on the sixteenth of the calends of January 
[Dec. 17] ; and was succeeded by his son Eichard, 
surnamed the Elder. 
Bishop Grunhard died, and was succeeded by Hugh, a 
monk by profession but not in deed. 

945. This year Herluin was slain. 

951. King Otho invaded Italy, and reduced it to submission. 

953, Stephen and Constantino, the sons of Eomanus, deposed 
their father from the imperial throne ; but Constan- 
tino, in turn, expelled them both, and, associated 
with his son Eomanus, reigned sixteen years. 

957. Ludolf, son of King Otho, died in Italy, which he had 
reduced to submission. 

961. Otho, an infant, was raised to the throne at the palace 
of Aix-la-Chapelle. 

969. Nicephorus emperor. 

972. The Emperor Otho died. 

At this time Harold, king of Denmark, on the invita- 
tion of the Normans who were faithful to their boy- 
duke Eichard, landed in Normandy, and fought 
against King Lewis [d'Outre-mer]. In this battle 
Herluin, count of Montreuil, was slain, and King 
Lewis taken prisoner ; but the Queen Gerberga, by 
the advice of Hugh the G-reat, delivered her son 
Lothaire, and two bishops, Hilderic of Beauvais and 
Guy of Soissons, as hostages for the performance of 
the treaty, by virtue of which the king was set at 
liberty, and Count Eichard was firmly established in 
his territories. 

976. Lothaire, king of the Eranks, dies, and Lewis, his son, 

reigned nine years. 
979. Nicephorus having been murdered by his wife, was 
succeeded by John, whose niece, Theophania, married 
the Emperor Otho [II]. 



248 CHEO^'ICLE OF ST. EVROULT. 

A.D. 

983. The Emperor Otho the Younger died, and was suc- 
ceeded by his infant son Otho. 

986. At this time died Lewis ; and Hugh the Great im- 
prisoned Charles, Lewis's brother, and reigned in 
his stead. 

989. Robert, archbishop of Eouen. 

993. Eobert, king of France. 

996. Bichard I., duke of Normandy, the son of "William, 
died. He was succeeded by his son, Eichard II. 

999. Gerbert became pope [Silvester II]. 

1002. The Emperor Otho died, and was succeeded by Henry 

[IV]. 

1003. Pope John [XVI]. 

1006. Abbot Hildebert died. He rebuilt the monastery of 

St. Ouen. 
1017. The Countess Judith died. 

1024. The Emperor Henry died. He was succeeded by 

Conon [Conrad II.], emperor and Augustus. 
Pope Benedict [VIII.], died. 

1025. AVilliam the Monk,^ son of Count Eichard, died. 

1026. Eichard II., duke of Normandy, died, and was suc- 

ceeded by Eichard III., who died the same year. 
His brother Eobert then became duke, 
1031. Eobert, king of Erance, died, and was succeeded by 
his son Henry. 
The Countess Grunnor also died. 

1033. Matilda, the daughter of Count Eichard, died.^ 

1034. John [XVIII.], pope. He was brother of Bene- 

dict. 

1035. Eobert, duke of Normandy, died, and was succeeded 

by his son William, a boy of tender years. 

1036. Pope Benedict [IX.], nephew of Benedict [VIII.], 

and John [XVIII]. 

1037. Eobert, the archbishop, died. Malger succeeded 

him, but was deposed for his misdemeanors. 
1039. The Emperor Conrad died, and was succeeded by his 
son Henry. 

' He was a monk of Fecamp, and son of Richard II., duke of Nor- 
mandy, by Judith, daughter of Geoffrey, duke of Brittany. 

^ 'i'he youngest daughter of Rich, ml I., wife of Eudes, count of 
Chartres, and l^i^ter of Emma, queen of England. 



CHEONICLE OF ST. EYROULT. 249 

A.D. 

1039. Pope Clement [II.], called Suier, and bishop of Bam- 
berg. 

1042. A great mortality among mankind. 

1047. The battle of Valesdunes. 

1048. Pope Damasus. 

1049. In this year Pope Leo held a council at Eheims. 

1050. The abbey of St. Evroult, which had been laid in 

ruins by the Danes, was rebuilt, and a certain, 
venerable monk of Jumieges, named Theodoric, was 
appointed abbot. 

1054. The battle of Mortemer. 

Pope Leo, also named Bruno, died. 

1055. Mauger, having been deposed, was succeeded by 

Maurilius, as archbishop of Bouen. 

1056. Henry [III.], emperor of the Eomans, died, and was 

succeeded by his son, Henry [IV]. 

1057. Pope Victor died. 

1058. Pope Stephen died. 

Abbot Theodoric resigned the administration of the 
church of St. Evroult, and died in Cyprus. 

Bobert de Grentmesnil was appointed in his place. 
1060. Henry [IV], king of Prance, died, and was succeeded 
by his son Philip. 

This year Abbot Bobert went to Bome, and Osbern, 
prior of Cormeilles, was made abbot. 

Pope Nicholas [II]. 

In the month of September, this year, John was con- 
secrated bishop of Avranches. 

1062. Pope Alexander II. 

1063. In this year Maine was reduced under the dominion 

of William, count of Normandy. 
The dedication of the church of St. Mary at Bouen. 

1065. Edward, king of England, died. 

1066. A comet appeared. 

Conan, count of Brittany, died. 

William, duke of Normandy, passed the sea on the 
twelfth of the calends of October [Sept. 25],' with 
a powerful body of Normans \_cum validd manu] ; 

* Ordericus states in his History, that the duke's fleet crossed the sea on 
the night of September 29, being the feast of St. Michael. See before, 
vol. i. p. 481. 



250 CHEO>'ICLE OF ST. ETROULT. 

A.D. 

Harold hastened to meet him and give him battle, 
and an engagement was fought on the second of 
the ides of October [Oct, 14], in which Harold and 
his army were put to the sword. After this, "Wil- 
liam was raised to the throne on Christmas day at 
London, the capital of England. 

1066. Lanfranc was appointed the first abbot of Caen ; and 
on the death of Osbern he was succeeded by Mai- 
nier as abbot of St. Evroult. 

3067. Maurilius, archbishop of Eouen, who had been a 
monk of Fecamp, died. 

1069. He was succeeded by John, son of Ealph [count of 
Bayeux], brother of Eichard. John had already 
governed the church of Avranches^ for seven years 
and three months, when, at the request of Pope 
Alexander, and with the leave of William, prince of 
JN'ormandy and king of England, he accepted the 
see of the church of Rouen. 

1073. Pope Grregory [VII], previously called Hildebrand. 
In this year the monks of St. Ouen invaded the 

rights of John, archbishop of Eouen .... 

1074. A synod was held this year in the city of Eouen, 

under William, king of England and prince of 
JS'ormandy, and John, the archbishop, assisted by 
his suffragans, Odo, bishop of Bayeux, Hugh of 
Lisieux, Michael of Avranches, Grilbert of Evreux, 
and Eobert of Seez. 

1075. This year William, king of England, on the holy day 

of Easter, offered his daughter to be consecrated to 
God in the church of Fecamp by the hands of John, 
the archbishop. At the same time he made the 
good law, that no one should assault another for 
the homicide of any kinsman, except the murderers 
of a father or a son. 

1077. The church of St. Stephen at Caen was dedicated this 
year. 

1079. John, archbishop of Eouen, died. This John was 
succeeded by William, archbishop of Eouen, who 
had been a monk and abbot of St. Stephen at Caen. 

^ See vol. ii. pp. 123 and 167. 



CHEOXICLE or ST. EYROULT. 251 

A.D. 

1081. There was a violent storm of wind on Christmas 

night. 
1084. This year died Matilda, the illustrious queen of 
England, by whose noble munificence many benefits 
were conferred on our convent. 
Grregory VII., having been expelled from Eome by 
the Emperor Henry .... was invited to Eavenna.^ 
There was a great schism throughout the "West. 
1087. In this year died William, king of England and duke 
of IN'ormandy, whose kindness and equity contributed 
so much to the welfare of the church .... caused 
it to serve Grod in perpetual peace and concord. 
The body of St. Nicholas was translated from Myra 
to Bari, on the ninth day of May. 
1089. Lanfranc, archbishop of Canterbury, died ; and, three 
years afterwards, he was succeeded by Anselm, 
abbot of Bee. 
Mainier, abbot of St. Evroult, died, and was succeeded 
by Serb. 
1091. Serlo was made bishop of Lisieux, and Eoger du Sap 

succeeded him in the church of St. Evroult. 
1095. There was a severe drought and great mortality; 
and, in the month of May, stars appeared to fall 
from heaven. 
Pope Urban held a great council at Clermont, and 
exhorted Christians to undertake the crusade to 
Jerusalem against the Pagans. 
Then there was a severe famine. 

1098. On the fifth of the calends of October [Sept. 27] the 

heavens seemed to be on fire. 
On the day of our Lord's Nativity the sun was 

turned to darkness. 
Hugh de Grrentmesnil, the founder of the monastery 

of St. Evroult, died. 

1099. Jerusalem was taken by the crusaders on the ides of 

July [July 15], the Gentiles, who had long possessed 

it, having been conquered. 
Pope Urban [II.] died this year, and was succeeded 

by Paschal. 
The church of St. Evroult at Ouche was dedicated. 
1 Cf. vol. i. D. 372. 



252 CHEONICLE OF ST. EYEOULT. 

A.D. 

1100. "William Eufas, king of England, was killed by an 
arrow while hunting. He was succeeded by his 
brother Henry. 
1106. The battle of Tinchebrai, in which Henry, king of 
England, took his brother Bobert, duke of Sor- 
mandy, prisoner. 
Geoffrey Martel, son of Eulk, count of Anjou, was 

slain. 
Bohemond went into Spain at the time when a comet 

appeared. 
The Emperor Henry died, and was succeeded by his 
brother Charles [Henry Y]. 
1108. Philip, king of Erance, died, and his son Lewis suc- 
ceeded him. 
3109. In this year and the two following, a severe famine 
prevailed in Erance. 
Anselm, archbisliop of Canterbury, died ; also Hugh, 
abbot of Cluni, died, and was succeeded by Pons. 

1110. A comet was visible from the fourth of the ides of 

June [June 10] to the second of the calends of 
July [June 30]." 

Helias, count of Maine, died. 

William, archbishop of Eouen, died, and was suc- 
ceeded by Geoffrey the Breton, dean of Mans. 

1111. Duke Bohemond died. 

The Emperor Charles made Pope Paschal prisoner. 

1112. Bobert de Belesme was arrested. 

Gilbert, bishop of Evreux, died. He was succeeded 
by Oueu, in whose time the cathedral church, with 
the whole city, was destroyed by fire, when Amauri 
held the castle against King Henry, who besieged 
it. 

1118. Pope Paschal [XL] died. He was succeeded by Gela- 

sius [II.], into whose church Bourdin, the heretic, 
intruded himself. 
There was a violent storm of wind on the night of 
Christmas, which threw down many houses and 
trees in the Western parts. 

1119. Also in this year, on the night of the feast of St. 

Thomas.^ There was a great earthquake in Britain, 
1 Dec. 21. The words " a violent storm of wind " are understood. 



CHRONICLE OF ST. EYKOTJLT. 253 

A.D. 

.... on the fourth of the calends of October 
[September 28]. 

1119. Pope Gelasius XL died on the fourth of the calends of 

February [.Jan. 29]. 
Pope Calixtus II. assembled a very numerous council 

at P-heims. 
There was a battle in the Yexin, on the thirteenth of 

the calends of September [August 20], between 

Henry, king of England, and Lewis, king of Prance ; 

where Lewis was defeated by Henry, and made a 

disgraceful retreat. 

1120. A peace was made between Henry, king of England, 

and. Lewis, king of France, after great losses suf- 
fered on both sides. 
When the king of England was returning to his 
kingdom, his sons, William and Eichard, with a 
great number of the nobility of different countries, 
perished by shipwreck on the seventh of the calends 
of December [Nov. 25]. 

1123. Some of the Normans having revolted, namely, 

Amauri, count of Evreux, and Waleran, count of 
Mellent, with their accomplices. King Henry burnt 
and took their castles of Montfort, Brionne, and 
Pontaudemer. After many reverses, Count Wale- 
ran was taken prisoner, with thirty men-at-arms. 

On the death of Ealph, archbishop of Canterbury, he 
was succeeded by AVilliam Curboil. 

On Ascension day, Warin, abbot of St. Evroult, was 
consecrated by Serlo, bishop of Seez. 

1124. On the death of Serlo, he was succeeded as bishop of 

Seez by John. 

1125. At this time there were great changes among princes. 

The Emperor Charles Henry V. died ; and Lothaire, 
duke of Saxony, was elected in his place. Charles, 
duke of Flanders, was killed while performing his 
devotions in a church during mass, and was suc- 
ceedeu by William the Norman, who was cut off in 
the year following. On the death of Pope Calixtus 
[II.], he was succeeded by Honorius [II]. 

1126. The churches of St. Gervase at Seez, and St. Ouen at 

Eouen, were consecrated. 



254 CHEONICLE OF ST. EVEOULT. 

A.D. 

1126. William, duke of Poitiers, William, duke of Apulia, 
and Abbot Eoger, died. 

1128. Germund, patriarch of Jerusalem, and Geoffrey, arch- 
bishop of Eouen, died. 

1130. Baldwin II., king of Jerusalem, died on the eighteenth 
of the calends of September [August 15], and was 
succeeded by Eulk, count of Anjou, his son-in-law. 
Hugh of Amboise, abbot of Heading, was made arch- 
bishop of Eouen. 
Pope Honorius died at Eome ; and there was forth- 
with a grievous schism in the church ; Gregory, the 
deacon, being elected pope by some, with the name 
of Innocent, but Peter Anaclete was consecrated 
by others. 

1133. The Emperor Lothaire sat down before Eome in order 

to restore peace to the people of God, who were in 
error either on the side of Gregory or Peter ; but 
after seven weeks he retired without settling this 
affair. 
Eichard, bishop of Bayeux, died .... 

1134. Eobert II., duke of Normandy, died at Cardiff, and 

was buried at Gloucester. 
Alfonso, king of Arragon, died, after the battle of 

Fraga. 
Chartres and Mans were destroyed by fire. 

1135. Henry, king of England, the firm lover of peace and 

protector of the church, died. He was succeeded 
by his nephew, Stephen. 

1137. Lewis Theobald, king of Erance, died. His son 

Lewis succeeded him. 
Warin, abbot of St. Evroult, died. 

1138. The Emperor Lothaire died, while he was on his 

return, after reducing Apulia to submission. He 
was succeeded by Conrad, the nephew of the Em- 
peror Charles. Eoger, king of Sicily, recovered 
Apulia, and his son Eoger having taken Pope Inno- 
cent, he made peace with him on his o^vn terms. 
Peter, the schismatical pope, died suddenly. 

1139. Pope Innocent held a great council at Eome. 

1140. Eichard, abbot of St. Evroult, died, and was succeeded 

by Ealph. 



CHRONICLE OF ST. EVEOULT. 255 

A.D. 

1141. Jolin, bishop of Lisieux, died, and was succeeded bj 

his nephew Arnulf. 
Here Vitahs brings his Ecclesiastical History to an 
end.^ 

1142. There was a great earthquake in the neighbourhood 

of E/Ouen, and throughout nearly all the diocese. 
Pope Innocent died, and was succeeded by Celestine. 

1143. On the death of Celestine, he was succeeded the same 

year by Lucius. 

1144. Eugenius succeeded Lucius. 

1145. In many countries, and chiefly on the borders of 

Erance and Grermany, men took the place of oxen 
in drawing carts loaded with corn and the other 
necessaries of life ; and, attended with many divme 
manifestations, brought them from all quarters for 
the use of Grod's servants, without any display of 
vanity. 
1147. The Emperor Conrad, and Lewis, king of Erance, 
undertaking a crusade to Jerusalem, with an im- 
mense army, marched by Hungary and Constan- 
tinople treachery through certain 

deserts .... perished. 

1150. Henry, growing up to youthful age, is made duke Ol 

Normandy. 

1151. G-eoffrey Martel, count of Aujou, died ; a prince, just 

.... victorious, pious ; and distinguished for his 
singular good faith, and .... in arms, valour, and 
eloquence. 

1153. Pope Eugenius died. Anastasius succeeded. 

1154. A treaty of peace is concluded between Stephen, king 

of England, and Henry, duke of Normandy. In 
the same .... Lewis, king of Erance .... duke 

of Normandy. Likewise, in the same he 

was invested in the duchy of Aquitaine. 
Pope Anastasius died, and was succeeded by Adrian. 
1157. In this year the king reduced the "Welsh to subjection. 
Gerard, bishop of Seez, died ; a man of eloquence and 

' See before, p. 222 ; and the Notice M. Delisle prefixed to the present 
volume. This entry in the Chronicle appears to have been written in the 
fourteenth century. 



256 CHROKICLE OF ST. EVROULT. 

A.D. 

pious memory. He was succeeded by Frogere, the 

almoner of Henry II. 
1158 A wonderful alliance was contracted between the 

king of England and King Lewis, cemented by a 

union of the children of the two kings ; and all the 

territories which had belonged to his predecessors 

were restored to King Henry. 
1160. Eobert, a monk of Bee, was made abbot of St. Evroult. 
Pope Adrian died, and was succeeded by Alexander. 
1163. Baldwin, king of Jerusalem, died. He was young, 

brave, and a true lover of Christianity. His brother 

Amauri succeeded him. 
Pope Alexander held a council at Tours, in which he 

excommunicated the schismatic Octavian and his 

adherents. 
1165. Hugh, archbishop of Eouen, died, and was succeeded 

by Robert, bishop of Evreux. 
1170. Henry, the son of Henry II., was, by his father's 

command, crowned as king at London by the arch- 
bishop of York. 
Thomas, the righteous archbishop of Canterbury, was 

murdered by impious men in his own church on the 

fifth day before Christmas. 
1174. Lewis, king of France, laid siege to Eouen with his 

army; but the citizens making a stout resistance, 

he drew off in disgrace. 
1177. Eobert, abbot of St. Evroult, died, and was succeeded 

by Ralph. 

1179. Pope Alexander held a great council at Rome. 

1180. Lewis, king of France, died, and was succeeded by 

his son Philip. 

1181. Pope Alexander III. died, and was succeeded by 

Lucius. 

1182. Arnulf, bishop of Lisieux, died, and was succeeded by 

Ralph. 

1183. King Henry the younger, son of Henry II., died. 
Rotrou, archbishop of Rouen, died, and was succeeded 

by AYalter. 

1184. Frogere, bishop of Se'ez, died, and was succeeded by 

Lisiard. 

1185. Pope Lucius III. died, and was succeeded by Urban. 



CHEONICLE OF ST. EVKOULT. 257 

A.D. 

1187. Pope Urban died, and was succeeded oj Clement. 

1188. E-alph, abbot of St. Evroult, died, and was succeeded 

by Richard. 

1189. Eicbard, abbot of St. Evroult, died, and was succeeded 

by Eeginald. 
Henry II., king of England, died at Chinon. He 
was a good prince, a lover of peace, and distinguished 
for his good faith, prowess in arms, courage, and 
eloquence. His son Eichard succeeded to the 
throne. 

1190. In this year Philip, king of France, and Eichard, 

king of England, departed on a crusade to Jerusa- 
lem, with an immense army, on the morrow of St. 
John the Baptist [June 25]. 

1191. Pope Clement died, and was succeeded by Celestine. 
Ealph, bishop of Lisieux, died, and was succeeded by 

William, 
The island of Cyprus was reduced to submission to 
the king of England, after the prince who had 
usurped its dominion had been defeated in three 
engagements. Likewise, in this same year, the 
city of Acre was surrendered to the Christians on 
the third of the ides of July [July 13]. 

1193. Eichard, king of England, is made captive by the 

emperor of Germany when returning from Jeru- 
salem. 
In this year Philip, king of Erance, laid siege to 
Eouen ; but gaining no advantage, ... he retired. 

1194. The king of England returns from Germany to his 

own dominions. 
Philip besieges Verneuil. 
Meanwhile (?) king Eichard razes the fortresses of 

Beaumont and Evreux. He reduces by force Lo- 

cheth (?), and many other castles. 
This year the king of Erance burnt Evreux, with all 

the churches and abbeys. 

1198. Philip, king of Erance, and Eichard, king of England, 

fought a battle this year at Gisors. 
Pope Celestine died, and was succeeded by Pope 
Innocent III. 

1199. Now died Eichard, the noble king of England, son of 

YOL. lY. S 



258 CHEONICLE OF ST. EYEOULT. 

A.D. 

Henry II., whose prowess and valour ought to be 
had in everlasting remembrance. He was succeeded 
by his brother John. 

1200. "Warine, bishop of Evreux, died, and was succeeded 

by Eobert de lioia. 
"William, bishop of Lisieux, died, and was succeeded 
by Jourdain. 

1201. In this year Philip, king of France, besieged the 

castle of Ealou. 
Lisiard, bishop of Seez, died, and was succeeded by 
Sylvester. 

1202. There was a movement of pilgrims to Jerusalem. 
Greoffrey, count of Perche, [died]. 

This year the king of Prance besieged Eadepont and 

Arques. 
Meanwhile, John, king of England, at Mirabel, took 

Arthur, count of Brittany, with many nobles, and 

an immense number of soldiers, wlio had revolted 

against him. 
Eobert, bishop of Evreux, died, and was succeeded by 

Luke. 

1203. There was an earthquake through nearly all Palestine, 

by which houses and cities were laid in ruins. 

1204. This year John, king of England, left JSTormandy, 

because nearly all the great lords deserted him, and 

gave their adhesion to Philip, king of Prance.^ 
1208. Otho, son of the duke of Saxony, and nephew of the 

king of England, and count of Poitiers, received the 

imperial crown, with great honours, at Eome in the 

month of November. 
"Walter, archbishop of Eouen, died, and was succeeded 

by Eobert. 
1212. The noble countess of Leicester, who loved the monks 

of St. Evroult as sons, died. 

1214. In this year Eeginald, abbot of St. Evroult, was 

deposed. Herbert succeeded him. 

1215. Pope Innocent held a great council at Eome. 

1216. Lewis, son of the king of Prance, went to England. 

' This article, and the preceding one, are not found in the Manuscript 
of St. Evroult. (A.) 



CHEONICLE OF ST. EYROULT. 259 

A.D. 

1216. Jotn, king of England, died, and was succeeded by 

Lis son Henry. 
Pope Innocent died, and was succeeded by Honorius. 

1217. Herbert, abbot of St. Evroult, died, and was succeeded 

by Geoffrey. 
Thomas, count of Percbe, was slain. 

1218. Greoffrey, abbot of St. Evroult, died, and was succeeded 

by Eoger, prior of Preaux. 
Jourdain, bishop of Lisieux, died, and was succeeded 
by "William. 

1219. This year the city of Damietta was taken by the 

Christians on the nones of jSTovember [ISTov. 5]. 

1222. Damietta was abandoned by the Christians. 

Luke, bishop of Evreux, died, and was succeeded by 
Ealph. 

1223. Philip, king of Prance, died on the day before the 

ides of July [July 14].^ He was succeeded by his 

son Louis. 
Sylvester, bishop of S^ez, died, and was succeeded by 

Gervase, an Englishman. 
The same year died Ealph, bishop of Evreux, and was 

succeeded by Pichard, abbot of Bee. 
Eobert, archbishop of Eouen, died, and was succeeded 

by Theobald. 

1225. Pope Honorius died, and was succeeded by Gregory, 

bishop of Ostia. 
"William, bishop of Catalonia, and count of Perche, 
died. 

1226. Louis, king of Prance, died, and was succeeded by 

his son Louis, a boy, who is now canonized.^ 

1228. Gervase, bishop of S^ez, died, and was succeeded by 

Hugh, prior of the canons. 

1229. Alas! the university of the clerks deserted Paris. 
Theobald, archbishop of Eouen, died, and was suc- 
ceeded by Maurice, bishop of Mans. 

1231. The foundations of the church of St. Evroult were 
laid this year by brother Baldwin.^ 

» The MS. B adds « at Mans." 

^ Qui nunc saiictus est. This last clause of the sentence was added in 
the l4th century. 

' See vol. iii. note pp. 246, 247. 

S 2 



260 CHEOITICLE OP ST. EYEOTJLT. 

A.D. 

1232. Philip, count of Boulogne, died. 

1233. Robert, count of Dreux, died. 

Boger, abbot of St. Evroult, died, and was succeeded 
by IN'icholas. 

1235. Maurice, archbishop of Eouen, died, and was succeeded 

by Peter Eomanus. 

1236. Eichard, bishop of Evreux, who had been abbot of 

Bee, died, and was succeeded by Ealph, archdeacon 
of Creuilly. 

1237. Peter Eomanus, archbishop of E-oueu, was consecrated 

in this year. 

1239. Many nobles went on the crusades to Jerusalem from 

Prance. 

1240. Hugh, bishop of Seez, died, and was succeeded by 

Geoffrey, a canon of Eouen. 
1243. Pope Grregory YIII. (?) died, and was succeeded by 

Innocent. 
Ealph, bishop of Evreux, died, and was succeeded by 

John, dean of Turon. 
1245. This year Peter, archbishop of Eouen, being^ made a 

cardinal, he was succeeded by Odo, abbot of St. Denis. 

1247. Nicholas, abbot of St. Evroult, joined the order of 

the Carthusians. He was succeeded by Eichard de 
Courjon. 

1248. Odo, archbishop of Eouen, died, and was succeeded 

by Eigault, of the order of Priars-Minors. 
In this year, on the ides of July [July 15], Louis, 
king of Prance, began his march to the Holy Land, 
at the head of his army. 

1249. This year Damietta was taken by the Crusaders, that 

is, by King Louis ; but in the same year the king 
was taken prisoner, and an immense number of 
the Christians were slain, and the king evacuated 
Damietta. 

1250. William de Pont de I'Arche, bishop of Lisieux, died, 

and was ■ succeeded by Pulk Dastin, dean of that 
church. 

1255. Died, John of St, Evroult, dean of Lisieux, who con- 
ferred many benefits upon us. 

1257. Geoffrey, bishop of Seez, died, and was succeeded by 
Thomas d'Aunon, 



CHEONICLE OF ST. EYEOTJLT. 261 

AD. 

1258. The heir of Saint Ceneri was born on the feast of 
the nativity of St. John the Baptist. 

1261. Pope Alexander died, and was succeeded by Urban. 

1262. "William, a knight, and lord of Saint-Ce'neri, died. 
264. Pope Urban died, and was succeeded by Clement. 

1265. In this year Symon, earl of Montfort, made war 

against Henry, king of England, and Eichard, king 
of Germany, with their sons, and in the first battle 
took them prisoners ; but in the end he, and his son 
Henry, alas ! fell miserably by their swords. 

1266. Charles, count of Anjou, having been crowned king 

of Sicily by Pope Clement, fought a battle with 
Manfred, at Benevento, and, by God's grace, be- 
came master of Apulia, Calabria, and Sicily. 

1267. Pulk, bishop of Lisieux, died, and was succeeded by 

Master Guy de Merula. 

1269. Eichard de Valle-de-Courjon, abbot of St. Evroult, 

died, and was succeeded by Nicholas de Yillaribus, 
prior of Moleine. 

1270. Louis, king of Erance, went on a crusade to Jeru- 

salem, with many of his nobles, and died the same 
year on his return. 
1272. Henry [III.], king of England, died, and was succeeded 
by his son Edward. 

1274. This year brother Nicholas de Yillaribus made a vo- 

luntary resignation of the charge of the abbey, and 
was succeeded by William de Montpin9on. 

1275. Pope Gregory X. died, and was succeeded by Inno- 

cent Y., who died the same year. 
Odo Eigaud, archbishop of Eouen, died, and was suc- 
ceeded by Master "William de Elava-Curia three 
years afterwards. 

1276. On the morrow of the nativity of the blessed Mary 

[Sept. 9], a daughter was born to the heir of 
Saint-Ceneri. 

1278. Thomas d'Aunon, bishop of Seez, died, and was suc- 
ceeded by Master John de Berners, official of 
Lisieux. 
Pope Nicholas died. Pope Martin succeeded him. 

1281. Philip de Cahors, bishop of Evreux, died, and was 
succeeded by Nicholas d'Autueil. 



262 CHEOIflCLE OE ST. EVEOULT. 

A.D. 

1282. William de Montpin9on, abbot of St. Evroult, died, 

and was succeeded by Geoffrey de Grirouart, prior 
of Alfay. 

1283. Master J. Cholet, the legate of our lord tbe pope, 

assembled a very numerous synod at Paris, after 
the feast of the assumption of St. Mary [Au- 
gust 15]. 
There was a violent thunder-storm about the time of 
high mass on Easter day, by which many persons, 
chiefly in the diocese of Seez, were injured. 

1284. Charles, king of Sicily, died. 

On the eve of St. Catherine [ISTov. 24], a violent 
storm of wind blew down many towers, woods, and 
trees ; the tower newly erected at St. Evroult then 
fell. 

1285. Philip, king of Prance, died at IN'arbonne, on his 

journey back from Arragon, and was succeeded by 
his son Philip. 

The same year died Peter, the infidel king of Arra- 
gon, and was succeeded by Alfonzo. 

Grny, bishop of Lisieux, died, and was succeeded by 
Master William d'Arnieres, chanter of that ca- 
thedral. 

1289. Louis, the eldest son of Philip, king of Prance, was 

born on the eve of Saint Denis [October 9]. 

1290. On the sixteenth of the calends of March [Feb. 14], 

at twelve o'clock, the moon suffered an eclipse, and 
on the same night an earthquake was felt in several 
places. 

1291. The summer was excessively hot, and the winter 

severely cold, with snow and frost 

This year Acre Avas laid in ruins by the Pagans, all 

.... being put to the sword. At Eouen .... 

the archbishop .... Haricuria, bishop of Cou- 

tances .... councils. 
1294. Master J. de Berners, bishop of Seez, died, and was 

succeeded by Master Philip Boulenger, prior of St, 

Gervase, in the same place. 
John, lord of Saint-Ceneri, died. 
The same year, in the month of May, there was a vio- 
lent inundation in the district of Exmes, which sud- 



CHROIflCLE OP ST. ETEOULT. 263 

A.D. 

denly did great damage, breaking through the banks 
of the fish-ponds, burying arable-lands and meadows, 
uprooting trees, levelling mills, bridges and houses, 
beating down the corn, besides many human beings 
and animals perishing in the floods. 
1296. There was such an inundation of water this year, that 
the great bridge and the little bridge at Paris fell, 
and all the bridges over the Seine were partly 
ruined, except Pont-de-l'Arche.^ This happened 
about Christmas. Hence the verses : — 

" Parisiis vere pontes, gens, tecta ruerunt 
Undis, milleno, c bis, novies decta, seno." 

"Swept by the floods, men, houses, bridges mix 
At Paris, in twelve hundred, ninety-six." 

1298. The remains of St. Lewis, king of France, were trans- 
lated this year ; and the king of England, and the 
count of rianders, rebelled against the king of 
France, St. Lewis's nephew. 
This year died "William d'Arnieres, of pious memory, 
formerly bishop of Lisieux. He was succeeded by 
John, of the order of Friars-Minors, who was then 
bishop of Eennes in Brittany. 

1303. John de Semes, of the order of Friars-Minors, bishop 
of Lisieux, died, and was succeeded by Gruy de 
Harcourt. 
This year brother Geoffrey de Gyrouart voluntarily 
resigned, and was succeeded by brother Thomas de 
Ductu. 

1306. This year the Jews were expelled from the kingdom 

of France. 

1307. This year peace was made and ratified between the 

kings of England and France, and the king of Eng- 
land received the daughter of the king of France in 
marriage, the nuptials being solemnized at Bou- 
logne- sur-mer. 
1309. This year died Thomas de Ductu, abbot of this 

' A town on the right bank of the Seine, a little above its confluence 
with the Eure, at which there is a bridge of twenty -two archea over the 
Seine. 



264 CHEONICLE OF ST. EVEOULT. 

A.D. 

monastery; who was succeeded by Nicholas de 
Ponte-Cardonis.^ 

1314. Philip, king of France, died this year, and was suc- 

ceeded by Louis, his eldest son, who took to wife 
the daughter of the king of Hungary. 
The same year Enguerran de Marigni was hanged, 
and many other outrages were committed in the 
kingdom. 

1315. This year brother IN'icholas de Ponte-Cardonis made 

a voluntary resignation of the charge of the abbey 
of St. Evroult ; and was succeeded by brother 
Ealph Grrente, the prior, who was then in England, 
but by divine inspiration unanimously elected abbot. 
Master Philip Boulenger, bishop of Seez, died, and was 
succeeded by Master Eichard de Centilleio (?) prior 
of the convent of the same place. 

1316. This year died Lewis, king of France and Navarre, 

and was succeeded by his brother Philip. 
^ A manuscript brought from the abbey of St. Evroult, and now pre- 
served in the Library at Alencon (f. 58. v.), has the following entries 
relative to this period. The writing is of the I4th century : 
1313. This year Louis and Charles, the sons of Philip, king of France, 
were divorced from their wives for cause of fornication. They 
afterwards succeeded to the crown. 

1315. This year the lord abbot, N. de Ductu, made a voluntary resignation 

of the office of abbot of St. Evroult, and was succeeded by Ralph 
Grente. 

1316. There was an earthquake this year in these parts. 

1320. The lord Ralph Grente, abbot of St. Evroult, died, and was suc- 

ceeded by Richard Tie'scelin. 

1321. The lepers were burnt throughout almost all France, on account of 

the potions which they had compounded for the general destruction 
of the people [universi populi] ; and [by which ?] numbers of 
them were exterminated [aterminati?]. 

1322. This year Charles, king of France, the son of King Philip, after the 

death of King Philip the Younger, his brother, espoused the 
daughter of the king of Bohemia. 

1323. In this year the daughter of the king of Bohemia died. 

This year there was a battle, with great loss, between the Normans 
and the French, and . . . ; that is, between those who belonged 
to parts beyond the sea, and those on this side, and much blood 
was shed by both. 

1324. This year great damage was done by thunder-storms. 

This year the winds were very tempestuous during the spring, and 
many houses and trees were levelled to the ground by the fury of 
the storm. 



CHRONICLE OF ST. EVEOTJLT. 265 

A.D. 

1319. This year died Master Eichard de Centilleio (?) bishop 

of Seez, and was succeeded by "William Malger, 
chanter of that church. 
This year^ there was a prodigious disturbance of the 
elements, causing great damage. Many trees were 
thrown down by the violence of the winds, among 
which, the wood .... of the abbot of Dive. 
There was thunder and great .... 

1320. This year died Ealph Grente, abbot of St. Evroult, 

who was succeeded by Eichard Tiescelin. 

1321. The lepers were burnt throughout the kingdom of 

iPrance. 
Philip, king of Trance, died ; and was succeeded by 
his brother Charles, at that time count of Marche. 

1324. The kings of France and England engaged in war 
respecting the territory of Grascony, and the castle 
of La Eiole was taken by the king of Prance. 
In the same year died [Mary], queen of Erance, the 
daughter of the king of Bohemia, as also her infant 
son. After her death king Charles married the 
daughter of Louis, count of Evreux, who was his 
cousin-german. 

1327. Charles, king of Erance, died, and was succeeded by 
his son, a child in the cradle, who lived only about 
half a year. After his death Philip, a cousin-ger- 
man. of king Charles, and who had been jointly with 
the queen, guardian of the boy-king and regent, 
ascended the throne. 
In this year died Geoffrey, bishop of Evreux, and was 
succeeded by brother J. de Preaux, of the order of 
Eriars-Preachers . 

1330. In this year died William, archbishop of Eouen, who 
had before been a monk and bishop of Langres. 
He was succeeded by Peter, a monk, who was arch- 
bishop of Soissons, and a man of high dignity. 

1334. This year died Eichard Tiescelin, abbot of this monas- 
tery ; brother Nicholas Herbert, then the cloisterer, 
succeeded him. 



It is doubtful whether this entry belongs to the year here assigned to 



266 CHEONICLE OF ST. EYEOTJLT. 

AD. 

1334. In tlie same year died Pope John XYII., who was 
succeeded by Benedict XII., a monk of the Cister- 
cian order. 

1336. This year died Guy de Harcourt, bishop of Lisieux, 
who was succeeded by William Chermont. 

1342. This year died Benedict XII., who was succeeded by 
Clement YI. This prelate's rise was most extraor- 
dinary. His original name was Master Peter Eo- 
gers, master in theology; and he was formerly a 
monk of the order of 8t. Benedict. After that he 
was made successively abbot of Pecamp and arch- 
bishop [of Soissons]. He then became archbishop 
of Eouen, and was taken from thence and made a 
cardinal. 

1346. This year the king of England entered Prance, land- 

ing at Saint Waast-la-Hogue. After trampling 
under foot nearly the whole of JNTormandy and 
Prance, returning by the bridge of Poiss (?) he 
burnt "Wulgatium.^ 
The two kings joined battle at a vill called Crecy, 
where the king of England gained the victory, and 
the king of Bohemia, with two dukes, six counts, 
and a great multitude of nobles, were slain. He 
took the to^vn of Calais, and held it for a long time.^ 

1347. This year, brother JNlcholas Herbert voluntarily re- 

signed the charge of the abbey of St. Evroult, and 
was succeeded by brother J. du Bois-Gruescelin, who 
was that time cellarer at the before-named abbey. 

1348. In this year a disease, called by the learned epidemy, 

came into the world, beginning in the east and 
spreading w^estward 

1 St. Gennain-en-Laye? 

2 This entry, recording the irruption of Edward III. into Normandy 
and France, followed by tlie battle of Crdcy in 1346, is generally exact. 
The English king advaiiced along the valley of the Seine, and his light 
troops burned St. Germain, and several villages within sight of Paris. 
But that he crossed the Seine by the bridge of Poissy is contrary to the ac- 
counts given by historians of his having found all the bridges over the Seine 
and the Somme broken down. He forded the Somme at BJanchetaque, 
near its embouchure, while the French were compelled to ascend its left 
bank ; and the two armies met at Crecy. The battle was fought on the 
26th of August, 1346 



CHEONICLE OP ST. EYE0T7LT. 267 

A.D. 

1350. This year died Philip, king of Fi-ance, and was suc- 
ceeded by his son John. 

1352. This year died Nicholas Herbert, abbot of this mo- 

nastery. 

1353. In this year Johanna, lady of Moles, who 

was possessed by a devil, obtained a cure through 
the merits of St. Evroult. 

1358. This year the lord John du Bois-Guescelin, abbot of 
this monastery, brought to us one shoulder-bone, 
and one joint of the thumb, of our most holy father 
St. Evroult, on the day of his translation. 

1363. John, king of France, died at London, in England, 
and was succeeded by his son Charles. 

1366. John du Bois-Gruescelin, abbot of this monastery, 
died, and was succeeded by Philip the Breton. 

1370. Urban Y. died, and was succeeded by Gregory XI. 

1392. This year died the lord abbot Philip the Breton, and 
the same year the abbey of St. Evroult was given in 
commendam, by Pope Clement YII., to a certain 
cardinal, by the title of Sta. Cecilia, whose name 
was De Vergey. He held the abbey for the space 
of four years or thereabouts, and was then suc- 
ceeded by Eobert de Tellier, a monk of Bee, and 
prior of St. Tmer. 

1408. This year died brother Eobert de Tellier, who was at 
first a monk de Bosco [? of Bee], and conferred 
many benefits on the abbey, which he ruled for the 
space of thirteen years or more. He was succeeded 
by brother Michael Philippi de St. Martin, prior of 
Noyon. 

1415. The English put many Frenchmen to the sword on 
St. Crispin's day.^ 
Then also the town of Harfleur was taken.^ 

1438. This year died Michael Philippi, abbot of this monas- 
tery ; afterwards Eobert I'Apostole succeeded. 

' In the text this entry is in hexameter verse : — 

" Crispini multos stravit gens Anglica Franfos." 

We have translated as closely as possible the brief record of the victory of 
Azincour, fought on the feast of St. Crispin [October 25]. 
' Henry V. landed at Harfleur 



268 cheo:mcle or st. eyeotjlt. 

A.D. 

1444. A truce was made between the kings of Trance and 

England. 
1444. In this year the king entered the city of Eouen. 
1450. This year Normandy was recovered from the English, 

and reduced under the dominion of the Erench. 

1459. This year died brother Eobert 1' Apostle, our abbot, 

afterwards brother William Selleys succeeded him. 

1460. This year there was a deadly pestilence in the monas- 

tery, of which twelve monks died. 

1461. Charles, the most illustrious king of Erance, died this 

year, and Louis, his most noble son, reigned in 
his stead, and did many wonderful works in his 
kingdom. 

1466. On the twenty-second of September, as we sorrow- 
fully record, the venerable Lord "William Selleys, 
the late humble abbot of this monastery, departed 
this life. He was a native of the bourg of Ouche, 
and repaired, with great magnificence, the buildings 
of the abbey of St. Evroult, which had become ruin- 
ous in all parts in consequence of the wars. He also 
erected new buildings, and long and largely aug- 
mented the church revenues. Need more be added ? 
Having governed the abbey well, both in spirituals 
and temporals, he afterwards made a blessed end 
during his journey to Eome, and his body was in- 
terred in the abbey of St. Nine, five leagues distant 
from Dijon, near the door of the choir. He was 
succeeded by Jacobus d'Espinasse, a monk of Cluni. 

1484. Brother Jacobus d'Espinasse, abbot of this monastery 
of St. Evroult, died on the last day of October in 
this year. He was succeeded by Anger de Brie, 
the prothonotary. 

1503. On the third day of October, in the year 1503, died 
Master Anger de Brye, the commendator of this 
monastery of St. Evroult, and was succeeded by his 
nephew, Master Eelix de Brye, the prothonotar}'. 



THE END or THE CHEONICLE. 



CHEONOLOaiCAL INDEX 

TO THE 

HISTOEY OF ORDERICUS VITALIS, 



A.D. 

Lillebonne and Rouen are founded by Julius Caesar, ii. 130; iv. 20 

—22. 

The castles of Exmes and Gac6e resist Caesar's assaults, ii. 276. 

Life of St. Martial, apostle of the Gauls, i. 296—312. 

Mission of St. Nicasius, ii. 131. 

Lifeof St. Taurinus, ii. 132— 136. 

Foundation of the city of Coutances, ii. 139. 

The monastery of Deux-Jumeaux founded, ii. 275. 

VI. Century. Life of Evroult, ii. 273—296. 
596. Death of St. Evroult, ii. 146—294. 

VII. Century. Life of St. Judoc, i. 472—479. 

648. Fontenelles, or St. Wandrille's abbey founded, i. 378. 
654. Abbey of Jumieges founded, l 278. 
About 670. A monastery founded by St. C6neri, ii. 456. 
672—735. Account of Venerable Bede, ii. 150. 
673—714. Life of St. Guthlac, ii. 86—93. 
716, Croyland Abbey founded, ii. 95—102. 

VIII. Century, at the end, or beginning of the IX. Life of St. William, 

count of Tholouse, ii. 240—249. 

IX. Century (beginning of). Piratical inroads of Biom Iron-sides, Ladbroc's 

son. and Hasting, i. 379 ; ii. 296. 
836. Translation of the relics of St. Philibert, i. 134; ii. 155. 
841, Rouen sacked by the Northmen, i. 379; ii. 155, 296. 

Translation of the relics of St. Ouen. i. 379; ii. 155. 

853. Tours sacked by the Northmen, i. 379. 

859. Noyon, i. 379; ii. 296. 

863. They take Poitiers, i. 379. 

876. Rolio is said to have penetrated into the basin of the Seine, i. 135; 

ii. 157. 
886. Paris besieged by the Normans, i. 380. 
1 RoUo storms Bayeux, marries Poppa, and Normandy is ceded to 

him, i. 380; ii. 157. 
900 ? Translation of the relics of St. Ceneri to Chateau-Thierri, ii. 456. 

911. Rollo and Charles the Simple conclude a treaty at Saint-CIair-sur- 

Epte, i. 380; ii. 157. 

912. Baptism of Rollo, ii. 380. 
925 « Death of Rollo, ii. 380. 



270 CHEOKOLOGICAL INDEX. 

A.D. 

933, Riulf, or Ralph d'Evreux defeated at Rouen by William Longue- 
Ep6e, i. 1 37. 

936. Louis d'Outre-Mer brought back from England, ii. 157, 339. 

940. The abbey of Jumieges restored, i. 381 ; ii. 157. 

942. Dec. 18, William Longue-Epee assassinated, i. 137, 381; ii. 299. 

943 or 944. Louis d'Outre-mer seizes Rouen and makes Richard I. pri- 
soner, ii. 159, 299. 

944. Louis d'Outre-mer and Hugh the Great invade Normandy. The 
relics of St. Evroult and St. Ansbert are carried off, ii. 299 — 304. 

946? Duke Richard is set at liberty; Louis d'Outre-mer is defeated by 
the Normans and Harold the Dane, ii. 159, 299, 340. 

965. The abbey of Mount St. Michael restored, i. S81; ii. 161. 

977. Discovery and translation of the relics of St. Judoc, i. 474. 
Miracles wrought by them, i. 475 — 479. 

987. Accession of Hugh the Great (Hugh Capet), i. 142. 

990. Restoration of the church of Fecamp, i. 381 ; ii. 161. 
1002. Emma, daughter of Richard I., marries Ethelred, king of England, 

ii. 161. 
1008. St. AVandrille's Abbey restored, i. 381 ; ii. 161. 

1013. Ethelred takes refuge in Normandy, i, 146. 

1014. Death of Sweyn, i. 146. 

1015 (about). Herbert Eveille-Chien, count of Maine, succeeds his father, 
Hugh ; his quarrels with Fiilk, count of Anjou, ii. 73 — 77. 

1016. Death of King Ethelred, i. 146. 

1017. Death of Edmund Ironside, i. 147. 

1016 — 1038. The Normans establish themselves in Italv, i. 53 — 55; ii. 

162, 163. 
1017 (about). Edward the Confessor and the other children of Ethelred 

and Emma, take refuge in Normandy, ii. 161. 
1020 (about). The monastery of Bernay founded, i. 381. 
1027. Death of Richard II., duke of Normandy, i. 145; ii, 161. 
1030 (about). The abbey of the Holy Trinity at Rouen founded, i. 382. 
1030 — 1035. Hostilities between the sons Giroie and Gilbert, count de 

Brionne, i. 391, 392. 

1031. Death of Robert I., king of France, i. 148. 

1032, March. Henry, king of France, comes to Fecamp, to demand suc- 

cour from Duke Robert, which he grants, and obtains the Vexin 
in recompense, ii, 400. 
1032. Robert, son of King Robert, obtains the duchy of Burgundy, iv. 135, 
The abbey of Cerisi founded, i. 382. 

1033 (about). Death of Warin of Domfront, iv, 110. 

1034 (about). Expedition of Gilbert, count de Brionne, into the Vimeu, i. 

383, 
1134 (about). Foundation of the abbey of Bee, i. 383; ii. 116, 

1035 (about). Also of Conches, i. 382. 

The abbeys of St, Peter and St. Leger-des-Preaux, founded, I 388. 
1035. Pilgrimage of Robert, duke of Normandy ; he dies at Nice, i. 148 ; 

ii. 161, 400. 
Dreu, comte du Vexin, accompanies Robert in his pilgrimage, i, 148; 

ii. 400. 



CHEOIfOLOGICAL INDEX. 271 

A.D. 

1039. The Emperor Conrad II. dies, i. 150; and there was a great mor- 

tality, i. 150. 
1040 (about). In the disorders which harassed Normandy during the 

duke's minority, among other lords who perished, Avere Turketil 

du Neuf-Marche, Osbern the Steward, and Henry de Ferrieres, i. 

149; ii. 163,403. * 

Gilbert, count de Brionne, is assassinated, with Fulk of Giroie, i. 

393, 449; ii. 403. 
Death of llobert de Grantmesnil, and Roger Toeni and his two 

sons, i. 149, 401; ii. 163. 
Henry I. of France retakes the Vexin, which he had ceded to Duke 

Robert, ii. 400. 
William Giroie razes his castle of Montacute to obtain the release of 

Geoffrey de Mayenne, a prisoner to William Talvas. To recom- 

pence him, Geoffrey erected for him the castle of St. Ceneri-sur- 

Sarthe, i. 393. 

1040, October 1. Alain III., duke of Brittany, died of poison at the siege 

of Montgomeri, ii. 74, 163, 400. 

1040 — 1057. Eudes, count of Penthievre administers the duchy of Brit- 
tany, ii. 164. 

i042. Accession of Edward the Confessor, ii. 164. 

1046. Foundation of the monastery of Lire, i. 384. 

(about). Foundation of the monastery of St, Pierre-sur-Dive, i. 382; 
Ainard is appointed abbot, i. 383; ii. 105. 

1047. Guy of Burgundy revolts, i. 150; ii. 167. 

Battle of Vales-Dunes, i. 150; ii. 349, 405; iii. 464. 
Siege of the castle of Brionne, iii. 464. 

1049, Oct. Leo IX. consecrates the church of St. Remi at Rheims, and 

holds a council there, i. 151; ii. 186. 

1050. The abbey of St. Evroult is restored from its ruins, i. 151; ii. 384 — 

386. 
Donations made to the abbey by its first founders, i. 395 — 397; ii. 

187. 
William, duke of Normandy, confirms the grants, i. 400; ii. 189. 
Consecration of Theodoric, abbot of St. Evroult, i. 387; ii. 316, 
349. 
1050. The abbey of Troarn founded, i. 389. 
1050 — 1057. Administration of Theodoric, abbot of St. Evroult, 
1052? William, duke of Normandy, defends himself bravely against 

Geoffrey Martel, count of Anjou, i. 425; ii. 410. 
1053 ? Duke William marries Matilda of Flanders, i. 441; ii. 348, 

1053, Revolt of William, count d'Arques, i. 152; ii. 405, 406. 
Richard de HeugleviUe opposes the count, ii. 267. 

1054. Expedition of the king of France and his brother Eudes to Nor- 

mandy; battle of Mortemer, i. 152, 153, 425; ii. 167, 349, 407 — 

410. 
Pope Leo IX. dies, iii. 349. 
1055 (about). The monastery of St. Martin at S^ez is restored, i. 405, 418. 
1056. Death of the Emperor Henry III., and accession of his son, Henry 

IV., i. 417. 



272 CHEONOLOGICAL INDEX. 

A.D. 

1056, June 29, The prelates assembled at St. Evroult prevail on Abbot 
Theodoric to remain at the abbey, i. 417, 418. 
August 29. Abbot Theodoric resigns, and goes to the Holy Land, i. 
418—420. 

1058. Death of Pope Stephen IV., i. 431. 

August 1. Theodoric, late abbot of St. Evroult, dies in the Isle of 
Cyprus, i. 423. 

1059. Election of Abbot Robert de Grantmesnil, i. 422. 

June 21. His consecration as abbot of St. Evroult, i. 423. 
1055 — 1061. His administration of the abbey, i. 424. 

1060. Death of Henry I., king of France, i. 153. 

War between the Normans and Anjevins — Robert Giroie takes the 
side of Duke William — He is besieged in the castle of St. C6neri, 
and dies on the 6th of February, poisoned by his wife, i. 394, 425, 
426. 

End of February or beginning of March. Duke William makes peace 
with Arnold, son of William Giroie, ii. 426. 

May 6. Dedication of the chapel of St. Evroult, i. 424. 

August 29. Death of Henry I., king of France, i. 430. 

Accession of Philippe I., i. 430. 

Death of Geoffrey Martel, count of Anjou, i. 440; ii. 74. 

His nephews, Geoffrey le Barbuand Fulk le Rechin, succeed him, ii.74. 
1060 (about). William, duke of Normandy, takes possession of Neuf- 
Marche-en-Lions, and gives the custody of it to Hugh de Grant- 
mesnil and Gerald the Steward, ii. 455. 

The abbev of Cormeilles founded, i. 384. 

1061. Death of Pope Nicholas II., i. 431. 

William, duke of Normandy, disinherits Ralph de Toeni, Hugh de 

Grantmesnil, and Arnold d'lEchoufour, i. 431. 
Jan. 27. Robert, abbot of St. Evroult, being summoned to the 
court of the duke of Normandy, quits his abbey, and goes to the 
pope, i. 432. 
Februarv. The duke intrudes Osbern, against the will of the monks, 
i. 432,' 433. 
lOGl— 1066. Administration of Abbot Osbern, i. 440, 443, 447, 457. 
1061. — 1063. Incursions of Arnold d'l^chaufour ; he takes that castle by 
surprise, and burns the bourg of St. Evroult, i. 433. 

1062. Death of Herbert II., count du Maine, i. 448; ii. 74. William, 

duke of Normandy, claims Maine for his son Robert, espoused to 
Margaret, Herbert's daughter. Geoffrey le Barbu, count d' Anjou, 
receives Robert's homage at Alen9on, i. 449. 

1062 1 Duke William, holding his court at Lillebonne, refuses justice to 
Robert de Grantmesnil, who returns from Rome with two cardi- 
nals. Robert excommunicates Osbern, the intrusive abbot, i. 434, 
435. 

1062 (about). The collegiate establishment of Neuf-March^-en-Lions be- 
comes a priory of the abbey of St. Evroult, i. 456. 

1063. William, duke of Normandy, is reconciled with the barons whom he 

disinherited in 1061, wanting their support in his war with the 
Bretons and Manceaux, ii. 441. 



CHEONOLOGICAL INDEX. 273 

A.D. 

1063. Harold, son of Earl Godwin, comes to Normandy, and does homage 

to Duke William at Rouen (?), i. 459. 
Harold attends the duke in his expedition against Conon, duke of 

Brittany, i. 459. 
Duke William invades Maine, i. 448. 
He takes possession of Mans on the death of Walter, count du 

Vexin, and his wife Biote, i, 4 48; ii. 79. 
He compels Geoffrey de Mayenne to submit, i. 449. 
Dedication of the cathedral at Rouen, ii. 7, 165, 167. 
1063 (about). Robert de Grantmesnil, the late abbot of St. Evroult, repairs 

the abbey of St. Euphemia ; Robert Guiscard also bestows upon 

him the abbevs of Venosa and St. Michael de Melito, i. 438, 439. 
Death of R.-.bert de Gace, i. 449. 

1063. Arnold d'!l6chaufour, returning from Italy, is received into favour 

by the duke of Normandy. He is poisoned at Courvillc, near 
Chartres, the 1st of January, 1064 (r), i. 441, 450—452. 

1064. Sigefrid, archbishop of Mayence, and Gontier, bishop of Bamberg, 

go in pilgrimage to the Holy Land, with a large company of nobles 

and prelates, i. 431. 
(about). Hostilities between Hugh de Grantmesnil, castellan of 

Neuf-Marche-en -Lions, and Ralph II., count de Cressi and Valois, 

i. 45(). ♦ 

1066. Jan. 5. Death and funeralof Edward the Confessor, i. 153,458,460; 

ii. 167; iii. 349, 350. 
Harold is raised to the throne, i. 460; ii. 167. 
April. A comet appears, i. 153, 458. 
May 27. Death of Osborne, abbot of St. Evroult, i. 457. 
Tosti;::, being expelled from England, persuades the duke of Nor- 
mandy to invade it, i. 461. 
He stirs up Harold Hardraad, king of Norway, to make a descent 

on the island, i. (note) 464, 
Pope Alexander II. exhorts the duke to the conquest of England, 

i. 463. 
Meeting of the barons of Normandy to consult on the expedition, i. 

463. 
Preparations of the duke to cross the sea, i. 465. 
The duke, being at Bonneville, gives the abbey of St. Evroult to 

Mainier, i. 466; ii. 184. 
Administration of Abbot Mainier (1066—1089), i. 466—472; ii. 

184—186, 236; iii. 249, 253, 258. 
The duke commits the abbey of St. Stephen, which he had founded 

at Caen, to the care of Lanfranc, i. 382, 466; ii. 2. 
King Harold defeats the Norwegians in Yorkshire, i. 480. 
He returns to London, and prepares to oppose the invasion of the 

Normans, i. 481, 482. 
Sept. 29. The duke's fleet sails from St. Valeri-sur-Somme, and 

lands the expedition at Pevensev, i. 482. 
Oct. 14. The battle of Hastings, i^ 153, 483—487; ii. 167; iii. 242. 
William takes possession of Dover, and receives the homage of the 

people of Kent, i. 488. 
TOL. IV. T 



274* CHEOI^-OLOGICAIi IKDEX. 

A.D. 

1066. Edcjar Atheling resigns his rights to the throne of England, and 

William is acknowledged by the principal lords, and the citizens of 
London, i. 489. 
Dee. 25. William is crowned, i. 490, 491; ii. 167; iii. 242. 
Death of Conon TI., duke of Brittany, ii. 79. 

Odo, bishop of Biyeux, establishes monks of Mount St. Michael in 
the church of St, Vigor at Bayeux, ii. 429. 
1066 (about). The abbey of the Holy Triuty at Caen founded,!. 382; ii. 2. 

1067. Foundation of Battle Abbey, 'ii. 2. 

King William receives the submission of Edwin and Morcar at 

Barking. Their example followed by many English lords, ii, 4. 
March. King William commits Winchester to the custody of William 

Fitz-Osberne, and Dover to that of the bishop of Bayeux, and 

embarks for Normandy, ii. 5. 
April 8. He keeps Easter at Fecamp, ii. 6. 
May 1. He assists at the dedication of the abbey of St. Pierre-sur- 

Dive, ii. 6. 
July 1. He assists at that of Jumi^ges, ii. 16. 
August 9. Death of Maurilius, archbishop of Rnuen, ii. 7. John, 

bishop of Avranches, succeeds him, ii. 8. Michael is named 

bishop of Avranches, ii. 8. 
The Anglo-Saxons, '•Oppressed by the Normans, claim the aid of 

Sweyn, king of Denmark, ii. 9, Some of them take service under 

the Greek emperor, ii. 9, 10. 
Eustace, count of Boulogne, fails in his expedition against Dover, ii. 

11; he is reconciled with King William, ii, 12. 
Dec. 6. William the Conqueror crosses from Dieppe to Winchester, 

ii. 14. 
Dec. 25, He celebrates Christmas at London, ii. 14. 

1068. Jan. or Feb. The Conqueror marches against Exeter and into Corn- 

wall, ii 15, 16. 
March 23. He celebrates the feast of Easter at Winchester, ii. 17- 
Queen Matilda comes over to England, ii. 17. 
May 11, She is crowned, ii. 17, 
Birth of Henry I., King of England, ii. 17. 
The English revolt under Edwin and Morcar; the Welsh support 

the insurgents; rebellion north of the Humber, ii. 17, 18. 
The city of York submits to the king, who begins to erect castles, 

ii. 19. 
Geoffrey le Barbu is made prisoner by his brother, Fulk le Rechin, 

i. 440; ii. 74; iii. 74, 75. 

1069. In the beginning of the year, Robert de Comines is assassinated at 

Durham, and Robert Fitz-Richard at York, i. 21. 
The sons of Harold make an unsuccessful descent from Ireland on 

the coasts of England, ii. 21. 
April 12. The king celebrates Easter at Winchester, and sends the 

queen back to Normandy, ii. 22. 
Descent of the Danes, under Sweyn, on the eastern coasts. They 

besiege York, and are routed, ii. 24, 25. 
Insurrections in the West of England, ii. 26 ; the rebels crushed 



i 



OHEONOLOGICAL INDEX. 275 

A.D. 

there, and at Shrewsbury and Stafford, ii. 26, 27; the king hastens 
to York by a difficult winter march, ii. 27 ; spends Christmas at 
York, ii. 29; his campaign in the north and cruel devastations, ii. 
28—30; builds castles, ii. 31. 

1069. April 4. The Conqueror keeps Easter at Winchester, attended by 

cardinals from Rome, and holds a synod there, ii. 31; appoints 

bishops, ii. 32. 
Stigand is deposed, and Lanfranc made archbishop of Canterbmy, 

ii. 42. 
William Bonne- Ame made abbot of St, Stephen at Caen, ii. 42. 
Death of William, bishop of Evreux, and Ives, bishop of S^ez. 

Successors appointed, ii. 43. 
Death of Baldwin VI., count of Flanders, ii. 59. 

1070. The Conqueror's administration ; he endeavours to reconcile the 

English and Normans, ii. 44. 
(about), Guitmond refuses preferment in England, ii, 51 ; tyranny 
of the Normans — the English prelates ejected from the churches, 
ii. 52. 

1071. Death of Edwin and Morcar, ii. 45. 

The. Conqueror distributes lands and honours among his principal 
followers, ii. 48-50. 

He sends William Fitz-Osberne to Normandy, ii, 59. 

Fitz-Osberne falls in the I)attle in which Robert the Frisian, aided by 
the Emperor Henry IV., defeated his neyhew Arnulf, ii. 59 ^ 60. 

(According to Ordericus, about 1075). Lanfranc, Thomas, arch- 
bishop of York, and R^mi, bishop of Lincoln, go to Rome, ii, 115, 
1071, or 1072. William the Conqueror goes over to Normandy, ii. 61. 

A synod held at Rouen, ii. 61 — 65. 

1073. William Pantulf gives Noron to the abbey of St. Evroult, ii. 207. 
Death of Pope Alexander II., ii. 70 ; he is succeeded by Gregory 

VIII. 
Fulk le Rechin, count of Maine, stirs up the people of Maine to 

revolt against the Normans, ii. 73, 74. 
King William's expedition, and their submission, ii, 75 — 77. 

1074. Conspiracy of English nobles against the king, ii. 78 — 81. 

He comes over to England, and puts down the rebellion, ii. 82, 83. 

1075. Feb. 16. Birth of the historian, Ordericus Vitalis, at Shrewsbury, ii, 

113. 
April 5. King William celebrates Easter at Fecamp, ii. 115, 
May 31, Waltheof is beheaded on the charge of being privy to the 

conspiracy of the English nobles, ii. 84 — 86. 
Hugh 1. succeeds his uncle, Robert the Elder, as duke of Burgundy, 

iv. 135. 

1076. Expedition of King William against the Bretons, Siege of Dol. 

Peace concluded, ii. 104. He betrothes his daughter Constance to 
Alan, the duke, ii, 105. 
Ingulf appointed abbot of Croyland in place of Ulfkytel, ii. 100. 
Foundation of the priory of Maule, ii. 216 — 221. 
1076,(1077 according to Ordericus). Consecration of the cathedral of 
Evreux, ii. 116,209. 

T 2 



276 CHEO'S'OLOGICAL Ily-DEX. 

A.D. 

1077. July 17. Death of Hu^h, bishop of Lisieux, ii. 119, 120. He is 

succeeded by Gilbert Maminot, ii. 121, 
Sept, 13. Consecration of the church of St. Stephen at Caen, ii. 116, 

209. 
Consecration of the churches of Bayeux and Bee, ii, 209, 
Robert de Grantmesnil, ex-abbnt of St. Evroult, comes to the court 

of William in Normandy, and returns to Apulia with William 

Pantulf and other knights, ii. 209. 
1077 ? Robert Curthose requires his father to invest him with the duchy 

of Normandv, and on his refusal retires to France, ii. 107, 169 — 

172. 
Quarrels between King William's sons at L'Aigle. Robert attempts 

to seize Rouen, ii. 108 — 110. 

1078. Philip, king of France, gives Robert Curthose a refuge in the castle 

of Gerberoi, ii. 177. 
Hostilities in Anjou between King William with John de la Fl^che, 

and Fulk le Rechin with Hoel of Brittany. Peace concluded, ii. 

76,77. 
August 26, Death of Harluin, abbot of Bee, ii. 116. He is suc- 

sucoceded by St. Anselm, ii. 117. 
Death of Ainard, abbot of St. Pierre-sur-Dive, ii. 106, 107. 
Hugh I. resigns the duchy of Burgundy'to his brother, Eudes Borel, 

iv. 135. 
Nicephorus Botoniiptes dethrones Michael Parapinaces. Robert 

Guiscard espouses the cause of the pretender Michael, ii. 355, 359. 

1079. Jan.? King William besieges his son Robert in the castle of Gerbe- 

roi, ii. 178. 
On his return to Rouen, he is prevailed on to pardon his son, ii. 179, 

180. 
Jan. 18. Consecration of St. Anselm as abbot of Bee, ii. 117. 
Aug. 15. Death of Gilbert de Heugleville, the founder of the priory 

of Aufay, ii. 264. 
Sept. 9. Death of John d'Avranches, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 122, 

167. He is succeeded by William Bonne-Ame, ii. 123, 167, 168. 
Whitsuntide (May 31). A synod held at Lillebonne, ii, 124—130. 

1080 1 Death of Richard, son of William the Conqueror, ii. 181. 

1081. Mainier, abbot of St. Evroult, goes to England, and obtains a 

charter of confirmation of the possessions of the convent, dated at 
Winchester, ii. 253—258. 

Marriage of Steplien, count de Blois, with Adela, daughter of Wil- 
liam the Conqueror, ii. 182. 

Alexis Commenes dethrones Nicephorus Botoniates, ii. 357. 

Hostilities between Alexis and Robert Guiscard, ii. 358. 

Expedition of Robert Guiscard into Illyria. Siege of Durazzo. 
Conduct of Bohemond in the campaign, i, 438; ii. 358 — 361. 
1081—1 084. Expedition of the Emperor Henry IV. in Italy, ii. 350—354. 

1081 ? Nomination of Hoel to the bishopric of Mans, ii. 71, 72, 

1081 ? Visit of Queen Matilda to the abbey of St. Evroult, ii. 258, 259. 

1082. Dec. Assassination of Mabel, wife of Roger de Montgomery, ii. 194, 

210. 



CHEOKOLOGICAL INDEX. 277 

A.D. 

1082. "William Pantulf submits to an ordeal to clear himself of this crime, 
ii. 210. 
Odo, aspiring to the papacy, is arrested by his brother, the king, in 

person, at the Isle of Wight, ii. 372 — 375, 416. 
Robert Guiscard returns to Italy, ii. 361. 
1082 ? Robert Ciirthose again quits his father's dominions, ii. 173. 

Death of Robert Grantmesnil, abbot of St. Evroult and St. Euphe- 
mia, ii. 362. 
J083. Nov. 2. Death of Queen Matilda, ii. 376, 377. 

Foundation of the abbey ot Shrewsbury, ii. 197—203. 
1083 — 1085. Hubert, viscount of Maine, revolts. King William marches 
against him, and besieges the cistle of Sauit-Susanne. He makes 
terms with Hubert, ii. 377 — 381. 
1084. Robert Guiscard liberates the pope from his confinement in the 
castle of St. Angelo, and sacks Rome, ii. 352 — 364. 
He returns to Illyria, ii. 366. 

1084. 1085. Intrigues of Sichelguade, wife of Robert Guiscard, to procure 

the death of Bohemond, her step-son, ii. 366 — 368. 

1085. Death and burial of Robert Guiscard, ii. 371, 372. 
Death of Pope Gregory VII., ii. 462. 

Ordericus Vita lis is sent to Normandy, and enters the abbey of St. 
Evroult, ii. 113; iv. 

1086. Domesday-book compiled. The survey commenced in 1080, ii. 51; 

and was now completed, ii. 382. 

Canute IV., king of Denmark, assassinated while preparing an expe- 
dition against England, ii. 382 — 384. 

Accession of Pope Victor, ii. 462. 

1087. William the Conqueror asserts his rights to the Vexin, ii. 398, 400. 
End of July, He lays siege to Mantes, ii. 400. 

August 14. Death of his cousin, Gilbert d'Aufay, ii. 425. 

Last illness of William the Conqueror, ii. 401, 402 ; his dying dis- 
course, ii. 403 — 413; bequeaths his states and treasure, ii. 414; 
sets at liberty Morcar and otlier prisoners, ii. 416. 

His death, Sept. 9, i. 153; ii. 417, 418, 424; his body is carried to 
Caen, ii. 419; his funeral, ii. 420, 424; his tomb, ii. 425. 

William Rufus goes over to England with the letter -vvritten by his 
father to Lanfianc before his death, ii. 424; iii. 199 

Robert Curthose becomes duke of Normandy, ii. 424. 

Sept. 29. Coronation of William Rufus, i\ 424. 

Death of Simon de Montfort, William Paganel, and several other 
Norman barons, ii. 425, 426. 

Robert de Belesme, William, count d'Evreux, and Ralph de Con- 
ches, expel the garrisons placed in their castles by the Conqueror, 
ii. 427. 

Translation of the body of St. Nicholas from Myra to Pari, ii. 384 
—395. 

1088. Feb, 11. Death of Durand, abbot of Troarn, ii. 460; Amulf suc- 

ceeds him, ii. 461. 
The barons revolt against William Rufus, who besieges Tunbridge 
and Rochester castles, ii. 432 — 441. 



278 CHEONOLOGTCAL INDEX. 

A.D. 

July. Incursions of the Welsh under Griffyth-ap-Conan. Death of 
Robert de Rhuddlan. His burial, ii. 442 — 450. 

1088. Robert Curthose gives the Cotentin to his brother, Henry II., ii. 431. 
In the summer. Henry comes over to England, and is arrested with 

Robert de Belesme, on his return, ii. 451 ; he is released, ii. 462. 

Odo, bishop of Bayeux, excites Duke Robert to attack Roger de 
Montgomery. He seizes Balon and Saint-Ceneri. Peace is con- 
cluded, ii. 452 — 457. 

Geoffrey, son of the count of Perche, attacks the duke, ii. 459, 460. 

Accession of Pope Urban II., ii. 462. 

Peace restored between Bohemond and Roger, the son of Robert 
Guiscard, ii. 464. 

1089. Jan. 15. Death of Robert, abbot of S6ez, ii. 464; he is succeeded 

by Ralph d'Escures, afterwards archbishop of Canterbury, ii. 465. 
May 28. Death of Lanfranc, ii. 465; iii. 8. 
William Rufus, by the advice of Ralph Flambard, leaves the 

English sees vacant, ii. 466 — 469. 
He designs to invade Normandy ; Stephen d'Aumale and other 

barons support him, ii. 471. Duke Robert commits its defence to 

Elias de Saint-Saens, ii. 474. 
Robert gives Bertrade de Montfort to R6chin, count d'Anjou, ii. 

475. 
The count introduces the fashion of long-peaked shoes— wearing 

long hair in vogue. The nobles are dissolute and licentious, ii. 

477—479. 
Edgar Atheling is at the court of Robert Curthose, ii. 476. 
War between Ascelin Goel and William de Breteuil. Death of 

Amauri de Montfort, ii. 484 — 487. 
Death of William de Warrenne, founder of the priory of Lewes, ii. 

472; his tomb and epitaph, ii. 472, 473. 

1090. Revolt of the Manceaux. Hugh, son of Azo, marquis of Tuscany, 

made count. He resigns in favour of his cousin Elias, ii. 480 — 

484. 
Roger de Beaumont recovers the castle of Brionne, iL 487 — 492. 
Hostilities between William, count d'Evreux, and Ralph de Toeni, 

lord of Conches, ii. 493 — 496. 
Prince Henry, count of the Cotentin, prepares for war, ii. 498. 
November. Insurrection at Rouen, fomented by William Rufus, 

quelled by Prince Henry. Execution of Conan, the ringleader, ii. 

499—502. 
Robert de Belesme, at the zenith of his power in Normandy, ii. 

504; iii. 30, 31. Hugh de Grantmesnil and Richard de Courcy 

resist him, ii. 505 — 507. 
1990 (about). Stephen, chanter of the abbey of St. Nicholas at Angers, 

contrives to purloin an arm of St. Nicholas from Bari, ii. 395, 396. 

1091. Robert de Belesme is forced to raise the siege of the castle of 

Exmes, defended by Gilbert de Laigle, who fell the next year, ii. 
485, 486. 
January. Robert Curthose besieges the castle of Courci, which is 
obstinately defended, ii. 507 — 510. 



CHEONOLOGICAL INDEX. 279 

A.D. 

10.91. Japuary. William Rufus lands in Normandy. Holds his court at 

Eu. The two brothers are reconciled at Rouen, ii. 510. 
Same month. A vision of purgatory by the priest of Bonneval, ii. 

511—519. 
Jan. 23. Death of Gerard, bishop of Seez, ii. 510. 
March. King William and Duke Robert besiege their brother 

Henr)^ in Mount St. Michael. The prince is forced, to take 

lefuge in France, ii. 520, 521. 
June 22. Serlo, abbot of St. Evroult,is made bishop of Seez, ii. 521. 
July 21. Roger du Sap is elected abbot of St. Evroult, and comes 

over to Windsor to receive confirmation, ii. 522, 523. 
Robert Curthose accompanies his brother William to England, ii. 

522,523. 
Sept. War with Malcolm, king of Scots ; peace restored by Robert's 

mediation, iii. 9 — 11. 

1092. Hostilities between Ascelin Goel and William de Breteuil, ii. 487; 

iii. 22, 23. 
Prince Henry obtains possession of Damfront, and ravages the 

territories of Robert Curthose, iii. 1, 2. 
Death of Nicholas, abbot of St. Stephen at Ouen, and nephew of 

Duke Robert, iii. 37. 
Death of Remi, bishop of Lincoln, iii. 200. He is succeeded by 

Robert Bloat, iii. 201. 
William Pantulf brings some relics of St, Nicholas from Apulia, ii. 

896, 397. 

1093. Fiesh hostilities between Ascelin Goel and William de Breteuil, iii. 

23, 
Philip I. marries Bertrade de Montfort, repudiating Bertha, iii. 3, 

4, 63. 
St. Anselm appointed archbishop of Canterbury, ii. 465, 470; iii. 9. 
Death of Malcolm, king of Scotland, and his queen, Margaret, iii. 

11, 12. 
Death of Simeon, abbot of Ely, iii. 201. 
1093 ? Death of Hugh de Grantmesnil, the founder of St. Evroult, iii. 54, 

55. 

1094. March ? The king of France and duke of Normandy besiege Br^val, 

iii. 24. 
Hostilities between Robert de Belesme and Robert Giroie, iii. 26 — 28. 
A severe drought and famine, ii. 168; iii. 61. 

1094. July 27. Death of Roger de Montgomery, ii. 203; iii. 25. 

1095. A conspiracy against William Rufus, which fails. Robert de Mow- 

bray is imprisoned. Treatment of the other conspirators, iii. 17 — 
22. 

The king restores three Norwegian merchant-ships, and compensates 
the merchants, iii. 18. 

March. Council of Piacenza, iii. 60. 

April 4 ? A brilliant phenomenon of falling-stars, ii. 168. It was 
remarked by Gilbert Maminot, bishop of Lisieux, a great philo- 
sophers, from his observatory, iii. 62. 

Oct. 25. Urban II. consecrates an altar at the abbey of Cluni, iii. 63. 



280 CHKONOLOGICAL IKDEX. 

A.D. 

1095. Nov. Council of Clermont; Urban preaches the Crusade,!. 154; ii. 

168; iii. 63—68, 204. 
Nov. 26. Death of Gontard, abbot of Jumieges, while at the council 
of Clermont, ii. 66, 67; iii. 207. He is succeeded by Tancard, 
and then by Urso, ii. 67; iii. 207. 
There prevailed a drought, pestilence, and famine, i. 154; ii. 168. 
1095 ? Roger de Beaumont becomes a monk in the abbey ot St. Evroult, 
iii. 33, 34. 

1096. Jan. 2. Death of William, bishop of Durham, iii. 200. 
Feb. 10, ] 1. The moon eclipsed this night, iii. 68, 69. 
Feb. A synod at Rouen, iii. 69 — 72. 

Feb. 10. Urban II. dedicates the church of St. Nicholas at Angers, 
iii. 74. 

March IG — 22. Council at Tours, iii. 74. 

March. Peter the Hermit, and the Crusaders, depart for the Holy 
Land, iii. 75. April 12. He reaches Cologne. Joined by multi- 
tudes; progress of the pilgrims, iii. 76 — 79. 

Many French lords take the cross, iii. 77, 78, 80. 

Other Crusaders, and especially the Normans of Italy, iii. 81 — 83. 

Duke Godfrey pledges his castle of Bouillon ? iii. 204. 

July. Walter de Poissi dies in Bulgaria, iii. 77. 

Sept. Robert Curthose mortgages the duchy of Normandy to Wil- 
liam Rufus, and sets forth on the Crusade, iii. 80, 205. 

Odo, bishop of Bayeux, departs for the Holy Land, ii. 430; iii. 205. 

Sept. 29. The pilgrims receive their first check in Asia Minor, iii. 
84—86. 

November ? Robert Curthose, and Odo, bishop of Bayeux, visit 
Pope Urban at Rome, and pass the winter in Apulia, iii. 82, 206. 

Dec. 23. Godfrey de Bouillon arrives under the walls of Constan- 
tinople, iii. 86,' 87. 

1096 ? IMeeting at Rouen between Elias, count of Maine, and William 

Rufus, iii. 223, 224. 

1097. William Rufus asserts his claims to the Vexin, and prepares to 

enforces them by arms, iii. 208. He erects the frontier fortress of 

Gisors, iii. 209. Skirmishes between the English and French 

armies, iii. 210. 
Feb. Death of Odo, bishop of Bayeux, at Palermo, ii. 430; iii, 205. 

He is succeeded by Thorold, iii. 206. 
Dec. 29. Death of Baldwin, abbot of St. Edmondsbury, iii. 200. 
Death ef Hoel, bishop of Mans, who is succeeded by Hildebert, iii. 

226, 227. 
St. Anselm leaves England, and retires to Italy, iii. 202, 203, 237, 

2:^.8. 

1097 1 Elias, count of Maine, defeats Robert de Belesme, iii. 221. Elias 

fortifies the castle of Dangeul. William Rufus marches to the aid 

of Robert, without success, iii. 225, 226. 
In the spring. Duke Robert and the Crusaders, who had wintered 

in Italy, cross the Adriatic Sea, iii. 90. 
May and June. Nice is besieged and taken, iii. 93 — 97. 
July 1. The Crusaders gain a victory over the Saracens, iii. 100 — 102. 



CHRONOLOGICAL INDEX. 281 

A.D. 

1097. Oct. 21. They lay siege to Antioch, iii. 108. 
Edessa conquered by Baldwin, iii. 143 — 1-18. 

1098. Sept. 27. An aurora borealis, iii. 19:^, 211. 
Dec. 25. An eclipse of the sun, iii. 193. 

End of April. Robert de Belesme takes the count of Maine prisoner, 
and conducts him to the king at Rouen, iii. 228, 229. 

June. The king's expedition into Maine, iii. 229 — 231. 

July ? Fulk le R^chin lays siege to Balon. The king marches to its 
relief. Terms of peace agreed on, iii. 232 — 235. 

Sept. 27. William Rufus marches against the French ; halts at 
Conches, iii. 211. 

His army ravages the Vexin as far as Pontoise, and assaults Chau- 
monc ; fttils before that place, Mountfort, Epernon, and other 
castles, iii. 211, 212. A truce is agreed on, and in the autumn 
the king returns to England, iii. 212. 
1098 (before). Conquests of Magnus III., king of Norway, in the Orkney 
and Shetland islands, iii. 215 — 217. His son Sigurd's naval 
expedition to the Holy Land, iii. 213. 
1093—1098. Expedition of Magnus III. to the Isles and Ireland, iii. 216. 
The fleet appears off the coast of Wales. Hugh de Montgomery 
is slain, ii. 203; iii. 218, 219." He is succeeded as earl of Shrews- 
bury by Robert de Belesme, his brother, iii. 220. 

1098. Death of Walkeline, bishop of Winchester, iii. 200. 
The Cistercian order founded, iii. 41—48. 

June 28. Antioch taken by the Crusaders, iii. 142. 

Autumn. The main body rest; some expeditions are made, iii. 149 

—152. 
Richard, prince of Capua, is restored by his uncle Roger, count of 

Sicily, Tancred's son, iii. 203. 
Oct. A council at Bari, iii. 204. 
Nov. 27. The Crusaders proceed on their march, and take Marrah ; 

are delayed there by quarrels among the chiefs, iii. 149. 

1099. Jan. 13. The Crusaders resume their march by the sea-coast, iii. 158. 
After Easter (April 10). Count Elias revolts against William Rufus. 

In the month of June he enters Mans. The garrison of Normans 

burn the })lace, iii. 238 — 240. 
Middle of May. The Crusaders quit Tripoli ; reach Csesarea by 

Whit-Sunday (May 29), and invest Jerusalem on the 6th (or 7th) 

of June, iii. Ibb' — 169. 
July 5. Jerusalem taken by storm, after a siege of twentv-eight 

days, i. 154; ii. 198; iii. 169—180. 
July 23 or 24. Godfrey de Bouillon is elected king, iii. 181 — 256. 
Month of July. William Rufus hastens over to Normandy on the 

summons of Robert de Belesme, and landing at Touque, marches 

into Maine, iii. 240 — 244. 
July 29. Death of Urban II., who is succeeded by Paschal IL, i. 

154; iii. 244. 
August 14. Battle of Ascalon, iii. 185—190, 250. 
August 29. Roger du Sap, abbot of St. Evroult, receives the bene- 
diction, iii. 246. 



282 CHEONOLOGICAL INDEX. 

A.D. 

1099. Nov, 13. The abbey church at St. Evroult consecrated, ii. 168, 191; 

iii. 247, 248. 
Dec. 3. Death of Osmund, bishop of Salisbury, iii. 200. 
End of the year. Stephen, count de Blois, resolves to return to tne 

Crusade, iii. 249. 

1100. Robert Curthose and other Crusaders return home, iii>. 250; iv. 108, 

109. 
Marriage of Robert with Sibylla, daughter of Geoffrey de Conversana, 

iii. 250. 
William, count of Poitiers, mortgages his states to William Rufus to 

raise funds for his crusade, iii. 258. 
About May 7. Death of Richard, natural son of Robert Curthose, 

in the New Forest, iii. 259. 
June. Visions predicting the death of William Rufus, iii. 260 — 262. 
August 2. William Rufus slain while hunting in the New Forest, i. 

154; ii. 168; iii. 263, 264, 267. Buried at Winchester, iii. 265. 
August 5. Coronation of Henry 1., ii. 168; iii. 267. 
August. Elias restored to his county of Maine, iii. 273 — 275. 
August. Expedition of the count of Evreux and Ralph de Conches 

against Robert de Meulan, iii. 272. 
Sept. Duke Robert returns to' Normandy, and goes in pilgrimage to 

Mount St. Michael, iii. 272; iv. 109. 
October. Death of Geoffrey, count de Mortain, and William de 

Moulins, iv. 108. 
About Nov. Marriage of Henry I. with Matilda, iii. 270. 
Loui?, son of the French king, comes to the court of Henry I., iii. 

352. His stepmother, Bertrade, attempts to get rid of him, iii. 

353—355. 
Death of Godfrey de Bouillon. He is succeeded by Baldwin, iii. 

299. 
Bohemond is taken prisoner bv the Turks, iii. 307 — 322. 
1100 (about). Visit of Philip I. to Maule, ii. 236. 
His pilgrimage to Fames, i. 479. 

1101. July 27. Death of Hugh, earl of Chester. His son Richard suc- 

ceeds him, ii. 283. 
Lea2ue for placing Robert Curthose on the throne of England, iii. 

277—279. 
Corrupt administration of Robert Flambard, iii. 280, 281. 
August 1. Robert Curthose crosses over to England, iii. 282. 
The two brothers come to terras of agreement, iii. 285, 286. At the 

approach of Avinter Robert returns to Normandy, iii. 287. 
William, the son of Robert Curthose by Sib^'lla, is born at Rouen, 

iii. 257, 272. 
Louis le Gros besieges Montmorenci, iii. 424. 
Death of Roger I., count of Sicily, iv. 134. 
Crusade of the counts of Poitou and Blois, and their companions, 

iii. 288—293. 

1102. Jan. Death of William de Breteuil, ii. 191; iii. 342. 

1102. June 3. Dtath of Odeleriu^, the father of Ordericus, ii. 203. 
August. Death of Gilbert Maminot, bishop of Lisieux, iii. 287. 



CHEOKOLOGiCAL i:n^dex. 283 

A.D. 

1102. Henry I. mulcts or disinherits the barons who had leagued against 

him, and prefers men of low rank, iii. 325, 327 — 330. 
The king summons Robert de Belesme for his offences, procla 

him a traitor, and seizes his castles, iii. 331, 332. 
Robert Curthose besieges Vignats, iii, 333. 
Henry I. besieges Bridgnorth and Shrewsbury. On their surrender 

Robert de Belesme retires to Normandy, iii. 334 — 337. 
His excesses there, iii. 338, et seq. 

Death of Walter GifFard and Ralph de Conches, iii. 342. 
1102 ? Ives de Grantmesnil dies as he is returning from the East, iii. 330, 
Ramla taken by the Sa'-acens, iii. 301 — 304. 

1103. June. Fulcher, Lambard's brother, is made bishop of Lisieux, iii. 

287. 
Robert Curthose crosses over to England at the instance of William 

de Warrenne. He is ill received, and hastens back to Normandy, 

iii. 325—327. 
The nunnery of Almeneches burnt in Duke Robert's expedition 

against Robert de Belesme, who routs his army, iii. 340, 34.1. The 

duke makes peace with Robert, iii. 349. 
Disputes respecting the succession to William de Breteuil, iii. 344, 

347, 348. 
Ralph de Conches, and several other Norman lords, become adhe- 
rents of Henry I., iii. 355. 
Death of Walter GifFard, earl of Buckingham, iii. 342. 
Death of the Duchess Sibylla, iii. 343. 
Death of Gundulf, bishop of Rochester. He is succeeded by Ralph 

d'Escures, iii. 849. 
Death of Magnus Barfod during his expedition in Ireland, iii. 349, 

351. 
Siege of Chambli by Louis le Grcs, iii. 427. 
Adelaide, mother of Roger II., count of Sicily, invites Robert oi 

Burgundy to be the guardian of her young son, iv. 134, 135. 

1104. Jan. Death of Fulcher, bishop of Lisieux, iii. 287. 

1104— HOG. Flambard usurps the see under his son's name, iii. 287. 

1104. Henry I. crosses over to Normandv, and makes a progress. He has 

a meeting with his brother Robert, when they parted in peace, iii. 
356—358. 
Bohemond is liberated by the Saracens, iii. 320. 

1105. April 3. Death, at Winchester, of Fulk, abbot of St. Pierre-sur- 

Dive, iii. 207, 368. 
Henry I. goes to Normandy in consequence of the arrest of Robert 

Fitz-Hamon and some of his other adherents, iii. 359. 
April 8. He spends Easter at Carentan, near Harfleur, where Serlo, 

bishop of Seez, preaches a sermon on the state of the country and 

the vices and fashions of the age, iii, 360—363. 
After Easter. He sends envoys to Philip of France, and summons 

Geoffrey Martel, iii. 364. 
Robert d'Estoteville is killed at Maromme after a singular omen, iii, 

367, 368. 
May, An epidemical disease in France, iii. S69. 



284 CHEOKOLOGICAL IKDEX. 

A.D. 

1105. Bayeux is besieged and burnt, iii. 371. Caen surrenders to Henrv 

I., iii. 372. 
About June 1. Henry I. and Robert Curthose have a meeting at 

Cinteaux, iii. 373. 
Rotrou, count of Morlaix (Perche) goes into Spain to the aid ot 

Alfonso I., king cf Navarre and Arragon, iv. 109. 
Hostilities between Rotrou and Robert de Belesme, iv. 109, 110. 

1106. Feb. A comet appears, ii. 223; iii. 365. 

June 16. Dedication of the abbey of Fecamp, iii. 412. 

Robert, abbot of St. Pierre-sur-Dive, undertakes to betray King 

Htnn,iii. 373, 37-1. 
(Sept. 28.) Battle of Tinchebrai. Robert Curthose is defeated and 

taken prisoner, with William, count of Mortain, and other lords. 

Submission of Normandy to Henry I., i. 154; iii. 376 — 382. 
October. Henry presides at a meeting of prelates and barons at 

Li^ieux, iii. 382, 383. 
Robert de Belesme, by the advice of Elias, count of Maine, submits 

to King Henry, iii. 383—385. 
William ile Paci, who had bought the bishopric of Lisieux, is con- 
demned for simony, iii. 287, 288. 
Arnold de Maule is a great benefactor to the priory there, ii. 221 — 

225. 
1106 (about). Henry I. gives the county of Mortain to Stephen de Blois, 

iii. 346. 

1106. Geoffrey Martel dies at the siege of Cande, iii. 369. 

Bohemond visits France, where he marries Constance, daughter of 
Philip I., ii. 223; iii. 6, 365—367. 

Aug. 7. Death of the Emperor Henry IV,, i. 154; iii. 373, Acces- 
sion of his son Henry V., iii. 373. 

1107. Jan. Death of Robert, abbot of Caen, at a meeting of barons and 

prelates convoked by the king at Falaise, iii. 412. 
March. A synod at Lisieux, iii. 412. 
March 26. Death of William de Ros, abbot of Fecamp, iii. 413. 

His successor, Roger d'Argences, is consecrated on the 2l8t of 

December following, iii. 414. 
John, archdeacon of Seez, is appointed bishop of Lisieux, iii. 416. 
Death of Richard de Reviers and Roger Bigod, iii. 418. 
Death of Maurice, bishop of London. He is succeeded by Richard 

de Beauvf.is, iii. 417. 
April 14. Paschal II. celebrates the feast of Easter at Chartres, iii. 

345. 
Robert de Montfort departs for the East, having receieed great 

honours from Bohemond, iii. 387 — 390. ^ 

October. Bohemond besieges Durazzo, iii, 388. 
Dec. 21. Ordericus Vitalis is ordained priest at Rouen by William 

Bonne- Ame, the archbishop, iii. 415; iv. 224. 

1108. At the synod held at Rnuen, the bishop of Coutances relates a 

miracle which had occurred in a church there, iii. 6 — 8. 
Foundation of the priorv of Noyon-sur-Andelle, iii. 419 — 423. 
July 29. Death of King Philip I. of France, i. 154; ii. 168; iii. 424. 



cheo:n'ological i:n-dex. 285 

A.D. 

1108. Louis le Gros succeeds him, ii. 168; iii. 424. 

Bohemond concludes a treaty with the Greek emperor, iii. 390. 

1109. April 21. Death of St. Anselm, i. 154; ii. 117; iii. 436, 436. 
Ralph d'Escures succeeds him, iii. 437. ' 

Dec. 17 (Nov. 16, according to Ordericus). Death of Ingulf, abbot 
of Croyland. He is succeeded by Geoffrey, ii. 101. 

Death of Hugh, abbot of Cluni, who is succeeded by Pons, i. 154 ; 
iii. 436. • 

Elias, count of Maine, marries Agnes of Poitiers, iii. 276. 

Ravages of ervsipelay, and a severe famine, i. 154; iii. 434. 
1109—1111. Famine in France, iii. 434, 438. 

1110. Appearance of a comet, iii. 438. 

Death of William Boune-Ame, archbishop of Rouen, i. 154; iii. 

435, 437, 438. 
Elias, count of Maine, gives his daughter in marriage to Fulk, count 

of Anjou, iii. 276. 
His death, iii. 276, 438. 

1110 (about). Foundation of the abbey of Tiron, iii. 50, 51. 

August Henry V. attacks Milan, and ravages Lombardy, iii. 198. 

1111. Geoffrey, the Breton, is made archbishop of Rouen, iii. 435, 438. 
Louis le Gros besieges the castle of Puiset, iii. 428. Again, iii. 441. 
Robert de Beauchamp, the viscount, attempts to arrest William, 

• the young heir of Normandy, who escapes, iii. 430. 
Expedition of Louis le Gros against Theobald, count of Blois and 

Chartres, iii. 429, 441—443. 
Henry V. invests Rome, arrests Pope Paschal in St. Peters, and is 

driven out of the city, iii. 196, 438. The pope is liberated, iii. 197. 
Hostilities between Alfonso I., king of Navarre and Arragon, and 

his wife Urraque,, queen of Leon and Castile, iv. 119, 120. 
Death of Bohemond, iii. 390, 391. 

1111 or 1112. The first war between Fulk, count of Anjou, and Henry I., 

iii. 441—443. 

1112. Robert de Belesme imprisoned for life, iii. 442. 
The abbey of Savigni founded, iii. 51, 52. 

Death of Gilbert, bishop of Evreux, iii. 438, 4 39. Succeeded by 

Ouen, iii. 439. 
William Pantulf grants Trotton in England, and other possessions, 

to the priory of Noyon, ii. 211. 
Miracles are wrought on the tomb of Waltheof at Croyland, ii. 102, 

103. 
March 28. In a coimcil at Rome, Henry V. is excommunicated by 

the pope, iii, 197. 
Accesssion of Roger, prince of Antioch, iii. 322. 

1113. Feb. 2. Visit of Henry I. and his court to the abbey of St. 

Evroult, when the author was a monk there, iii. 439 — 441. 
Feb. 21 — 28. Fulk of Anjou concludes peace with Henry I. 
? March. Meeting and alliance of the kings of France and England at 

Gisors, iii. 444. 
? May 1. Henry I. besieges the castle of Bel^sme without success, 

iii. 445. 



286 CHEOKOLOGICAL INDEX. 

A.D. 

1113. Adelaide, mother of Roger II., count of Sicily, poisons her son-in- 

lav/, Robert of Burgundy. She goes to Jerusalem, hoping to 
marry King Baldvv^^i, who strips her of her wealth and sends her 
back, iv. 136, 137. 

1114. IMarringe of Matilda, daughter of Henry I., with the Emperor 

Henry V., iii. 148, 434, 435. 
Second expedition of Rotrou, count of Mortain, to Spain, iv. 1 1 1 — 
11.3- 
1115 or 1116. Mirraculous liberation of one Bricstan^ of Chatteris in Ely, 
ii. 323—331. 

1117. Dec. 24. A violent storm of wind, i. 155; iii. 446. 

1118. April 18. Death of William, count of Evreux, iii. 448. 
May 1. Death of Queen Matilda, iii. 448. 

June 5. Death of Robert, count de Meulan (earl of Mellent), iii. 

448. 
Henrv I. takes bv surprise the castle of Saint Clair-sur-Epte. Louis 

le Gros fortifies Gani, ii. 226; iii. 446, 447. 
Baldwin, count of Flanders, espouses the cause of William of Nor- 
mandy. He is wounded in an expedition against Henry 1., and 

dies the year following, iii. 450, 451, 475. 
Fulk, count of Arijou, invades Normandy, and takes La Motte- 

Gautier. Henry I. cedes a frontier district to him, iii. 454, -155. 
Sept. King Henry is recalled from the siege of Laigle to Rouen. 

Takes La Ferte-en-Brai, and burns Neubourg, iii. 457, 458. 
Oct. 7. King Henry holds a council at Rouen, iii. 459, 460. 
Amauri de Montfort takes arms against the king. The castle of 

Evreux seized for him, iii. 449, 460, 461. 
Hugh de Gournai revolts in the Talou and Caux, iii. 451, 452. 
Nov. — Dec. Henry I. marches to Laigle. Alen9on, having revolted, 

is reduced by Theobald, count of Anjou, iii. 461 — 463. 
The last moments of Ansold de Maule, ii. 229—282. 
December 21. A violent storm of wind, iii. 463, 464. 
Ansel de Garlande, commander of the French, killed before Puiset, 

iii. 428. 
Gelasius II. succeeds Pope Paschal and visits France, iii. 446. 

1119. Beginning of the year. Inundations of the Seine. In Lent, the 

river dried up, iii. 475, 47c. 
Jan. 29. Death of Gel^:sius 1 1. He is succeeded by Calixtus, iii. 464. 
Feb. Eustace de Br^teuil, Henry's son-in-law revolts. The king 

besieges his daughter Juliara in Breteuil, iii. 465 — 467. 
Reynold de Bailol, withdrawing his fealty, King Henry bums his 

mansion. Other garrisons remain quiet, iii. 468. 
Louis le Gros seizes Andeli by surprise, iii. 469. 
Henry I. fortifies Noyon, iii. 470. 
In Lent. Richard Fresnel and other lords make irruptions. After 

Whitsuntide, Henry I. appears before his castle, which submits. 

Richard dies a monk at St. Evroult, iii. 470, 473. 
May. William, Henry's eldest son, comes over from England, and 

in the month following marries at Lisieux the daughter of the 

count of Anjou, iii. 474. 



CHEOKOLOGICAL INDEX. 287 

A.D. 

1119. Henry I. destroys Pont-Saint-Pierre and other castles of his 

enemies, and garrisons his own, ii. 473, 476. 

August. Signs in the moon. Red light in the heavens for three 
nights, iii. 476. 

Henry I. besieges and burns the city of Evreux, iii. 476, 477 

Louis le Gros besieges Danjiiu and Chateau-Neuf-sur-Epte, iii. 479. 

Aug. 20, The battle of Biemule, or Noyon, iii. 480—486. 

Sept. 17. Louis le Gros makes a fresh irruption into Normandy, and 
is foiled before Breteuil, iii. 486 — 490. 

Sept. Henry I. marches into the district of Ouche, and crushes all 
opposition, iii. 491, 492. 

The principal barons of Normandy submit to Henry, iv. 22. 

Sept. 28. A violent earthquake in Cheshire, Shropshire, Hereford- 
shire, and Gloucestershire, iv. 38. 

October. Council of Rheims held by Calixtus IL, i. 155; iv. 1 — 18. 

November. Synod at Rouen ; tumultuous proceedings, iv. 29 — 31. 

Calixtus II. comes into Normandy, and has a conference with 
Henry I. at Gisors, iv. 22—28. 

Death of Roger, prince of Antioch, iii. 322. 

The emir Yl-Gazi defeats the Christians, iii. 391. 

1120. Nov. 23, Shipwreck of the Blanche Nef, i. 185; iv. 33—42. 
1120 (about). Loin's le Gros visits the priory at Maule, ii. 236. 

1120. Calixtus II. returns to Italy. The antipope, Bourdin, is placed in 

confinement, iv. 43. 

Fulk of Anjou goes to the Holy Land and joins the Knights- 
Templars, iv. 44. 

Aug. 14. The emir Yl-Gazi taken by the Christians, iii. 405. 

1121. Marriage of Henry I. with Adelaide de Louvaine, iv. 43. 

1122. The count of Anjou betrothes his daughter Sibylla to William of 

Normandy, iii. 432. 
Waleran, count de Mellent, and other Norman lords, espouse Wil- 
liam's causp, iv. 59. 

1123. Sept. His adiierents assemble at Croix-Saint-Leufroi. In the 

month following, Henry I. lays siege to Montfort and Pont- 
Audemer, i. 155; iv. 60—63, 67. 

Oct. They nearly surprise Robert de Chandos, and burn the town 
of Gisors, 68 — 70. 

Oct. Death of Serlo, bishop of Sees, iv. 63 — 66. 

Roger du Sap, abbot of St. Evroiilt, resigns. Election of Warin 
des Essarts, who is presented to Henry I. at York on the 6th of 
December, iv. 53 — 56. 
1123 — 1124. Ca| tivitv and deliverance of Baldwin II., king of Jerusa- 
lem, iii. 394—404. 

1124. Waleran, count de Meulan, besieges Watteville. He is taken 

prisoner at Rougemontier. King Henry's cruelty to Luke de la 
Barre, the Trovevr, and other captives, iv. 71 — 76. 

April. Henry I. takes the castle of Brionne, iv. 77. 

John, bishop cf Seez, is consecrated, iv. t"6. 

May 5. The bishop comes to St. Evroult and consecrates a chapel, 
iv. 66. 



288 CHEONOLOGICAL INDEX. 

A.D. 

1124. Death of Ralph le Vert, archbishop of Rouen. He is succeeded 

by Reynold, bishop of Anders, iv. 80. 
Dec. 13 or 14. Deaih of Calixtus II. He is succeeded by Hono- 

riuSj iv. 80. 
Tyre is taken by the Crusaders, iii. 405, 406. 

1125. Dec. 15. Richard de Coulonces, brother of Roger Fitz-Warrenne, a 

noble monk of Evroult, dies, iii. 252. 

Death of Rnlph, second abbot of Battle Abbey, iii. 3. 

Death of Alexander, king of Scots. He is succeeded by his brother 
David, iii. 15. 

Hildebert, bishop of Mans, becomes archbishop of Tours, ii. 72; iv. 
80,81. 

Pons, abbot of Cluni, forcibly re-possesses himself of the abbey, iv. 46. 

Death of the emperor Henry V. He is succeeded by Lothaire, 
duke of Saxony, i. 155, 156; iii. 199; iv. 81—84. 

Expeditions of Alfonso, king of Navarre and Arragon. He ad- 
vances as far as Cordova, iv. 118 — 120. 

Bohemond II. takes possession of the principality of Antioch, iii. 
409, 410. 

1126. March 21. The cathedral of Seez dedicated. Henry I. is present, 

iv. 84. 
Oct. The church of St. Ouen at Rouen consecrated, iii. 38; iv. 85»- 
Death of William, abbot of St. Ouen, at Rouen, iii. 38. 
Death of Roger du Sap, cx-abbot of St. Evroult, iv. 57. 
Death of William de Poitiers, duke of Aquitaine, i. 156; iv. 85. 
Louis le Gros holds a parliament, and engages his barons to aid 

William of Nnrmandy, iv. 85, 86. 

1127. William proceeds to Gisors and proposes to support his claim to the 

duchy in arms, iv. 87. 
July 13. Death of Cecilia, abbess of the Holy Trinity at Caen, and 

sister of Henry I., iii. 115, 377. 
The empress Matilda is contracted in marriage to Geoffrey, count of 

Anjou, iii. 198. 
March 2. Charles, count of Flanders, is assassinated in a church at 

Bruges, i. 156; iv. 87, 88. 
Louis le Gros invests William the Norman as count of Flanders, iv. 

88. William's administration, iv. 89—92. 
Death of William II., duke of Apulia, i. 156; iv. 86. 
Roger II., count of Sicily, obtains the principality of Apulia, iv. 85. 

1128. Death of Geoffrey, archbishop of Rnuen, i. 156;' iv. 103. 
Sept. A synod held at Rouen, iv. 103 — 105. 

July. William of Normandy, count of Flanders, is vt^ounded at the 
siege of Alost. He dies on the 9th of August, i. 156; iv. 92, 93, 
96. He is succeeded by Thierri of Alsace, iv. 94. 

Robert Burdet is made prince of Tarragona in Spain, iv. 114 — 117. 

Death of Germond, patriarch of Jerusalem. He is succeeded by 
Stephen of Chartres, i. 156; iv. 103. 

1129. The marriage of the empress Matilda with Geoffrey Plantagenet is 

solemnized, iv. 105, 106, 
April 1 4. Philip, son of Louis le Gros, is crowned at Rheims, iv. 1 05 . 



CHEONOLOGICAL INDEX. 289 

A.D. 

1129. Second crusade of Fulk, count of Anjou, iv. 106. 

1130. Geoffrey de Clinton charged with treason, iii. 16. 

Hugh of Amiens, abbot of Reading, is made archbishop of Rouen, 

iv. 107. 
Warin, abbot of St. Evroult, goes to Rdbais and meets St. Bernard 

at Clairvaux. He brings back to his abbev some relics of St. 
- Evroult on the 26th of May, ii. 318, 320. 

1130 (about) Fulbert, a canon at Paris, sends to the abbey some relics of 

the saint, ii. 317- 
Angus, earl of Moray, raises a rebellion in Scotland, iii. 16. 
Death of Pope Honorius. Innocent II. is elected pope, and Ana- 

clete antipope, i. 156; iv. 107, 127. 
Innocent II. comes to France, and, residing at Aries, pays a visit to 

Cluni, and consecrates the church on the 25th of October, iv. 128. 
Death of Bohemond II., prince of Antioch, iii. 410, 411. 
William de Malines, patriarch of Jerusalem, iv. 103. 

1131. Jan. 13. Meeting of Henry I. and Innocent II. at Chartres, iv. 128. 
March 22. Meeting between Innocent II. and the emperor Lothaire 

at Liege, iv. 129. 
Oct. 13. Death of Philip, the son of Louis le Gros, iv. 105, 129, 130. 
Oct. 18. A council at Rheims, iv. 130. 
Oct. 25. Louis, son of Louis le Gros, crowned, iv. 130. 

1131 ? Hugh, the sub-dean of Orleans, waylaid and murdered, iv. 131, 

Fulk of Anjou succeeds Baldwin II. as king of Jerusalem, iv. 107. 

1132. March 20. Great meeting of Benedictine monks at Cluni. Reforms 

imposed on the Cluniacs by Peter the Venerable, iv. 131 — 133. 
Innocent II. returns to Italy, iv. 131. 

1133. Dec. 28. A very heavy fall of snow, the houses blocked up and 

roads impassable. Floods succeeded, ii. 321 ; iv. 138, 139. 
February. Death of Robert Curthose at Cardiff, iv. 96, 122, 123, 143. 
June. Excessive heat and drought, iv. 138. 
Aug. 9. A violent storm of wind, thunder, and deluge of rain, iv. 

140, 141. 
Sept. Chartres, Mans, and other cities burnt, iv. 141. 
The sea overflows in Flanders, iv, 142. 
Insurrection of the Welsh. They burn Paganus Fitz-John's castle 

of Cause, iv. 143. 
Defeat of Alfonso I. at the battle of Fraga. Robert Burdet brings 

reinforcements. The king's death, iv. 120 — 127, 143. 
Ramirus II., surnamed the Monk, succeeds Alfonzo, iv. 127. 
1135. May and June. Council of Pisa, iv. 144. 

Henry I. is detained in Normandy by his misunderstanding with 

Geoffrey Plantagenet, and marches against several Norman lords, 

the adherents of the count, iv. 145 — 147. 
Oct. 28. A violent storm of wind, iv. 147, 148. 
Louis le Gros falls sick. He is reconciled with Theobald, count de 

Blois, and Ralph, count de Vermandois, and entrusts his son 

Louis with the government of France, iv. 148. 
Nov. 25. Henry I. falls sick at the castle of Lions, iv. 149. He dies 

on the Ist of December, i. 157; iii. 346; iv. 150. On the 4th hia 

yoL. rv. V 



290 CHEONOLOGICAL INDEX. 

A.D. 

corpse is carried to Kouen, iv. 150; 
where it was buried, iv. 151. 

1135. Dec. 15. King Stephen crowned. The Normans submit to his 

government, iv. 155. 
The count and countess of Anjou make pretensions to Normandy, 

and enter it in arms, iv. 156. 
Dec. 25. A truce till Whitsuntide is concluded between Theobald, 

count de Blois, and Geoffrey Plantagenet, iv. 158. 
Richard de Beaufait is consecrated bishop of A\Tanches, iv. 134, 145. 
Richard, a son of Robert, earl of Gloucester, is made bishop of 

Bayeux, iv. 134, 145. 

1136. Feb. Death of Eustace de Breteuil. His son William asserts his 

claims by arms. King Stephen is detained in England, iv. 157. 
The king betrothes his infant daughter to Waleran, count de 

Mellent, iv. 157, 
After March 22. The count of Anjou returns to Normandy. Hos- 
tilities between Roger de Toeni and the earl of Leicester, iv. 157. 
May. Roger de Toeni surprises Vaudreuil. He is driven out by 

the count de Mellent, who burns Acquigni on the 11th of May. 

The next day Roger makes fearful reprisals, iv. 157, 158. 
May 18. Robert Bouet plunders the burghers of St. Evrcult, who 

capture and hang him. The garrison of Liigle reduce the 

burgh to ashes. The abbey escapes, iv. 158 — 160. 
King Stephen is again prevented from going over to Normandy by 

a report of the death of Roger, bishop of Salisbury, iv. 161. 
May? Gilbert de Clare attacks Exmes, iv. 161. 
June. The count de Blois, with the earls of Mellent and Leicester, 

ravage the lands of Roger de Toeni, iv. 162. 
The same day, Richer de Laigle was routed in a skirmish, iv. 162. 
June 24. Boso, abbot of Bee, dies, and is succeeded by Theobald 

the prior, iv. 163. 
June 25. Ralph, archdeacon of Evreux, is attacked by the sons of 

Simon Harenc, iv. 163. 
June and July. Theobald, count de Blois, besieges Pont-Saint- 

Pierre, iv. 162, 163. 
Sept., third Aveek. A great fire at Rouen ; the abbey of St. Ouen 

burnt, iv. 163, 164. 
Sept. 21. Geoffrey Plantagenet and the Angevins make an irruption 

into Normandy. They are repulsed before IMontreuil, Lisieux, 

and Sap. Geoffrey is wounded, and on the 2nd of October the 

Angevins retreat, iv. 164 — 169. 
Sept. and Oct. Roger de Conches ravages the diocese of Lisieux. 

He pillages the abbey of Croix-Saint-Leufroi, and burns the 

church of Saint Stephen at Vauvai. He is taken prisoner, iv. 170, 

171. . ,. . . 

The diocese of Seez and Lisieux are laid under an mterdict, iv. 1 i 3, 

174. 
Henrv, bishop of Winchester, brother of Stephen, count de Blois, 

is e'lected archbishop of Canterbury. The matter is referred to 

the pope, iv. 173. 



CHEONOLOGICAL INDEX. 291 

A.D. 

^^^1 ¥^H^ "^Mans, dies, and is succeeded by Hugh de Saint- 

]]ly' ?u^^^ ^^ Gerard, bishop of Angouleme, iv. 172, 
11^7. About March 15. King Stephen lands at La Hogue, iv. 175. 
April 9. Death of William, duke of Aquitame, iv. 175 
May King Stephen has a meeting with Louis le Gros. He besieges 

Lillebonne, Villers, and Mesidon, iv. 175. 
May Geoffrey Plantagenet ravages the Hiemois, burns Basoches, 

and exacts a ransom from the monks of Dive and Fecamp He 

fails before Caen, IV. 175, 176. 
May Stephen liberates Roger de Conches, and draws to his cause 

Kotrou, count of Perche, and Richer de Laigle, iv. 177 
June. Stephen assembles his forces at Lisieux, but divisions breaking 

out among them, he concludes a truce for two years, iv. 1 78 
June 21 Death of Warin, abbot of St. Evroult. Richard of 

Leicester succeeds him, iv. 179, 180. 
July and August. Excessive heats and pestilential diseases, iv 181 
Aug. 4 (the 1st according to the French authors). Death of Louis le 

Gros. His son, Louis le Jeune, is crowned (?) at Poictiers on the 

8th of August, IV. 181, 182. 
^J'^^* f "g^st- Ki"g Stephen marches against Roger le Bee e 

ord of Grosseuvre, iv. 182. He destroys the eastle of Quitr lu' 

the Vexin, iv. 182. 
Richard the Forester, lord of Saint-Pois, is killed in a plundering 

expedition, iv. 182, 183. ^ ° 

The ravages and death of Gelduin of Dol, iv. 183 184 
Dec. King Stephen returns to England, iv. 185 ' 
A plot formed against him fails, iv. 186. 
Dec. 25. He lays siege to Bedford, iv. 195, and takes it at the end 

ot live weeks, iv, 196. 
Louis le Jeune is crowned at Bourges, iv. 194. 
The emperor Lothaire undertakes an expedition into Apulia iv 195 
He dies suddenly while on his way back, i. 15S. 
Death of Pons, count of Tripoli, iv. 186. 
Exploits of Emadeddin Zenghi, iv. 186. Defeat of the Christians. 

IV. 187. J he king of Jerusalem is besieged in the castle of Mont 

Keal, IV. 187. Some crusaders come to his relief, iv. 188 189 

Mont Real is given up to Zenghi, iv. 190. ' * 

1138. Jan. 25. Death of the antipope Anaclete, i'. 158; iv. 194 

(About the beginning of the year.) Wars in the Cotentin, in which 

Roger the Viscount was slain, iv. 196. 
Jan. Simon the Red ravages the territories of the earl of Leicester 

IB the diocese of Evreux. Pont-j^chanfr^ and Montreuil are 

burnt, IV. 197. 
Feb. There is a report of the death of Roger, duke of Apulia, iv. 195 
March. Ralph d'Eason is made prisoner by the partisans of the 

empress, iv. 197. 
Enguerran de Sai gains an advantage over Reynold de Dunstanville 
iv 198 ^^^" <^e R^viers, near the castle of Houlme in the Cotentin, 

u 2 



292 CHEONOLOGIOAL IIHJEX. 

A.D. 

May. Waleran, earl of Mellent, and William d'Ypres, come to 
Normandy and attack Roger de Conches, iv. 198. 

1138. June. Geoffrey Plantagenet enters Normandy in arms, and draws 

to his side Robert, earl of Gloucester, through whom Bayeux and 
Caen submit to him, iv. 199. 

July. Ralph de P^ronne joins the Earl of Mellent and William 
d'Ypres. Geoffrey Plantagenet quits Normandy, iv. 199. 

July. Geoffrey Talbot, William de Mohun, William Peverel, 
■^ William Fitz-John, and other partisans of the earl of Gloucester 
in England, take arms against Stephen, and fortify their castles, 
iv. 200—202. 

Irruption of the Scots into the North of England, iv. 202. 

King Stephen besieges Hereford, iv. 203. The Queen besieges 
Dover, iv. 203. 

Shrewsbury is surrendered to Stephen, iv. 204. The cruel punish- 
ment of Arnulph d'Hesdin, iv. 204. 

Aug. 22. Battle of the Standard, iv. 205. 

Sept. 7. Roger de Toeni reduces to ashes the town of Br^teuil, iv. 
206. He is reconciled with the earls of Leicester and Mellent, 
and King Stephen, iv. 206. 

October. Geoffrey Plantagenet besieges Falaise, and is repulsed, iv. 
206. 

November. He occupies Touque, but, surprised by a sally of the 
garrison of Bonneville, flies to Argentan, iv. 207. 

Theobald, abbot of Bee, is preferred to the archbishopric of Canter- 
bury, iv. 208. 

Anselm, nephew of St. Anselm, is elected bishop of London in 
place of Gilbert the Universal, iv. 173. 

The Emperor John Comnenus sits down before Antioch. He 
receives the homage of Raymond de Poitiers, who had married 
Constance, the heiress to the principality, iv. 191 — 194. 

1139. Jan. 21. Death of Thurstan, archbishop of York, iv. 209. 
April. A council at Rome, iv. 208. 

King Stephen arrests the bishops of Salisbury and Lincoln; the 

bishop of Ely escapes. The castle of Devizes given up to the 

king, iv. 209—211. 
In the autumn. The Countess Matilda, with her brother, Earl 

Robert, land at Arundel. They proceed to Bristol Castle, where 

the earl entertains his sister, iv. 212. 
Dec. 4. Death of Roger, bishop of Salisbury, iv. 211. 
Letald is made abbot of Bee, iv. 208. 
Expedition of Roger, king of Sicily, into Apulia, i. 158. 
Thierri, count of Flanders, takes the cross, and goes to the Holy 

Land, iv. 198. 

1140. Henry de Blois, bishop of Winchester, proposes in the king's 

council, his nephew, Henry de Sulli (abbot of Fecamp), for the 
vacant see of Salisbury, and being in a minority, leaves the court, 
iv. 218. 
Philip d'Harcourt, archdeacon of Evreux, proposed by the earl of 
Mellent, is nominated to the bishopric, iv. 218, 



CHEOKOLOGICAL INDEX. 293 



A,D. 



May 9. Death in England of Richard, abbot of St. Evroult, iv. 218. 
He is buried at Thorney Abbey, and Ralph, prior of Noyon, 
succeeds him, iv. 219. 

Sept. 8. Richard de Laigle is taken at Lire by Robert de Belesme, 
iv. 220. 

Nov. 6. Ralph, or Ranulph, prior of Noyon, iii. 420, the abbot- 
elect of St. Evroult, having been to England and received investi- 
ture from King Stephen, is consecrated on his return by the bishop 
of Lisieux, iv. 214. 
1141. Ranulf, earl of Chester, and William de Roumare sieze by surprise 
the castle of Lincoln, and revolt against Stephen, iv. 214, 215. 

Feb. 2. Battle of Lincoln, in which Robert, earl of Gloucester, and 
his adherents, defeat the king's army, and take him prisoner, i. 
157; iv. 216, 217. 

King Stephen is lodged in Bristol Castle, i. 157; iv. 218, 222. 

Henry de Blois deserts the cause of his brother Stephen, and 
receives the coimtess of Anjou with royal honours at Winchester, 
iv. 219. 

Geoffrey Plantagenet, on hearing of his countess's success, goes into 
Normandy, and requires the nobles to acknowledge his rights, and 
put him in possession of their castles, iv. 219. 

About March 9. Rotrou, earl of Mortain, having allied himself with 
Geoffrey Plantagenet, a meeting of the Norman barons is held at 
Mortain, at which they offer "the kingdom of England and the 
duchy of Normandy,""'to Theobald, count de Blois, iv. 219, 220. 

He declines the offer in favour of Geoffrey, as King Henry's son-in- 
law, on certain conditions on behalf of Stephen, iv. 220. 

By the intervention of Rotrou, Richer de Laigle is set at liberty by 
Robert, earl of Leicester, after six months' imprisonment at Br6- 
teuil, iv. 220, 221. 

The garrisons of Verneuil and Nonancour transfer their allegiance to 
Geoffrey and Matilda, iv. 

May 21 . Death of John, bishop of Lisieux, who had just before given 
his adhesion to the family of Anjou, there being none to oppose 
them in Normandy, iv. 221, 222. 
June 24. Louis le Jeune sets forward on his march to lay siege to 
Thoulouse, iv. 221, 222. 



GENEKAL INDEX. 



Aaron, martyr in Britain, i. 100. 
Aaron, (al Rachid) caliph, i. 134. ' 
Abbanes, an Indian chief, i. 254, 256, 

258. 
Abbo, monk of Fleury, ii. 35. 
Abdallab, caliph, i. 131; ii. 152. 
Abdias writes Memoirs of the Apos- 
tles, i. 277. 
Abdo, not Abelo, a martyr, i. 323. 
Abgarus, king of Edessa, i.263; iii. 

144. 
Abiathar, chief priest, i. 1 78. 
Abibas, i. 168. 
Abienus, father of Pope Severue, i. 

350. 
Abingdon, abbey of, ii. 35. 
Abingdon, Farisius, abbot of. 
Abingdon, Reynold, abbot of. 
Abo, the Breton, father of Arnulf the 

Great, i. i^90. 
Abou-Omar-Taschelin, see Buchard. 
Abraham, «ee Peter. 
Abramius, father of Pope Zosimus, i. 

333. 
Absimare Tiberius, i. 126, 127, 358, 

359; ii. 148. 
Acacius, bishop of Constantinople, 

i. 336, 337, 338. 
Acephali, heresy of the, i. 120. 
Achaia, i. 223, 234, 295. 
Achard de Montmel, a crusader, iii. 

172, 173. 
Acheres, Peter de, 
Achilles, iii. 370. 
Achilleus, Saint, 1, 99, 207. 
Acquigni, ii. 189. Castle of belongs 

to Ralph de Conches, iii. 487 ; burnt 

in 11 36, iv. 158; belongs to Robert 

deToeni, 171. 
Acre, see St. John d'Acre. 
Ada, daughter of the count de 



Guines, wife of Peter de Maule, ii. 
233. 

Ada, daughter of Richard de Heigle- 
ville, wife of Geoffrey du Neuf- 
Marche, ii. 267. 

Ada, widow of Herluin de Heigle- 
ville, marries Richard de St. Vai- 
eri, ii. 266. 

Adaloald, king of the Lombards, ii. 
146, 153. 

Adam le Sor defends AIen9on against 
Henry 1. iii. 442. 

Adam, abbot of St. Denys, iii. 420. 

Adam, son of Tedfrid, ii. 265. 

Adana, iii. 1 04. 

Adela, daughter of William the Con- 
queror; wife of Stephen count de 
Blois, i. 157, 439; ii. 22, 182, 349; 
iiL 31 ; encourages her husband to 
return to the crusade, iii. 289; in 
1101, reinforces Henry I. at the 
siege of Montmorenci, 426; in 1 1 06, 
entertains Bohemond at Chartres, 
ii. 223; iii. 367; in 1107, Pope 
Paschal VII., 345; education of 
her children, 345, 346; 'enters the 
convent of Marcigni, 347; a bene- 
factress to the abbey of Tiron, 
iii. 51. 

Adela, daughter of King Robert, wife 
of Baldwin V. count of Flanders, 
i. 431 ; ii. 59, 347,376. 

Adelaide, wife of Richard du Cou- 
lonces, ii. 252. 

Adelaide, daughter of Fulk, dean of 
Evreux, ii. 185. 

Adelaide, daughter of Richard Giifard, 
marries Walter Tirell, iv. 184. 

Adelaide, daughter of William Giroie, 
i. 390, 395. 

Adelaide, cousin of William the Con- 



296 



GEITEEAL INDEX. 



queror, wife of William Giroie, i. 
393, 425. 

Adelaide, daughter of Boniface of 
Liguria, iv. 137; wife of Roger I. 
count of Sicily, 136; her conduct 
after her husband's death, 1 35, 137. 

Adelaide of Louvaine, marries Henry 
I., iv. 44; brings Juliana, daughter 
of Godeschalch, to England, ii. 270. 

Adelaide, daughter of Humbert, count 
of JMaurienne, marries Louis VI., 
iii. 424; gives her sister Jane to 
William the Norman, iv. 87. 

Adelaide, daughter of Boniface de 
Montserrat, wife of Tancred de 
Hauteville, has for second husband 
Baldmn, king of Jerusalem, iv. 85. 

Adelaide, daughter of Everard de 
Puisat, wife of Roger de Mont- 
gomery, ii. 195, 197; iii. 33. 

Adelard, abbot of Melun, iv. 132. 

Adelard, archbishop of Rouen,!. 156; 
iv. 245. 

Adelard, monk of St. Evroult, i. 404, 
405. 

Adelelm, a priest, i. 397. 

Adelelm de Gaseran, ii. 218; his son 
Amauri, ib. 

Adelelm, monk of Flai, iii. 36 ; his 
character for learning, 413, 414. 

A.delelm, a monk, i. 474, 475, 476. 

Adelgiso, son of Desiderius, king of 
the Lombards, ii. 152. 

Adeline, daughter of Hugh de Gren- 
temesnil', ii. 213, 5Q5 ; marries 
Roger d'I\Ti, 506. 

Adeline, sister of Hugh count de 
Meulan, wife of Roger de Beau- 
mont, iii. 34; her offering to St. 
Evroult, ii. 259. 

Adeline, wife of Robert count de 
Meulan, marries Hugh de Mont- 
fort, iv. 61; defends the castle of 
Montfort against Henry I., 62 
makes terms, 63. 

Adeline, daughter of Hugh de Mont 
fort, iii. 344; marries William de 
Br^teuil, ib. 

Adeline, wife of Simon de Moulins 
i. 194. 



Adeline, daughter of William earl of 
Surry, marries Henry, son of the 
King of Scots, iv. 205. 

Adeliza, daughter of Ives count de 
Beaumont, mfe of Hugh de Gren- 
temesnil, ii. 505; iii. 55; buried at 
St Evroult, 56. 

Adeliza, sister of Richard de Cou- 
lonces, a nun at Caen, ii. 253. 

Adeliza, sister of Hugh de Grente- 
mesnil, wife of Humphrey de Til- 
leuil, buried at St. Evroult, ii. 443. 

AdeHza, daughter of William the 
Conqueror, i. 440; ii. 22, 349; be- 
comes a nun, 182. 

Adeliza, wife of William Fitz-Osberne, 
buried in the abbey of Lire, ii. 60. 

Adeliza, wife of Ralph de Mont- 
pin jon, ii. 212, 

Adeliza, daughter of Richard II. duke 
of Normandy, wife of Reynold I. 
count of Burgundy, i. 150; ii. 404; 
iii. 464. 

Adeliza, daughter of earl Waltheof 
and Judith, marries Ralph de To- 
eni, iii. 355. 

Adeodatus, Pope, i. 353; ii. 147. 

Adimathus, i. 238. 

Adrastus, ii. 173. 

Adriatic Sea, i. 438; ii. 90. 

Adrian, Emperor, i. 88, 89; ii. 135, 
137. 

Adrian, son of Exhilarat, i. 361. 

Adrian I., Pope, i. 133, 365, 366; ii. 
152, 154. 

Adrian II., Pope, i.37l; ii. 156. 

Adrian III., Pope, i. 371; ii. 157. 

Adrian IV., Pope, iv. 255, 256. 

Adrian, abbot of St. Peter at Canter- 
bury, i. 121; ii. 147; his death, 
151. 

^lia, built on site of Jerusalem, i. 89. 

Aetius, lieutenant in Gaul, i. 109, 110. 

Africanus, see Julius. 

Africanus, see Scipio. 

Africa, i. 108, 112, 113, 114, 120, 
124, 338, 342, 369, 411; ii. 143. 

Africa, king of, (prince of Morocco), 
iv. 127. 

Agabus, a prophet, i. 173, 1-76, 200. 



GENEEAL INDEX. 



297 



Agamemnon, ii. 55, 358. 

Agapete, Pope, i. 341; ii. 144, 284. 

Agapete T.I., Pope, i. 371; ii. 158. 

Agapete, Antipope, ii. 160. 

Agapete, saint and deacon, i. 222. 

Agatha, Saint, relics of, ii, 162. 

Agatha, daughter of Robert Giroie, 
iii. 29. 

Agatha, daughter of William the Con- 
queror, ii. 22, 348; contracted to 
Harold, and afterwards to Alfonso, 
king of Galicia, ii. 181; her death, 
181, 182. 

Agatho, Pope, i. 122, 123, 354; ii. 
147. 

Agilmund, king of the Lombards, 
ii. 153. 

Agilulf, king of the Lombards, i. 347; 
ii. 146, iii. 53. 

Agilus, Saint, abbot of Rebais, iii. 53. 

Agnes, Saint, i. 350. 

Agnes, daughter of Reynold de Bri- 
quesart, marries Robert de Grente- 
mesnil, ii. 505; is buried at St. Ev- 
roult, iii. 56. 

Agnes, daughter of Richard count of 
Evreux, half-sister of Ralph de 
Conches, marries Simon de Mont- 
fort, ii. 190; iii. 433, 449. 

Agnes, daughter of Hugh de Grente- 
mesnil, ii. 505; marries WiUiam de 
Say, 506. 

Agnes, daughter of Robert de Grente- 
mesnil, wife of Robert de Moulins, 
n. 19.3. 

Agnes, daughter of William count de 
Poitou, marries Alfonso, king of 
Galicia, and afterwards Elias, count 
of Maine, iii. 276. 

Agnes, daughter of Guy count de 
Ponthieu, marries Robert de Be- 
lesme, ii. 458; iii. 31; her ill fate, 
31, 32. 

Agnes, sister of Ansel m de Ribau- 
mont, marries Walter Giffard, 
iii. 343; her liaison with Robert 
Curthose, 343, 344. 

Agnes, wife of the Emperor Hen- 
ry III., i. 372. 

Agnes, wife of Hugh Paganus, ii. 238. 



Agrippa, i. 85, 180. 

Agrippa, see Herod. 

Agrippa^ prefect, i. 209, 213. 

Agrippina, i. 209. 

Agulans, the, iii. 99. 121, 127. 

Ahun, near Gueret, i. 395. 

Aichadre, Saint, abbot of Jumieges, 
ii. 147; his relics, i. 150, 247. 

Aigulfus, a monk, ii. 34. 

Aillerie (1'), near Chaumont, in the 
Vexin, i. 472. 

Aimar, bishop of Puy, the pope's 
vicar in the first crusade, iii. 68; 
traverses Illyria, 82; at Constanti- 
nople, 92; at the siege of Nice, 94, 
95; at the battle of Doryloeus, 101; 
at the siege of Antioch, 122, 130, 
136; his death, 152; his chaplain, 
Bernard III., 309. 

Aimer, or Aimeri, see Amalric. 

Aimeria, wife of Reginald de Baliol, 
ii. 196. 

Aimeria, niece of Roger de Mont- 
gomery, ii. 48. 

Ainard, abbot of St. Pierre-sur-Dive, 
i. 383; ii. 69, 208; his death and 
epitaph, ii. 106; his character and 
acts, 106, 107. 

Aix-la-Chapelle, i. 134, 140; ii. 159, 
341. 

Aizuppius, father of Pope Leo, i, 366. 

Alachis, duke of Brescia, ii. 148. 

Alan III., duke of Brittany, ii. 161; 
guardian of William the Bastard, 
400; his death in 1040, ii. 74, 163, 
164, -100; his wife Bertha, ii. 74. 

Allan Fergant, or the Red, duke of 
Brittany, in 1076, defends Dol, be- 
sieged by William the Conqueror, 
ii. 104; in 1084, blockades the 
castle of Suzanne, ii. 378; is in- 
vited to aid William Clito, iii. 432; 
does homage to Henry I., iii. 404; 
demands the hand of Matilda of 
Scotland, iii. 13, 14; marries Con- 
stance of Normandy, ii. 105, 182; 
afterwards Ermengarde d'Anjou, 
ii. 406, note, 

Alan de Dinan entrusted with the de- 
fence of Lisieux in 1135', iv. 166; 



298 



GENEEAL INDEX. 



in 1139, plots against the bishop of 

Salisbury, 210; is at the battle of 

Lincoln in 1141, 217. 
Alan, seneschal of Dol, joins the first 

crusade, iii. 99. 
Alan, son of Ralph de Guader, a cru- 
sader, ib. 
Alan, abbot-elect of St. Wandrille, is 

at the synod of Rouen in Oct. 1128, 

iv. 105. 
Alan, Fitz-, viscount of Shrewsbury, 

iv. 204. 
Alande Tanet, iv. 197. 
Alans, the invasions of, i. 105, 106. 
Alaric, king of the Goths, i. 157. 
Alban, saint and martyr, i. 1 00. 
Albano, in Armenia, i. 265. 
Albano, in Italy, i. 102; ii. 365. 
Albara ( ?), in Syria, iii. 152, 155; a 

bishop appointed there, 153 ; the 

city is taken by Bohemond IV., 

256. 
Alberede, daughter of Hugh bishop of 

Bayeux, ii. 261; wife of Albert de 

Cravent, 260. 
Alberede, wife of Ralph count of Ba- 
yeux, built the citadel of Ivri, ii. 

428; iii. 25. 
Alberede la Grosse, died on the way 

to the Holy Land, iii. 38. 
Alberede, daughter of Guitraond, wife 

of William de Moulins, ii. 192. 
Alberede, daughter of Robert count 

de Meulan, marries William Lou- 

vel, iv. 61. 
Alberic de Bouri, in garrison at An- 

delis, iii. 470. 
Alberic, abbot of Citeaux, iii. 47. 
Alberic, count de Gatinois, father of 

Geoffrey le Barbu and Fulk le 

Rechin, i. 439 ; ii. 74. 
Alberic, son of Hugh de Grentemes- 

nil, ii. 108, 505 ; quits his studies 

and joins the crusade in 1096, iii. 

57 ; makes his escape from Antioch, 

128. 
Alberic de Mareuil, ii. 234 ; is made 

prisoner at Bremule, iii. 483. 
Alberic, abbot of Vezelai, iv. 1 32. 
Albermarle, (iv. 205.), see Aumale. 



Albert de Blandrai, an Italian cru- 
sader, iv. 290 ; his death, 296. 

Albert de Cravent, father of Ralph, 
ii. 260, 261 ; his wife Alberede, 

260 ; grants tithes to St. Evroidt, 

261 ; is buried there, about 1080, 
262. 

Albert, abbot of Mamioutier, i. 394, 
424 ; ii. 2. 

Albert, archbishop of Mayence, in 
1119, is at the council of Rheims, 
iv. 1,3; in 1125, presides in the 
diet at the election of the emperor 
Lothaire, on the death of Henry 
v., 81—83. 

Albert, a priest, arrested in 1119, by 
the archbishop of Rouen, iv. 30. 

Albinus, governor of Judea, i. 86, 
248. 

Albinus Claudius, i. 92. 

Albinus, papal chamberlain, i. 366. 

Albinus, an abbot in England, ii. 
37. 

Alboin, king of the Lombards, i. 1 1 5, 
116, 345; ii. 145,153. 

Albold, a monk of Bee and abbot of 
St. Edmondsbury, iv. 49. 

Alcuin, abbot of Tours, ii. 334. 

Aldana, mother of William Court- 
Nez, iii. 244. 

Aldhelm, bishop of Serborne, ii. 36. 

Aldulph, king of East Anglia, ii. 92. 

Aldred, son of Algar, ii. 4. 

Aldred, archbishop of York, favours 
the Normans, ii. 18 ; crowns Wil- 
liam the Conqueror, i. 490, 491 ; ii. 
242 ; and queen Matilda, ii. 17. 

Alen^on, ii. 196, 455; iii. 27 ; about 
1061, a treaty made there between 
duke William and Geoffrey count 
d'Anjou, ii. 74 ; in 1087, Robert 
de Belesme drives out the royal 
garrison, ii. 427; in 1098, William 
Rufus marches by Alengon, iii. 
229 ; besieged and taken by 
Henry I., in 1112,443 ; in 1113, 
Fulk count of Anjou does homage 
to Henry I. at Alengon, 443 ; in 
July, 1118, the king comes there, 
454; grants the city to Theo- 



GEJTEEAL IN"DEX. 



209 



bald count de Blois, 455 ; who 
gives it to his brother Stephen, 
455, 456. The burgesses revolt 
and deliver the city to Fulk count 
of Anjou, 461, 462. The royal 
forces besiege and take the castle, 
463. In 1119, Henry I. restores 
Aleng-on to William Talvas, iii. 
474 ; it is burnt in 1134, iv. 141; 
in 1135, Henry I. ousts Talvas 
and takes it into his own hands, 
147. 

Aleppo, iii. 84, 127, 152 ; iv. 186. 

Alexander of Cappadocia, patriarch 
of Jerusalem, i. 89,93, 96. 

Alexander, king of Scots, ii. 149 ; iii. 
1 1 ; marries a natural daughter of 
Henry I., 14 ; his death, 15. 

Alexander, son of Havise wife of 
Humphrey Harenc, ii. 237. 

Alexander, bishop of Lincoln, deserts 
king Stephen, iv. 209, 210 ; is 
arrested, ib.; submits, 211 j in 
1141, he informs the king of the 
surprise of Lincoln castle, 215. 

Alexander Severus, emperor, i. 94, 
263, 320. 

Alexander, emperor of the East, L 
136 ; ii. 157. 

Alexander, Saint, pope, i. 317 ; ii. 
363. 

Alexander II., pope, i. 372, 431, 
439, 490 ; ii. 1. 8, 70, 165, 167, 
372 ; previously bishop of Lucca, 
ii. 431 ; letter of Osbeme, abbot 
of St. Evroult, to this pope, i. 444 
— 446 ; a standard sent by him to 
William duke of Normandy, 463 ; 
he interdicts Stigand, iv, 52 ; 
sends legates to crown William 
Rufu?, ii. 81 ; receives Lanfranc at 
Rome, 115, note. 

Alexander III., pope, holds a council 
at Tours, iv. 256. 

Alexander IV., pope, iv. 261. 

Alexander, a priest of the Jews, i. 
163. 

Alexander, gives a field to the abbey 
of St. Evroult, ii. 238. 

Alexandretta, iii. 122, 133, 134. 



Alexandria, i. 87, 94, 95, 103, 115, 
122, 195, 203, 290, 291, 292, 294, 
353. 

Alexis, saint, i. 106. 

Alexis Comnenes, emperor, i. 158, 
438 ; ii. 10, 169, 355, 356, 357, 
358, 359, 371,985; iii. I70 ; iv. 
194 ; defeated by Robert Guis- 
card, ii. 222 ; founds the town of 
Chevetot, iii. 85 ; his policy with 
the crusaders, iii. 86 — 93 ; Nice 
given up to him, 97, 98 ; his ex- 
pedition to reinforce them at the 
siege of Antioch abandoned 112, 
113 ; marches to their relief when 
besieged there, 134 ; retires, 135 ; 
Hugh the Great sent as envoy 
to him, 149 ; his troops occupy 
Laodicea, 251, 252 ; he treats 
favourably the crusaders returning 
to Evu-ope, 254, 255 ; his conduct 
to the crusaders in 1101, 290—295; 
hostilities with Bohemond, 201 ; 
treachery to the crusaders under 
the Count de Poitou, 294, 295 ; 
obtains the freedom of Harpin of 
Bourges, 305 ; tries to get Bohe- 
mond into his hands, 307, 308 ; 
in 1105, Bohemond stirs up the 
French against the emperor, 
366 ; in 1108, Alexius con- 
cludes a peace with Bohemond 
and entertains some of the cru- 
saders at Constantinople, 389, 
390 ; is said to have offered his 
son in marriage to the daughter 
of Roger of the Principality, 406, 
408 ; his death, 409. 

Alfia, a town in Armenia the Less, 
iii. 105. 

Alfonso III., king of Aragon, iv. 
262. 

Alfonso VI., king of Galicia (of 
Leon and Cagtille) demands in 
marriage Agatha, daughter of Wil- 
liam the conqueror, ii. 182; mar- 
ries Agnes de Poitou, iii. 226 ; his 
daughter Uraca, iv. 119 ; his 
daughter Elvira, iii. 75. 

Alfonso Raymond, surnamed Le 



300 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Petit Roy, king of Galicia (of 

Leon and Castille), iv. 119, 120. 
Alfonso I., king of Navarre and 

Aragon, in 1105, calls to his aid 

Rotrou, count du Perche, iv. 109 ; 

his wars with the Saracens, 118, 

119 ; quarrels with his wife Uraca, 

120. Is defeated at the battle of 

Fraga, in 1134, 121—126; his 

death, 126, 103, 254. 
Alfonso Jourdain, count of [Tholouse, 

son of Raymond, iii. 254 ; iv. 

221 ; succeeds his brother, iii. 

255; attacked in 1141 by Louis 

VIL, iv. 121. 
Alfred the Great, subdues the Danes, 

ii. 33 ; his character, 36 ; is king 

of all England, 97, 271; endows 

the church, 375, 468 ; Merlin's 

prophecy of, iv. 493. 
Alfred, son of Ethelred IL, i. 486 ; ii. 

36, 161, 400; iv. 98. 
Alfi-ed, king of Northumbria, ii. 

151. 
Algar, Earl, father of Edvrin and 

Morcar, i. 461 ; ii. 4, 17, 18. 
Algar, son of Earl Godwin, a monk of 

Rheims, i. 487. 
Algar, father of Siward Bam and of 

Aldred, ii. 4, 198. 
Algason, see Guigan. 
Algason, see John. 
Algmana, i. 233. 
Alhamon, prince of Morocco (?), iv. 

113. 
Alhamon, caliph of Cordova, iv. 

124. 
Ali, son of Joseph, king of Morocco, 

iv. 112, 121, 122, 127; his son 

Buchar, 123. 
Alice, daughter of Eudes Borel, duke 

of Burgundy, wife of Bertrand, 

count of Tholouse, and after of 

William Talvas, iv. 136. 
Alice, daughter of Baldwin, king of 

Jerusalem, marries Bohemond, iii. 

393, 409. 
Alice, see Adelaide. 
AUieres, a castle of Robert Talvas. 
AUobrogan, the, Hugh son of Azo, 



Marquis of Liguria, so called, ii. 
484. 

Allobroges, people of Dauphiny and 
Savoy, ii. 483, note. 

Almenesches, abbey of, endowment by 
Roger de Montgomery, ii. 197; of 
which Henry I. strips it, iii. 308 ; 
the abbey burnt in 1103, 340; and 
the nuns dispersed, 341, 342 ; re- 
stored in 1118, and again burnt in 
the time of the Abbess Matilda, 
342 ; in 1118, Almenesches belongs 
to Stephen de Blois, in 1119 is re- 
stored to Talvas ; Henry I. seizes 
the castle in 1135, iv. 147. 

Almoravides the, iv. 42, 121. 

Alnwick, priory at, iv. 145, note. 

Alost, besieged by William of Nor- 
mandy, count of Flanders, iv. 91 ; 
he perished there, i. 156, 

Alpinian, saint, a companion of St. 
Martial, L 297, 312. 

Alps, i. 413 ; ii. 374, 480 ; iii. 63, 82 ; 
see Cottian. 

Alsa (Anslb or Opslo in Norway), iii. 
214, 215, and note. 

Altar-cloths to be of white linen, i. 
229. 

Altars, seven consecrated in the abbey 
church of St. Evroult, iii. 248. 

Alvington, a manor in the parish of 
Rock, Wore, belonging to St. Ev- 
roult, ii. 189, 257 ; iii. 248. 

Amalric, viscount de Chatellheraut, 
his wife Maubergeon becomes the 
mistress of the count of Poitou, iv.7. 

AmaLric deMoira, in 1100, surrenders 
the tower of Mans to Count Elias, 
iii. 273—276. 

Amalric II., viscount de Narbonne, 
iv. 125. 

Amalric, a monk of St. Evroult, i. 
206. 

Amalric de Thouars, at the battle of 
Hastings, L 484. 

Amalric de Villeray, ii. 110 ; garri- 
sons Belesme in 1113, iii. 444 
his son Gouffier, ii. 110. 

Amauri, son of Guazo de Poissi, ii. 
235. 



GEIfEEAL IKDEX. 



301 



Amaurl, grandson of Peter de Maule, 
ii. 228. 

Amauri Floenel, ii. 227. 

Amauri, son of Adelelm de Gaseran, 
ii. 218. 

Amauri, king of Jerusalem, iv. 256. 

Amauri de Montfort, counsellor of 
Henry I., of France, ii. 399. 

Amauri 111. surnamed The Strong, 
slain in an irruption, ii. 485. 

Amauri IV. leads William Rufus to 
attack Montfort, iii. 212; en- 
gages in hostilities in Breteuil, 344, 
betrothed to the daughter of the 
count of Evreux, but the match is 
broken off, 348 ; persuades his ne- 
phew Fulk, count of Anjou, to 
make war on Henry I., 441; is 
reconciled with Henry, 443 ; de- 
cides on claims of the monks of 
Maule, iii. 226, 227; his pretensions 
to the county ;of Evreux, iii. 421, 
449; his great power, ibid; supports 
Richer de Laigle, and garrisons 
his castle, iii. 456; the citadel of 
Evreux given up to him, 449, 460; 
his counsel to Eustace de Breteuil, 
466 ; refuses terms offered by Hen- 
ry I., 471 ; his firmness and activity, 
ibid ; retreats on news that Evreux 
was burnt, 477, 478; iv. 252; makes 
Passy his quarters, 478, 479; goes 
to Paris after the battle of Br6- 
mule, in which he was not present, 
486; persuades Louis VI. to re-in- 
vade Normandy, 487; complaint 
against him by the bishop of Evreux 
at the council of Rheims, iv. 7; 
is defended by his chaplain — the 
pope's decision, 8, 9; is reconciled 
with Henry I., 19; the exactions 
of the royal tax-gatherers drive him 
to revolt, iv. 60, 253; i. 155 ; en- 
gages his nephew Fulk to give his 
daughter Sibylla of Anjou to Wil- 
liam of Normandy, iv. 60; joins a 
league to support him, 86; meet- 
ing at La-Croix-St. Leufroi, 62 ; 
his enterprise at Gisors, 69, 70; 
attacks the tower of Vatteville, 71, 



72; his conduct at the battle of 
Bourg-Teroude, 73 ; is taken pri- 
soner, but liberated, 74, 75; makes 
peace with Henry I,, iv. 79; has 
the custody of William d'Ypres, 
91; a partisan of Geoffrey of An- 
jou, 165. 

Amalric, prior of Rebais, ii. 320, 

Amauri, see Amalric. 

Ambrieres, in Mayenne, ii. 449. 

Ambrose, Saint, i. 104, 105, 336, 407; 
ii. 141. 

Ambrosius Aurelian, i. 113. 

Ambrosius Merlin, see Merlin. 

Amfreville, family of, iii. 209, note. 

Amfrid, see Umfrid. 

Amicia, daughter of Ralph de Guader, 
proposed for Richard, son of Hen- 
ry I., but marries Robert earl of 
Leicester, iv. 32, 33, 59. 

Amiens, i. 104; ii. 138 ; iii. 50. 

Amiens, Fulk, bishop of. 

Amiens, Guy, bishop of. 

Amiens, Hugh, bishop of. 

Amiot, a burgess of Alen9on, iii. 462. 

Am.organ, supposed king of Valencia 
(perhaps Merouan),'iv. 42. 

Amphimacus, ii. 55. 

Amphipolis, i. 184. 

Amphitheatre of Titus, i. 87. 

Ampliatus, vicar of Pope Vigilius, 
i. 343. 

Anaclete, Pope,i. 316, 317; se^Cletus. 

Anaclete, Antipope, i. 156; iv. 107, 
127, 133; educated at Cluni, iv. 
128; his death, 194. 

Anastasius, benefactor to St, Evroult, 
ii. 224. 

Anastasius I., Emperor, i. 113, 337, 
338; ii. 143. 

Anastasius II,, Emperor, i. 127, 359, 
360 ; ii. 148. 

Anastasius, saint and martyr, a Per- 
sian, i. 118 ; ii. 146. 

Anastasius L, saint and pope, i. 322; 
ii. 141. 

Anastasius II., Pope, i. 336 ; ii. 143. 

Anastasius IV., Pope, iv. 255. 

Anastasius, father of Pope Felix II., 
i. 330. 



302 



GENEEAL INDEX. 



Anastasius, father Ox Pope John III., 
i. 344. 

Anastasius, father of Pope Vitalian, 
i. 352. 

Anastasius, patriarch of Constantino- 
ple, i. 361. 

Anatolius, bishop of Laodicea, i. 98. 

Anceins, castle of, iii. 471. 

Ancona, iv. 130. 

Andalusia, iv. 112, and note 

An delis, on the Seine, a domain of 
the archbishops of Rouen, occupied 
by the French, iii. 469 ; Richard, 
son of Henry I., takes refuge there, 
469, 470 ; Louis VI. quartered 
there, 476, 481; takes refuge there 
after the battle of Br^mule, 485. 

Andrew, Saint, i. 187, 296; his acts 
and martyrdom from legends, i. 
223 — 237 ; his relics, 102; appears 
to a priest at Antioch, iii. 130, 131. 

Andrew de Coulombs, iii. 320. 

Andrew, a heathen priest at Limoges, 
converted by St. Martial, i. 300, 
310. 

Andrew, a priest at Ostia, i. 344. 

Andrew, steward of Theobald IL, 
count of Champagne, ii. 320. 

Andrew, abbot of Troarn, at the 
council of Rheims, iii. 460. 

Andrew, a monk of Vallombrosa, 
founds the abbey of Chezal-Benoit, 
iii. 49. 

Andrianople, i. 254 ; iii. 88. 

Anger de Brie, abbot of St. Evroult, 
iv. 268. 

Angers, ii. 395; taken by Charles 
Martel, i. 129; Matilda,' widow of 
WilUam, son of Henry I., returns 
there, iv. 59. 

Angevins, the, ii. 30,109, 176, 179; 
their irruption in Normandav after 
the death of Henry I., iv. 156, 164 
—170. 

Anglo-Saxons, or English, ii, 55; iii. 
72; take service at Constantinople 
after the Conquest, ii. 10, and note, 
358; iii. 85. 

Angles, or English, ii. 142; i. 110, 
130. 



Anglesey, isle of, descent of Magnus, 
king of Norway, on, iii. 217. 

Angus, earl of ^loray, iii. 16. 

Anicete, Pope, i. 319. 

Anianus of xllexandria, i. 292. 

Anjou, the count and countess of 
Evreux take refuge there, iii. 420. 

Anjou, see Geoffrey, Fulk, and other 
counts of. 

Anna, king of the East Angles, i. 123. 

Annas, Jewish chief priest, ii. 163. 

Annas, a Jewish scribe, i. 326. 

Anne of Russia, wife of Henry I,, 
king of France, called Bertrade by 
Ordericus, ii. 348. 

Anniversary of deceased monks and 
benefactors of St. Evroult, how 
solemnized, i. 447. 

Ansbert, Saint, archbishop of Rouen, 
i. 119; ii. 148,240. His reUcs, il 
303, 308. 

Ansbert, Saint, a disciple of St. 
Evroult, ii. 291, 308. 

Ansegise, bishop of Troves, i. 139; 
ii. 341. 

Ansel de Garlande, iii. 428. 

Anselm, Saint, his country and youth, 
ii. G1 ; retires to Bee, 383; is prior 
there, 117; abbot, 67, 68; iv. 250; 
at the funeral of William the 
Conqueror, ii. 420 ; at the election 
of Roger, abbot of St. Evroult, iii. 
245 ; archbishop of Canterbury, 
ii. 117, 470; iii. 9; composes a 
poem in honour of Lanfranc, ii. 
465; complains of the oppressions 
of the church, 237; his quarrels 
with William Rufus, iii. 202; has 
licence to go to Rome, 237; is 
twice in exile, 202; goes to Popes 
Urban II. and Paschal II., 202, 
203 ; passes through Boulogne, 
238; is accompanied by Edmer and 
Baldwin of Tournai. 203, 238; 
finds Urban in Apulia, ibid; 
preaches at the council of Bari, 
204; is in exile at the coronation 
of Henry I., 267; is recalled in 
1100, 268; adheres to the king in 
the rebellion of 1101, 279; conse- 



GENERAL INDEX. 



303 



crates Ralph bishop of Rochester, 
349 ; his death on the 21st April, 
1109,i. 154;ii. 117; iii. 435— 437; 
iv. 252; his character and works, ii. 
67, 68. 

inselm, abbot of St. Edmondsbury, 
nephew of St. Anselm, iv. 49; 
elected bishop of London, 173. 

A.nselm'de Ribemont, a crusader; falls 
in the East, iii. 165. 

Ansered, priest of Sap and monk of 
St. Evroult, i. 403, 404. 

Ansfrid, first abbot of Pr^aux, i. 
417,432. 

Ansger, father of William, a burgess 
of Rouen, iii. 236. 

Ansgot, sub-prior of Croyland, ii. 95. 

Ansgot, prior of a hospital in Hun- 
gary, i. 419. 

Ansol'd, son ot Peter de Maule, ii. 
217, 219, 221, 223, 226, 227, 228, 
233, 285; fights in Greece under 
Robert Guiscard, 222; Defends 
his mansion at Maule in 1098; iii. 
212; his charter t j Jit. Evroult, ii. 
225; his last hours, 22tt— 232; his 
wife Adeline, 222, 224; his nine 
children, 223; funeral and epitaph, 
232. 

Ansold, son of Ansold de Maule, ii. 
223. 

Ansold, the Rich, of Paris, father of 
Peter de Maule, ii. 216. 

Ansquetil de Quarrel, iu Apulia, i. 
412. 

Ansquetil de Cropus, a priest out- 
raged in the cathedral at Rouen, 
iv. 31. 

Anspraud, king of the Lombards, ii. 
153, 154. 

Antheros, Saint, pope, i. 94, 321. 

Anthemius, a heretic, i. 341, 343. 

Anthems, composed at St. Evroult, 
i. 443i used at other abbeys, ii. 69. 

Anthony, Saint, the monk, i. 102, 
115; ii. 57,141; iii. 41, 43. 

Anthony Harenc, ii. 486. 

Antioch, i. 96, and passim to 420 ; 
ii. 223, 385, 386; iii. 66, 157. 159, 
163; description of, iii. 153, 154; 



council of, i. 103; the siege of 
and acts of the Crusaders, iii. 106 
— 142; held by Bohemond, iv. 
253, 254; by Tancred, 307, 391; 
defence of, by his wife, in 1119, 
392; held by Baldwin, king of 
Jerusalem, 393, 407; then by 
Bohemond II., iii. 246,409, 410; 
on his death by king Baldwin, 411; 
Fulk. of Anjou, has the principa- 
lity, iv. 106; afterwards Raymond, 
who does homage for it to John 
Comnenes, 191—194. 

Antioch in Pisidia, i. 181, 183. 

Antiochus Clarus, son of Seleucus 
Nicanor, iii. 154. 

Aniiphonaire, i. 405, 443. 

Anoninus Pius, emperor, i. 89, 318, 
319; ii. 137. 

ApoUinaris, Saint, i. 195. 

Apollinaris, bishop of Hierapolis, i. 
91. 

Apollinaris, bishop of Laodicea, a 
heretic, i. 104, 105. 

Apollo, temple of on the Vatican, i. 
96. 

Appion, i. 192. 

Apulia, i. 157, 158; ii. 358, 395, 
456, 464, 506; iii. 82, 127, 170; 
iv. 134, 254, 261; invasions of the 
Saracens in, i. 411; conquests of 
the Normans, i. 412; ii. 162, 163; 
Robert de ISIoulins retires there, 
193; the assassins of Mabel take 
refuge there, 194; William Pantulf 
and Robert de Cordai go there, 
209, 210; Amulf de Montpin9on 
there, 212; Apulia conquered by 
Roger II., count of Sicily, iv. 137; 
campaign of the emperor there in 
1137; iv. 195. 

Aquila, a Jew, i. 186, etc. 

Aquilea, i. 106, 195, 290, 291, 294, 
319; council of, i. 126. 

Aquina, citv of, i. 437. 

Aquitaine, 'i. 301; ii, 157, 173, 280; 
iii. 258, 238; William Court- Nez, 
duke of, ii. 244; Louis le Jeune 
succeeds to the dukedom, iv. 182. 

Arabs, the, iii, 66, 99, 102, 127. 162. 



304 



GENERAL ITfDEX. 



Aragon, Alfonso I., king of, iv. 109, 

110, 123. 
Aragonese, the, iv. Ill, 119. 
Arator, i. 167, 197, 345, 346; ii. 

144; iv. 237. 
Arcadius, Emperor, i. 105, 106, 108; 

ii. 141, 142. 
Archadius pretended count of Poitiers, 

i. 304, 310. 
Arch, mortuary, over Avicia de 

Sanqueville, ii. 269; over Robert 

de Rhuddlan, 448. 
Archelaus, bishop of Mesopotamia, 

i. 98. 
Archambauld, archbishop of Sens, i. 

140; ii. 341. 
Archer or Achard de Domfront, iii. 

1, and note iv. 67. 
Archer, a knight of France, grand 

cuisinier? besieged at Pont-Aude- 

mer, iv. 67. 
Archdeacons, visitations of, ii. 1 26 ; not 

to consecrate the chrism, 62; juris- 
diction of, possessed bv laymen, i. 

392, 471; William de' Ros, both 

precentor, dean, and archdeacon of 

Bayeux, 468. 
Archill, a Northumbrian lord, iL 19, 

22, 25. 
Archipelago of the Northern and 

Western isles, etc., iii. 217. 
Archippus, a disciple of St. Paul, i. 

206. 
Archis in Syria, iii. 162, 165. 
Architecture, monks skilled in, i. 

442, 468; ii. 259; iii. 246, 247, 

note. St. Thomas represented in 

the legend as a skilful architect, i. 

254; palace erected by him for an 

Indian king, 266, 257. 
Architecture of the abbey church of 

St. E\Toult, i. 457; iii. 245, 246, 

note. 
Archpriests of the diocese of Rouen, 

ii. 124. 
Argences, ii. 405; a dependance of 

the abbey of Fecamp, iv. 176. 
Argentan, held by Robert de Be- 

l^sme, iii. 278, 226, 333, 385; 

Henry I. demands the royal reve- 



nues of it, 482; charges chem with 
a rent to St. Evroult, 440; he 
garrisons the castle, 473; iv. 147,'; 
the Countess Matilda acknowledged 
there, 156; threatened with a siege 
by King Stephen, 178; Geoftrey 
Plantagenet retreats there, 208. 

Argenteuil, the provostship of, given 
to Robert, ex-abbot of Dive, iii. 
375. 

Arian heresy, i. 1 02, 1 05, 123. 

Aribert, king of the Lombards, i. 126 ; 
ii. 153. 

Arioald, king of the Lombards, ii. 
147, 153. 

Aristides, his work, i. 88. 

Aristobulus, son of king Herod, i. 
85, 175, 178. 

Aristotle, ii. 40, 

Arius, i. 143. 

Aries, i. 249; council of, ii. 140; Pope 
John VIII. visits it, ii. 337 ; Inno- 
cent II. acknowledged there, iv. 
128. 

Armorial bearings; see Cognizance 
and note. 

Armenia, i. 264. 

Armenians, the, iii. 104, 106; iii. 
Ill, 119, 125, 141. 

Arno, bishop of Saltzburg, i. 366. 

Arnold des Bols, iii. 491; steward of 
the earl of Leicester, iv. 196. 

Arnold, son of Walkelin (d'Echan- 
fre?), i. 400. 

Arnold d'Echoufour, i. 393, 397, 
398, 425—427, 431, 433, 435, 
441, 450, 452, 453, 454; goes to 
Apulia, 441 ; burns the bourg of 
St. Evroult, ii. 189; is buried 
there, i. 453. 

Arnold, son of Giroie, i. 390, 392. 

Arnold, son of Robert de Grente- 
raesnil, i, 395; goes to Apulia, 
412. 

Arnold, the Great, father of Giroie 
and Hildiarde, i. 389. 

Arnold, son of Heugon, father of 
Berenger the monk, i. 435, 439. 

Arnold, bishop of Mans, i. 449 ; ii. 
70. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



305 



Arnold, prior of St. Evroult, iii. 440. 

Arnold du Tilleul, nephew of Hugh 
de Grentemesnil, viscount of 
Leicester, a monk of St. Evroult, 
ii. 185, 249, 443, 447, 448, 455, 
523; called "A. de Rhuddlan," 
iii. 55; his two journeys to England, 
iii. 55 ; iv. 53, 55 ; founds the 
altar of St. Mary Magdalen at St. 
Evroult (?) 66; cousin of Ilger 
Bigot (?) 179. 

Arnulph, chanter of Chartres, i. 443. 

Arnulph de Dol, ii. 250. 

Arnulph, emperor of Germany, i. 
136. 

Arnulph, son of Eudes, son of Walo, 
ii. 224, 234. 

Arnulph, count of Flanders, treacher- 
ously slays William Longve Epee, 
i. 137, 381 ; ii. 157, 166, 299; 
counsels Lewis d'Outre-Mer to kill 
or maim Duke Richard I., ibid. 

Arnulph IL, count of Flanders, i. 
142. 

Arnulph III., count of Flanders, ii. 
59, 347 ; succeeds his father, 59, 
60; defeated by his uncle Robert 
the Frisian, ibid. 

Arnulph de Hesdin, iv. 204. 

Arnulph, bishop of Lisieux, iv. 255, 
256. 

Arnulph of Toulx, entertains St. 
Martial, i. 297, 298. 

Arnulph, bishop of Martorano, is at 
the first crusade, iii. 183, 184. 

Arnulph, son of Roger de Montgo- 
mery, ii. 194, 203; iii. 32; joins 
his brother Robert de Belesme, iii. 
308 ; plots for making Robert Curt- 
hose king, 277 ; marries the daugh- 
ter of an Irish king, 338; aspires to 
his kingdom, ibid; banished from 
England, 339 ; gives up the castle 
of Almenesches to duke Robert, 
ibid; in 1103 he joins the Irish 
against the Norwegians, 350; the 
Irish king takes his daughter from 
him, 351; he returns to England, 
ibid; assists in surrendering Alenjon 
to the count of Anjou, 462; is 
VOL. IV. I 



reconciled with the Irish king, 351 ; 

dies on the morning after his 

marriage, ibid. 
Arnulph, son of Hugh de Montpin- 

ffon, ii. 212. 
Arnulph, son of William Pantulf, ii. 

212, 397. 
Arnulph de Roeulx act sas bishop of 

Jerusalem, iii. 182, and note. 
Arnulph, archbishop of Rheims, i. 

143, 144 ; ii. 343, 344. 
Arnulph, son of John de St. Denys, 

a crusader, ii. 233. 
Arnulph, son of William Talvas, i. 

384. 
Arnulph, prior of Seez, and afterwards 

abbot of Troarn, i. 389; ii. 461, 

462; iii. 246, 248. 
Arques, i. 152; ii. 14, 267, 405, 406, 

474; iii. 382, 450, 473, 485. 
Arques, viscount of, see Robert de 

Beauchamp. 
Arras, ii. 297; iii. 430, 483. 
Arthur, earl of Brittany, nephew of 

King John, iv. 258. 
Arthur, King, iv. 98, 102. 
Arthur of Caen, father of Ascelin, ii. 

421. 
Arundel, granted to Roger de Mont- 

gomeri, ii. 14, 48; besieged by 

Henry I., iii. 332; the empress 

Matilda entertained there, iv. 212. 
Ascalon, iii. 172, 181, 183, 187; 

battle of, 183—190; iii. 250; the 

Saracens assemble there, 301, 303; 

retreat there, 304. 
Ascelin, of Andeli?, betrays it to the 

French, iii. 469. 
Ascelin, son of Arthur de Caen, ii. 

421. 
Ascelin, Goel-, ii. 237, 401, 484; iii. 

22, 23, 24, 25, 345, 346, 347, 348 ; 

his death, ii. 239. 
Ascelin, bishop of Laon, i. 141; ii, 

343. 
Ascelin, a monk of Noron, ii. 211. 
Ascelin, provost of St. Evroult, ii. 

305, 309, 312. 
Ascelin, nephew of the provost, 309; 

succeeds him, 311. 



306 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Asclepiotlotus, pretnrian prefect,!. 89. 

Asia, i. 199, 201, 206, 239, 243, 252, 
494. 

Aslo, see Alsa. 

Asnebec, iv. 165. 

Assyria, i. 265. 

Astaroth, an Indian idol, i. 265, 266. 

Asterius, a martyr, i. 320. 

Astrology, predictions from, of Gilbert 
Maminot, bishop of Lisieux, iii. 
62 ; the mother of Kilidge Arslan 
at Aleppo, versed in, iii. 127, 128. 

Astronomy, i. 423; ii. 121; Gilbert 
Maminot, his study of, iii. 62; 
Ralph Mal-Corona, skilled in, i. 
423. 

Astulf, king of the Lombards, i. 363; 
ii. 154. 

Astyages, an Armenian or Indian 
king, i. 265, 269. 

Atcham, or Attingham, near Shrews- 
bury, the birth place of Ordericus, 
ii. 113; iv. 222. 

Athalaric, king of the Ostrogoths, i. 
114,340: ii. 144. 

Athanasius, Saint, i. 102, 103;-ii. 141. 

Athelstan, king of England, i. 137; 
ii. 157. 

Athens, i. 185, 198, 206, 316; ii. 40; 
iii. 408. 

Atlantic, the, iv. 119. 

Attila, king of the Huns, i. 109, 111. 

Aubette, river at Rouen, ii. 1-31. 

Aubin, abbot of St. Peter at Canter- 
bury, ii. 151. 

Aubrev, earl of Northumberland, ii. 
18l'. 

Aubrey, see Alberede and Alberic. 

Aubri-le-Ponthou, near Touque,ii.208. 

Audebert, abbot of Bourgdieu, after- 
wards archbishop of .Bourges, iv. 
49. 

Audin, a monk of St. Albans, ii. 1 02. 

Audoin, king of the Lombards, i. 115, 
153. 

Audon, king of the Lombards, ii. 55, 
153. 

Aufai, history of the priory of, ii. 262 
— 266; the bourg founded, 266. 

Augurius, Saint, iv. 1 14. 



Augustus, Emperor, i. 10, 84. 
Augustine, Saint, archbishop of Can- 

terbiirv. i. 117, 348, 494; ii. 33, 38, 

146, 147. 
Augustine, Saint, bishop of Hippo, i 

74, 83, 107, 108, 1.30, 253, 406; 

ii. 40, 141, 149. 
Aumone, L', a Cistercian abbey, 

founded, iii. 48. 
Aurelian, Emperor, i. 98, 32,3. 
Aurelian, a pagan priest at Limoges, 

i. 300. 
Aurelian, the biographer of St. Mar- 
tial, i. 296, 310. 
Aurelius Ambrosius, i. 113. 
Aurelius Ambrosius, betrothed to Fla- 

via Domitia, i. 314. 
Austriclinian, a companion of St. 

Martial, i. 298. 
Autarith, king of the Lombards, ii. 

34, 146, 153. 
Auvergne, iii. 463. 
Auxentius, i. 104, 
Auxerre, i. Ill; ii. 155, 346. 
Avallon, siege of, by King Robert, ii. 

346. 
Aversa, founded, ii. 58. 
Avicia, daughter of Richard de Cou- 

lonces, i. 253. 
Avicia, wife of Water de Ileugleville, 

i. 265 ; her death and epitaph, 268, 

269. 
Avicia, see Havise. 
Avician, Saint, archbishop of Rouen, 

ii. 138, 140; iv. 233. 
Avitus, a Spanish priest, i. 107; ii. 

142. 
Avranches, ii. 139, 431, 498, 520; 

iii. 4 13. 
Azo, father of Bernard and Ralph, ii. 

264. 
Azo, marquis of Liguria, marries the 

daughter of Herbert, count of 

Maine, ii. 74, 481. 
Azotus, i. 169. 

Babylas, a martvr, i. ^Q. 
Babylon, i. 277,'282; iii. 305. 
Babylon, emir of, i. 321; iii. 166, 
183; fights the battle of Ascalon, 



GENERAL INDEX. 



307 



183-190; takes Ramla, 301, etc.; his 

Christian captives at Babylon, 402. 

Bachelor, the White, Elias count of 

Maine, so called, iii. 275, and note. 

Bacchiolus, bishop of Corinth, i. 92 ; 

viscount of, iii. 393. 
Bagdad, caliph of, 401. 
Bailleul, see Baliol. 
Balad, viscount of Bagdad, iii. 393, 
397, 398, 400, 402, 403; his 
death, 404. 
Baldric, or Baudri, de Baucquenci, an 
archer of Duke William, i. 392, 
397, 426, 427, 428. 
Baldric, bishop of Dol, his life, iii. 
190, 191; at the council of Rheims, 
iv. 3; his history of the crusade, 
iii. 59, 190. 
Baldric, the Red, of Montfort, ii. 227. 
Baldwin de Clare, made prisoner at 

the battle of Lincoln, iv. 218. 
Baldvrin, bishop of Evreux, ii. 43. 
Baldwin V. count of Flanders, ii. 59, 
490 ; married to Adela of France, 
i.430; ii. 59, 348, 376. 
Baldwin VI. count of Flanders, ii. 59, 

347. 
Baldwin VII. count of Flanders, iii. 
430; gives an asylum to William of 
Normandy, iii. 433; takes arras for 
him, 450 ; iv. 20, 86; is wounded, 
and dies, 430, 451, 475; his mo- 
ther's appeal to the council of 
Rheims respecting his death, iv. 
16. 
Baldwin, count of Hainault, or Mons, 
defeated by Robert the Frisian, ii. 
59; takes the cross, iii. 81. 
Baldwin IV. count of Hainault, joins 
his forces to Roger de Toeni, iv. 
206. 
Baldwin I. king of Jerusalem, son of 
Eustace II. count of Boulogne, ii. 
12, 190, 497; iii. 187; brother of 
Godfrey de Bouillon, 299; takes 
the cross in 1096 ; ii. 497 ; iii. 81; 
his acts in the crusade, 87, 99, 101, 



to Ramla, and escapes o Jaffa, 
301—303; defeats the Saracens, 
304; his first wife. Godehilde de 
Conches, ii. 190, 497; his second, 
Adelaide de Montserrat, iv. 85; con- 
duct to Adelaide, widow of Roger I. 
of Sicily, 137; his portrait and 
character, iii. 300. 

Baldwin II. king of Jerusalem, sur- 
named De Bourg, iii. 299; iv. 149, 
391; occupies Antioch, 393; his 
captivity, 394—406, 409; treaty 
for marrying his daughter to John 
Comnenes, 407, 408; she marries 
Bohemond, 409; administers An- 
tioch on his son-in-law's death, 411; 
chooses for his successor Fulk of 
Anjou, 411; iv. 106; his death, i. 
189; iv. 107, 254. 

Baldwin III. king of Jerusalem, iv. 
256. 

Baldwin Fitz-Gilbert, i. 463 ; lord of 
Meules and Sap, and son of Gilbert 
count de Brionne, 490; retires to 
Flanders, ibid,\ placed in garrison 
at Exeter, ii. 16; his death, 514, 
515. 

Baldwin de Rivers, opposes King 
Stephen, iv. 196, 198. 

Baldwin, abbot of St. Edmondsbury, 
ii. 466; iii. 199. 

Baldwin de Tournai, a monk of Bee, 
accompanies St. Anselm to Rome, 
iii. 203, 238. 

Ballon, a strong fortress, often be- 
sieged, fortified by Robert de Be- 
l^sme in 1099, 240; ii. 455, 456; 
iii. 204, 231,233; he is slain there, 
iv. 110; besieged by Philip Augus- 
tus, 258. 

Bamborough Castle, siege of, iii. 19. 

Banners of parishes carried by the 
priests at the head of the people in 
arms, iii. 24. 

Baptismal fees prohibited by the 
council of Rheims, iv. 18. 

Barbarv, a physician of, saves the life 
104, 143, 144, 145, 147, 148; sue- of Philip I., iii. 354,, 
ceeds his brother, Godfrey de Bouil- Barcelona, Oldegaiie, archbishop of. 
Ion, ii. 498; iii. 148, 299^ marches I iv. 115. 

u 2 



308 



GEKEEAL INDEX. 



Barda, father of Leo, the Armenian, 

i. 134. 
Barfleur, Henry 1. lands there in 

1105, iii. 360; embarks there for 

England in 1120, iv. 33; shipwreck 

of the Blanche-Nef there, 35—42. 
Bari, 1.412; ii. 371, 384, 385, 386; 

relics of St. Nicholas landed there, 

392—396; council of Bari in 1098, 

iii. 204. 
Barjesus, or Elymas, i. 287. 
Barking, William the Conqueror halts 

there, ii. 4. 
Barnabas, Saint, his history from the 

Acts, i. 286 — 288; continued from 

legends, 288—290; his copy of St. 

Matthew's gospel, i. 112; his relics 

found, ibid. 
Barnabas, an officer of Nero, i. 217, 

221. 
Barnoe, father of William de GIos, ii. 

191,516. 
Barre, see Luke de la Barre. 
Bartholomew Saint, i. 226; legends of 

his acts and martyrdom, 265 — 270; 

apparitions of, ii, 89, 102. 
Bartholomew, Goel, of Chartres, a 

crusader, iii. 83. 
Bartholomew, abbot of Marmoutier, 

ii. 3. 
Basil, Saint, bishop of Caesarea in Cap- 

padocia, ii. 141. 
Basil, the Macedonian, i. 135. 
Basil, Emperor, ii. 156, 
Basil ia, wife of Roger de Rolleboise, 

ii. 237. 
Basoches-au-Houlme, burnt in 1137, 

iv. 176. 
Basset, note on the family of, iii. 329. 
Bath, see John the Physician, bishop 

of. 
Bathilda, wife of Clovis, ii. 147. 
Battle abbey founded, ii. 2. 
Bauquenci, i. 397, 427; ii. 312. 
Bavaria, an archbishop of, i. 419, 420, 

421, 422. 
Bavarians, ii. 419; iii. 136; iv. 83. 
Baveux, ii. 335; i. 380; ii. 166. 183, 

273, 443, 452; iii. 300, 340, 409; 

iii. 234, 359, ?'7?i the cathedral 



dedicated to Notre Dame, ii. 429; 

its consecration in 1077, 116,209; 

Agatha, daughter of William the 

Conqueror, buried there, 182, 183. 
Beards, long, fashion of wearing, ii. 

478; iii. 362; a sign of mourning, 

461; iv. 7; custom of among the 

glo-Saxons, ii. 6. 
Beatrix, abbess of Caen, i. 455. 
Beatrix, daughter of Joubert de Hei- 

gleville, ii. 268. 
Beatrix, mother of William Pantulf, 

ii. 207. 
Beatrix, wife of Geoffrey count of 

Perche, ii. 459; iii. 51; iv. 108. 
Beauchamp, family of, iii. 431, note ; 

see Robert, Simon de. 
Beaumais-sur-Dive, i, 396. 
Bsaumont-le-Roger, ii. 492; iii. 272, 

348, 474; iii. 59, 68, 73, 75, 77; 

the fortifications razed in 1194; iv. 

257. 
Beaumont-le-Vicomte, ii. 75, 377; iv. 

146. 
Beaunai, St. Peter's Church, ii. 263. 
Beauvaisis, the, i. 152; ii. 177, 312, 

349; the people of, i. 455, 456, 

488. 
Bee, foundation of the abbey of, i. 

383; dedication of the church, ii. 

116, 209; schools of Bee, ii. 40,67, 

68; the church of St. Evroult given 

to the abbey of Bee, i. 385; ex- 
changed for La Roussiere, 386; 

William de Breteuil dies at Bee, ii. 

191, 192; iii. 344; Edmer's book 

preserved there, iii. 238. 
Bede, i. 2, 84, 130 ; his life and 

works, ii. 38, 150; iii. 96; iv. 97. 
Bedford, siege of, by King Stephen, 

iv. 195, 
Beeby, Leicestershire, manor of. 

granted to Croyland abbey, ii. 97. 
Beechamwell, Norfolk, Ralph the 

Breton encamps there, ii. 81. 
Bees, tythe of, i. 205. 
Belesme, see Robert de, etc. 
Belesme, ii. 208, 503; iv. 110; Ro- 
bert de Belesme expels the royal 

garrison, ii. 427; in 1113, Louis VL 



GENEEAL INDEX. 



309 



cedes it Henry I., iii. 444; he 

besieges and burns it, 405; iii. 87. 
Belgrave, Leicestersliire, Hugh de 
Grentemesnil grants two villeins 
there to St, Evroult, ii. 255. 
Beliarde, wife of Eudes^ son of Walo, 

ii. 234. 
Behsarius, i. 114, 341, 342; ii. 144. 
Belocasi, the inhabitants of the dis- 
trict of Ba} eux, ii. 139. 
Benedict I., Pope, i. 345, 346; ii. 145, 

284. 
Benedict II., Pope, i. 355; ii. 147. 
Benedict III.. Pope, i. 371; ii. 156. 
Benedict V., Pope, i. 371; ii. 159. 
Benedict VI., Pope, i. 371. 
Benedict VII., Pope, i. 371. 
Benedict VIII., Pope, i. 371, 410; 

ii. 160, 348. 
Benedict IX., Pope, ii. 160; ii. 348. 
Benedict XII., Pope, iv. 266. 
Benedict, Saint, i. 114, 346; ii. 144; 

relics of, ii. 34; apparition of, 327, 

329; rule of, i. 389. 
Benedict, canon of Aufay, ii. 266. 
Benedict, brother of Ordericus Vitalis, 

ii. 200, 202. 
Benedict, father of St. Romanus, ii. 

284. 
Benedict, a monk of St. Ouen, abbot 

ofDive, ii. 207. 
Benedict, abbot ofWearmouth,ii. 150. 
Berenger, count of Bayeux, defeated 

by Rollo, i. 380. 
Berenger, farms the site of the abbey 

of Evroult in ruins, ii. 281. 
Berenger, the heretic, ii. 41, 53. 
Berenger, novice and scholar at St. 

Evroult, i. 388; abbot and after- 

Avards bishop of Venosa, 406. 
Bergen, in Norway, iii. 214. 
Bernack, Northamptonshire, a farm 

at, given to the abbey of Croyland, 

ii, 100. 
Bernai, monastery of, founded, i. 381 ; 

Henry I. gives the custody of the 

place to Eudes Berleng, iv. 72. 
Bernard, patriarch of Antioch, iii. 

309, 391, 392. 
Bernard, son of Azo, iii. 264. 



Bernard, the blind, Tesza his wife, and 
Eude his son, ii. 234. 

Bernard, Saint, abbot of Clairvaux, 
iii. 318, 319. 

Bernard, the Dane,ii. 159, 299—303. 

Bernard le Gros, prior of Cluni, iv. 
46. 

Bernard, son of William Court-Nez, 
count of Thoulouse, ii. 246. 

Bernard, Matthew, a learned monk of 
St. Evroult, i. 444; transferred, to 
the abbey of Dive, ii. 107. 

Bernard, abbot of Marmoutier, ii. 2, 

Bernard, Michael, a monk of St. 
Evroult, at the cell of Parnes, i. 
471. 

Bernard du ]Veuf-March6, a benefac- 
tor to St, Evroulc, ii. 264; serves 
in England, and, under William 
Rufus, defeats Rhys-ap-Tewdor, 
267 ; builds Brecknock castle, 
holds Talgarth, and. founds a 
priory at Brecknock, 267, 268. 
his inroad and ravages in Worcester- 
shire, 434, 

Bernard, monk of St. Evroult, a 
copyist, i. 406; iii, 55, 

Bernard, novice and scholar at St. 
Evroult, i. 388. 

Bernard, son of Walter de St. Valeri, 
a crusader, iii, 99, 

Bernard, de St, Valeri, son of Gil- 
bert,bya daughter of DukeRichard, 
ii. 266. 

Bernard, count de Senlis, son of Pepin 
II., ii, 229, 

Bernard, Saint, founder of the abbey 
of Tiron, iii, 50. 

Bernefrid, a monk of Cluni, after- 
wards bishop, i. 423. 

Bernieres-sur-Seine, ii, 190, 

Berold, a butcher of Rouen, the only 
one saved in the shipwreck of the 
Blanche-Nef, iv, 35, 36, 

Berri, iii, 49; the people of, i, 311; 
the communes of march against 
Henry I,, iii. 488. 

Bertarith, king of the Lombards, ii. 
148, 153. 

Bertha, daughter of Eudes II,, count 



310 



GEIiTEEAL TILDES. 



de Blois, ii. 76; marries Alan, duke 
of Brittany, and afterwards Hugh, 
count of Maine, i. 448 j ii. 76, 132, 
317? 
Bertha, wife of king Ethelbert. iii. 
283. 

Bertha, of Hollandjdaughter of Count 
Florence, and wife of King Philip 
I., ii. 348; iii. 3. 

Bertold, a German count, follows 
Peter the Hermit, iii. 76, 84. 

Bertrade, Pepin's queen, i. 364. 

Bertrade, daughter of Simon de 
Montfort, ii. 475; iii. 433; lives 
with Fulk le R^chin, count 
of Anjou, ii. 476, 477; quits him 
and lives with King Philip as his 
wife, iii. 33, 34, 63 ; intrigues 
against the life of Louis her step- 
son, iii. 352—355; obtains the re- 
lease of her son Fulk from con- 
finement, 370, 371. 

Bertrade, see Anne of Russia. 

Bertrand of Laon, count of Carrion 
and Asturias, iv. 125, 143. 

Bertrand, Rumex, keeper of the 
castle of Plessis, iii. 452. 

Bertrand, healed by St. Judoc, i. 
477. 

Bertrand, count de Thoulouse, iv. 
135. 

Bertrand, son and heir of Raymond, 
iii. 255. 

Bertwald, archbishop of Canterbury, 
i. 357; ii. 151. 

Besanfon, iv. 46. 

Beule, wood of, ii. 224, 225. 

Beuve, Saint, abbess of Rheims, ii. 
283. 

Beyrout, i. 190; iii. 168. 

Bezants, iii. 166, 396, 404. 

Bienfaite, castle of, iv. 78; family of, 
see Walter, Richard, Robert and 
Roger de. 

Bigod, see Roger de, &c. 

Biorn Ironside, i. 379. 

Biota, daughter of Herbert, count of 
Maine, i. 449 ; wife of Walter, 
count of the Vezin, ii. 79. 

Biothanatusy iii. 266. 



Bissextile days, ii. 486; superstition 
respecting such years, iv. 164. 

Bithla{9) Pharaoh's daughter, iii.321. 

Z?/awcAe-iV^/, shipwreck of the, i. 155; 
ii. 48, 380; iii. 283; iv. 253; full 
details, iv. 33-42. 

Bleda, near Viterbo, i. 349. 

Bleda ravages Illyrium, i. 109. 

Blethvn-ap-Cynryn, prince of North 
Wales, i. 463; ii. 18, 449, and 
note. 

Bleves, a castle near Mamers, iii. 
226. 

Blittero,a Flemish poet, iii. 479,480. 

Blois, counts of, see Stephen, Theo- 
bald. 

Blythe, Robert de Belesme, claims 
lands there, iii. 220; castle there, 
332. 

Bobbio, in Lombardy, monastery of, 
ii. 146. 

Bodin, king of the Sclaves, iii. 81. 

Boethius, i. 339; ii. 144. 

Bohemia, the king of, killed at Cr^ci, 
iv. 266. 

Bohemond, fable of the giant, iii. 
266. 

Bohemond, son of Rribert Guiseard, 
iii. 358; origin of the name, 266; 
at the siege of Durazzo, ii. 359, 
360 ; kept in lUyria bv his father, 
361; defeats the Greeks, 365; 
wounded, and returns to Palermo, 
366; his stepmother gives him 
poison, 367; seeks refuge with 
Jourdain, prince of Capua, 368; 
makes terms M-ith his brother 
Roger, 464; besieges Amalfi and 
takes the cross, iii. 82; arrives at 
Constantinople, 86; his expedition 
in Macedonia, and relations with 
the emperor Alexius, 86 — 93; at 
the siege of Nice, 94 — 98 ; at the 
battle of Dorylceum, 100—102; 
pursues the Turks after the battle 
of Plastencia, 105, 106; lecon- 
noitres Antioch, 108; at the siege, 
110—126; burns the city, 132; at 
the battle of Antioch, 137; his 
standard planted on the citadel. 



GENEEiVL INDEX. 



311 



142; claims possession of the 
. place, 153, 155, 159; opposed by 
Raymond, iii. 254; at the siege of 
Marrah, 155 — 157; at Laodicea, 
163; besieges it, 251, 252; takes 
it, 255, 266 ; is master of Antioch, 
25'3; in hostility with the Greek 
emperor, 290, 291 ; is taken 
prisoner by Daliman, 307; narra- 
tive of his' deliverance, 310 — 320; 
visits France, ii. 223; iii. 6, 365; 
Henry I. declines a visit from him, 
ib.; his pilgrimage to Noblac in 
performance of a vow, ii. 321, 322, 
366; visits several parts of France, 
iii. 6, 366; confers with King Phi- 
lip I., 365; marries his daughter 
Constance, i. 367; ii. 223; iii. 6; 
retm-ns to Apulia, and prepares to 
attack the emperor, iii. 338; be- 
sieges Durazzo, 30, 389; makes 
peace with the emperor, 390 ; does 
homage to him, iv. 192; returns to 
Apulia, iii. 390; his death, 390, 
391; iv. 285. 

Bohemond II., son of Bohemond I., 
educated by Constance at Taren- 
tum, iii. 409; goes to Syria, 393, 
409 ; invested with the principality 
of Antioch, 410; marries King 
Baldwin's daughter, 393, 409; his 
difference with Leo the Armenian, 
410; his death, 393, 410, 411; his 
daughter marries Raymond, son of 
the count of Poitou, iv. 191. 

Bomarzo, atown in Lombardy, i. 347. 

Boniface I. (Saint), Pope, i. 108,117, 
333, 334; ii. 142. 

P,oniface II ., Pope, i. 340 ; ii. 144,285. 

Boniface III., Pope, i. 348; ii. 144, 
285. 

Boniface IV., Pope, i. 348; ii. 285. 

Boniface V., Pope, i. 349; ii. 37, 144. 

Boniface VI., Pope, i. 371. 

Boniface, father of Pope Benedict, i. 
346. 

Boniface, apostle to the Germans, i. 
359; archbishop of Metz, ii. 152. 

Boniface of Liguria, marquis of Moni- 
serrat, iv. 157. 



Bonitus, abbot of Monte Cassino, ii. 
34, 146. 

Bonjeu, valley of, ii. 378, 381. 

Bonniont, diocese of Geneva, abbey 
founded, ii. 48. 

Bonmoulins, church of Notre-Dame 
at Rouen, founded by Queen Ma- 
tilda, ii. 501; iv. 150. 

Bonneville-sur-Touque, Duke Wil- 
liam stays there, i. 466; falls sick 
there, ii. 180; William Rufus there, 
iii. 241; Henry I. there, 442; his 
funeral passes through it, iv. 151 ; 
Geoffrey of Anjou attempts to take 
it, 207. 

Bonosus, father of Pope paschal I., 
i. 367. 

Bonus, saint and martyr, i. 322. 

Bonus, bishop of Ferentino, i. 344. 

Bonus, father of Pope Sabinian, i, 
348. 

Bordeaux, i. 307. 

Bosc-Hebert at Verneuces, i. 398. 

Boso, abbot of Bee, ii. 68; iii. 493; 
his death in 1130, iv. 103. 

Boso, bishop of Porto, iii. 464; iv. 4. 

Bosphorus, the, iii. 79, 92. 

Botentrot, a pass of Mount Taurus, 
iii. 104. 

Botolph, Saint, abbot of Ikanoe, his 
relics translated to Thorney, iii. 
421. 

Botrys, nowBatroum, in Syria, iii. 167. 

Botterell, see Hugh. 

Bouillon, Godfrev, mortgages his 
castle of, ii. 204'. 

Bouillon, see Godfrey. 

Boulogne-sur-mer, ii. 10; St. Anselm 
lands there, iii. 238; people of, iii. 
136; support their lady, Matilda, 
wife of King Stephen, iv. 203; 
Edward II. married there, 263. 

Bourdin^ archbishop of Braga, anti- 
pope, as Gregory VIII., iii. 446; 
iv. 252; accused at the synod of 
Rouen, 460 ; excommunicated at 
the council of Rheims, iv. 17. 
arrested at Sutri, and confined at 
La Cava, 43. 

Bjurges sold by I^erpin to Philip I., 



312 



GENERAL INDEX. 



iii. 289; Louis le Jeune crowned 
there, iv. 194. 
Bourg Teronde, battle of, iv. 73—75. 
Bouri, a frontier castle of Normandy, 
iii. 209, 210; family of in note to 
210. 
Brai, the country of, ii. 408; people 
of, iii. 454; expedition of Henry I. 
in, 458. 
Brecknock, the people of invaded by 
Fitz-Osberne and Walter de Lacy, 
ii. 47; Bernard du Neuf-March^ 
founds the castle there, 267; and 
the priory of St. John, 268. 
Bremule, battle of, i. 155; iii, 481 — 

485; iv. 253. 
Brenneville, name assigned to the 
battle of Bremule, or Noyon, iii, 
481, 482, note. 
Brescia, i. 438. 

Breteuil, castle and lordship of, ii. 
60, 191, 182; iii. 466, 467, 487, 
488, 490, 491; iv. 19, 33, 59, 157, 
206, 220. 
Bretons, The, i. 484; ii. 31, 176; iii. 
72, 77; their character and man- 
ners, ii. 105, 191; Hoel, bishop of 
Mans, a worthy person, " though a 
Breton," ii. 7 1 ; in arms under Duke 
William at the Conquest of Eng- 
land, i. 465; under Henry when 
count, ii. 520, 521; in the pay of 
William Rufus, iii. 229; in that of 
Henry I., 379, 450; iv. 166, 183; 
of King Stephen, 216. 
B.^val, ii. 261, 487; iii. 23; Ascelin 
Goel builds a castle there, ii. 237; 
the tower of, 238; siege of, iii. 24. 
Brian, son of Hughe, count of Brit- 
tany, ii. 23, 26. 
Brickhill, Bucks, tithe of granted to 

St. Evroult, ii. 257. 
Bricstan, of Chatteris in Ely, his 

storv, ii. 324—331. 
Bridgnorth, castle of, iii. 220, 332; 

siege of, 334—336. 
Brihtmer, abbot of Croyland, ii. 99. 
Brinsop, Herefordshire, church ex- 
changed with the abbey of St. 
Evroult, ii. 264. 



Brionne, castle and lordship of, ii. 
405, 427, 490, 491; iii. 464, 474: 
iv. 62, 87. 
Bristol, castle of, belongs to Robert, 
earl of Gloucester, iv. 200; he re- 
ceives there his sister, the empress, 
212; King Stephen imprisoned 
there i. 157; iv. 218. 
BritaiH, i. 86, 92, 99, 100, 101, 105, 
107, 110, 117, 119, 125, 128, 130, 
138; ii. 6, 15, 142; iii. 349. 
Britons, the, invaded bv Picts and 
Scots, i. 106—109 ; Invite Vorti- 
gern, ibid.; he defeats the Saxons 
and Picts, 110. 
Broie, La, a hermitage near Calais, i. 

473. 
Bruges, Charles, earl of Flanders, 
assassinated there, iv. 87 ; the 
assassins besieged in it by William 
d'Ypres, and executed, 88. 
Brunehaut, queen of the Franks, i. 

115; ii. 283; iii. 53. 
Bruno, a chief of the Saxons, i. 139, 

140; ii. 341. 
Bruno, son of Fromond II., count of 

Sens, ii. 345. 
Bruno, of Lorraine, bishop of Toul, 
pope as Leo IX., i. 151, 372; ii. 
186. 
Buchar, son of Ali, prince of Morocco, 

iv. 123, 186. 
Buckingham, county of, iii. 257; the 
earldom of given bv the Conqueror 
to Walter GifFard,"ii. 49. 
Bulgaria (Epirus), conquests of the 
Normans in, ii. 153, 163, 360; 
Walter de Poissi, a crusader, dies 
there, iii. 77 ; Bohemond there, 
82. 
Burdet, Robert (de Culei), a Norman 
knight, settles in Spain, and is 
made count, or prince, of Tarra- 
gona, i v. 114, 115, 117, and note; 
reinforces King Alfonso after the 
battle of Fraga, 122. 
Bures, in Brai, ii. 474; fortified by 

Henry I., iii. 451. 
Bures, near Troarn, Mabel de Be- 
l^sme assassinated there, ii. 194, 



GEKERAL INDEX. 



313 



Burghill, Herefordshire, church of, 

belonged to the abbey of St. Ev- 

roult, ii. 264. 
Burgus, see Sarpsborg. 
Burial fees prohibited by the council 

of Rheims, iv. 18. 
Bursa, surname of Roger, count of 

Sicily, iii. 82, 358. 
Byfield, Northamptonshire, the church 

and tithes granted to St. Evroult, 

iii. 257. 
Byzantium, i. 226; ii. 223; iii. 408. 

Cacabus, see Kakava. 

Cadogan-ap-Blethyn, prince of North 
Wales, iii. 334. 

Cadogan-ap-Rhys, ii. 47. 

Caen, William de, surnamed Alexan- 
ander, i. 411. 

Caen, Robert de, the name given by 
the Normans to Robert, earl of 
Gloucester, iv. 211. 

Caen, Constance, daughter of AVilliam 
the Conqueror, married there to 
Alan Fergus, ii. 106 ; that king and 
Matilda buried there, 168; a fire 
there, 419, 420; Henry I. occupies 
it, iii. 372, 374; ii, 25; his corpse 
carried there, iv. 151 ; the garrison 
loyal to King Stephen, 176; the 
city submits to the count of Anjou. 
199; Robert, earl of Gloucester, 
holds the castle, 199, 200; abbeys 
founded at, i. 382 ; ii. 2 ; abbey of 
St. Stephen dedicated, i. 468; ii. 
116, 209; benefaction of Robert 
de Montgomery to, 197; abbey 
of the Trinity founded at, i. 382 ; 
Queen Matilda buried there, ii. 
376; Matilda and Cecilia abbesses 
there, 377- 

Caius, Saint, pope, i. 99, 323. 

Caius, patriarch of Jerusalem, i. 89. 

Calabria, annual descents of the Sara- 
cens, i. 411; Norman conquest of, 
411,412, 446; ii. 163, 209; Nor- 
man monks there, i. 435; Robert 
Guiscard's expedition from, ii. 358; 
crusaders winter there, iii. 82. 

Calculus, see William de Jumid;?es. 



Caldecot, Norfolk, the manor ofy 
given to St. Evroult, ii. 189, 351; 
iii. 249. 

Calepodius, a martyr, i. 320. 

Caletus, a city supposed to be be- 
sieged and ruined by Julius Caesar, 
ii. 130; iv. 21. 

Caligula, i. 85, 175, 176, 195. 

Calixtus, a deacon, i. 331. 

Calixtus I., Pope, i. 320; ii. 363. 

Calixtus II., Pope, i. 373; ii. 168; 
iv. 172; elected, iii. 464; holds the 
council of Rheims, iv. 1, 18; meets 
Henry I. at Gisors, 23; returns to 
Italy, and arrests the anti-pope 
Bourdin, 42, 43; his conduct to 
Pons, abbot of Cluni, iii. 437; iv. 
43, 47; his death, 80; his family 
and character, 464, 465. See Guy 
of Burgundy. 

Calixtus, cemetery of, i. 93, 98. 

Callinicus, patriarch of Jerusalem, i. 
127. 

Cansbray, i. 494; ii. 297. 

Cambridge, county of, i. 196; ii. 254; 
castle founded there, ii. 20. 

Cambvses, a priest of Diana, ii. 133. 

Campania, i. 115, 126, 333,355, 357, 
360,412,413. 

Canards, Norwegian merchant ships, 
so called, plundered by Robert de 
Moubray, iii. 18. 

Cande taken by Geoffrey Martel, iii. 
369, 370. 

Cannes, battle of, iii. 391. 

Canons, secular, displaced for monks, 
i. 389. 

Canterbury, ii. 436; burnt by the 
Danes, 37 ; St. Anselm buried 
there, iii. 136; Archbishop Ralph 
dies there, iv. 51 ; the castle held 
by Robert, earl of Gloucester, 200. 

Canusa, the wool of, iii. 52. 

Canute the Great, i. 146, 147; ii. 9, 
36, 161, 382. 

Canute II., ii. 400. 

Canute IV., Saint, ii. 282—384. 

Capet, see Hugh. 

Capharmagala, Lucian, priest of, ii. 
141. 



314 



GENERAL IJfDEX. 



Capiton, patriarch of Jerusalem, i. 

89. 
Cappadocia, i. 193; iii. 77, 290, 295. 
Capua, i. 131 ; ii. 412; besieged by 

Roger, count of Sicily, iii. 203; 

St. Anselm finds Urban II. there, 

238. 
Caracalla, Emperor, i. 93. 
Carausius, i. 99. 
Cardiff, Robert Curthose dies there, 

iv. 97, 122, 143. 
Carentan, Henry I. there, iii. 360; 

Serlo, bishop of Seez, preaches 

there before the king, 3ti0 — 364. 
Caribert, king of Paris, i. 115, 283. 
Carinus, Emperor, i. 99, 323. 
Carisius, an Indian prince, i. 260 — 

265. 
Carlisle, founded by Caesar, iv. 201; 

held by David, king of Scots, idid. 
Carloman, son of Charles Martel, be- 
comes a monk, i. 362. 
Carloman, son of Pepin, i. 1 32 ; mayor 

of the palace, i. 131, 364; ii. 152, 

334. 
Carlovingian kings, ii. 333. 
Carlton-Curheu, Leicestershire, and 
Carlton-upon-Ottmoor, Oxfordshire, 

possessions of St. Evroult there, ii. 

255. 
Carpus, a saint at Troas, i. 205. 
Carrouges, siege of, iv. 164. 
Carthage, i. 107, 115, 124; ii. 144. 
Carus, Emperor, i. 100. 
Cassian, patriarch of Jerusalem, i. 89. 
Cassian, chief of the Turks at Antioch, 

iii. 126, 132, 153, 159; his death, 

308; his daughter set at liberty, 

318; his palace, iii. 132. 
Cassiodorus, senator, ii. 144, 145. 
Castlecary, Somerset, held by Ralph 

Louvel in King Stephen's wars, iv. 

201. 
Castoria, an episcopal city in ^lace- 

donia, iii. 88. 
Castro- Giovanni, in Sicily, i. 412; ii. 

371. 
Catacombs at Rome, i. 96. 
Catania, i. 412. 
Cataphrygians, The, i. 332. 



Catherine, Saint, ii. 106. 

Catigirn, iv. 102. 

Cauchois, the, i. 152; ii. 343 : gate of, 

at Rouen, 499. 
Cause Castle, on the borders of Wales, 

held by Paganus Fitz-John in 

King Stephens wars, iv. 143, 144, 

and note. 
Caux, country of, i. 442; ii. 130; iii. 

368; etymology of the name, iv. 21 ; 

ravaged in 1118, iii. 453; com- 
mitted to the charge of William de 

Warrenne, ii, 151. 
Cava La, monastery of, described, iv. 

43; the Antipope Bourdin confined 

there, ib. 
Ceadwalla, king of the West Saxons, 

i. 125, 126. 
Cecilia, Saint, i. 320. 
Cecilia, daughter of William the 

Conqueror, i. 441; ii. 22, 349; a 

nun, and afterwards abbess, of the 

Trinity at Catn, ii. 115, 378. 
Cecilia, daughter of Philip I., and 

wife of Tancred, iii. 392. 
Cefyn, the Welsh name of the river 

Conway, iii. 449. 
Celestes; heretic, i. 332. 
Celestine I., Pope, i. Ill, 123, 334; ii. 

142. 
Celestine, II., Pope, iv. 255. 
Celestine III., Pope, iv. 257. 
Celestine, bishop of Nice, i. 226. 
Celibacy of priests, ii. 8, 57, 64, 125, 

186; iv. 18, 29, 30, 103. 
Celsus, Saint, i. 221. 
Celsus, the philosopher, i. 95. 
Ceneri, Saint, his relics, ii. 457; iii. 

28 ; castle of, ii. 457. 
Centule, viscount of Bearne, iv. 125; 

takes the cross, iii. 78. 
Ceolfrid, abbot of Wearmouth, ii.150. 
Ceolred, king of Mercia, ii. 92. 
Cerdo of Alexandria, i. '292. 
Cerdo the heretic, i. 90. 
Cerisi, abbey of, i. 382. 
Cesarea, in Cappadocia, iii. 105. 
Cesarea, in Palestine, i. 95, 96. 118, 

169—172, 180, 186, 189—191, 

200,203, 254; iii. 160, 168. 



GENEEAL INDEX. 



315 



Chad, Saint (Hedda), bishop of Dor- 
chester, ii. 91. 

Chalcedon, council of, i. 1 1 1, 123, 335 ; 
ii. 62, 142. 

Chalons, see Robert, Count; Walter 
William, bishop of. 

Chamberlain, see Rabel ; Tanker- 
ville. 

Chambli, expedition of Louis le Gros 
against, iii. 427. 

Champagne, see Hugh and Theobald, 
counts of. 

Cham party, ii. 237, and note. 

Chancellor, William Giffard, iii. 268; 
Flambard, to Henry I., see Ranulf; 
King Stephen's, iv. 210. 

Chandos, see Robert de. 

Chant, Gregorian, usage of by the 
English, ii. 52. 

Chanters, Robert Gamaliel and Wil- 
liam Bonne- Ame, eminent, i. 436; 
ii. 124. 

Chants composed by Ainard, abbot of 
Dive, ii. 105. 

Charancei (Eure and Loire), ii. 206. 

Charenton,"the, i. 397, 424; ii. 286, 
313, 315; iii. 472. 

Charlemagne, i. 132, 364, 365; ii. 74, 
152, 154, 155, 335; iii. 44, 143, 
378; his posterity cease to reign in 
France, i. 142. 

Charles d'Ancre, son of Canute, king 
of Denmark, iv. 87; count of Flan- 
ders, iii. 451; iv. 76; at Rouen, at 
the court of King Henry I., 75, 76; 
supports William of Normandy, iv. 
86; is assassinated, i. 156; iv. 87. 

Charles d'Anjou, king of Sicily, iv. 
261, 262. 

Charles the Bald,i. 135; ii. 156, 336, 
and note on the place of his death. 

Charles the Fat, Emj'eror, i. 136. 

Charles IV., king of France, iv. 264, 
265. 

Charles V., king of France, iv. 267. 

Charles VIL, king of France, iv. 267, 
2G8. 

Charles, duke of Lorraine, brother of 
King Lothaire, i. 141; ii. 160, 343, 
344. 



Charles, son of Charles, duke of Lor- 
raine, i. 141, 142; ii. 344. 

Charles Martel, i. 129, 362; ii. 150, 
151, 333, 334; hell-torments in- 
flicted on him, 424. 

Charles the Simple, i. 136—138, 157; 
ii. 5Q, 157, 329, 337, 338, 456. 

Charlton-Curlieu, Leicestershire, and 
Charlton-upon-Ottmoor, Oxford- 
shire, see Carlton, 

Charters, of Arnold de Maule,ii. 225; 
of Ascelin Goel, 238; of Fulcher, 
son of Gerard, 204 ; of William de 
Breteuil, 191; of William, duke of 
Normandy, i. 400, 450; ii. 189; of 
Henry I., ii. 192; iii. 440; iv. 50; 
of Peter de Maule, ii. 216, 217; of 
Roger de Montgomery, ii. 196. 

Chartrain, country of, i. 435. 

Chartres,i. 136, 443; ii. 182, 223; iii. 
367; iv. 128, 142; lands of the 
cathedral pillaged by Rotrou, count 
of Perche, ii. 110; Paschal II. 
celebrates Easter at Chartres, and 
confirms the privileges of the 
cathedra] church, iii. 195. 

Chasuble, i. 415 ; ornamented with 
gold and pearls, ii. 259. 

Chateau-Gontier, ii. 504; iii. 334, 
341. 

Chateau-du-Loir, iii. 223, 236, 241. 

Chateau-en-Timerais, ii. 109. 

Chateauneuf-sur-Epte founded by 
William Rufus, iii. 479. 

Chateau-Tierri, on the Marne, ii. 457; 
iii. 28. 

Ch^telleraud, see Aimeri, viscount of. 

Chatillon, see Conches. 

Chatteris, Cambridgeshire, iii. 324. 

Chaumont-en-Vexin, ii. 398; iii. 208, 
209—211, 480,481; iv. 87, 88. 

Cheese of Poulton, Wiltshire, tithe 
of granted to St. Evroult, ii. 196, 
255; tithes of cheese and cows, 
208. 

Cherbourg, belonged to Henry I. 
then count, in 1090, ii. 498. 

Cherson, city of, i. 315. 

Chersonesus, Pope Martin banished 
there, i. 121, 352; ii. 147, 257; 



316 



GENEEAL INDEX. 



Emperor Justinian II., 124; Phi- 
lip plans, 127. 

Chester, the church of St. Peter be- 
longed to the abbey of St. Evroult, 
iii. 443; the earldom given to Hugh 
d'Avranches, ii. 47, 242; passes to 
Ranulf of Bayeux, iv. 4.9; the in- 
habitants revolt, ii. 26, 30 ; reduced 
by William the Conqueror, who 
builds the castle, 30, 31; an earth- 
quake there, iv. 48; Earl Hugh 
founds St. Werburgh's there, in 
which he was buried, iii. 283. 

Chevetot, near Nice, founded by 
Alexius for the Anglo-Saxon fugi- 
tives, ii. 10; iii. 85; occupied by 
the crusaders, 85 ; the emperor 
sends ships there to their aid, 96. 

Chevrense besieged by Louis le Gros, 
iii. 425. 

Chezal-Benoit, abbey of, founded, iii. 
48. 

Chichester granted to Roger de Mont- 
gomery, ii. 14, 48; Wulfine, the 
goldsmith there, land held by him 
granted to St. Evroult, ii. 196. 

Childebert I., king of the Franks, ii. 
144, 145; iii. 191. 

Childebert II., i. 115, 378, 467; ii. 
101, 145, 283; iii. 53; his visit to 
the abbey of St. Evroult, ii. 285, 
286. 

Childebert III,, ii. 53, 148, 333. 

Childeric, king of the Franks, i. Ill, 
113; ii. 143. 

Childeric II., i. 119; ii. 148. 

Childeric III., ii. 334. 

Chilperic, king of the Franks (Sois- 
sons), i. 115, 119, 378; ii. 145. 

Chilperic, ii. 53. 

Chinon, Geoffrey le Barbu long a 
captive there, i. 441; ii. 74; iii. 74, 
370 ; Henry II. dies there, iv. 
257. 

Chorasan, see Korasan. 

Chosroes, king of Persia, i. 118; ii. 
146. 

Christians, persecutions of by Nero, i. 
86; by Domitian, 88; by Trajan, 
ib.; by Severus, 92; by Maximi- 



nus, 94; by Decius, QG; bv Vale- 
rian, 97. 

Christina, sister of Maraaret, queen of 
Scotland, a nun of Ramsev, i. 147, 
148; iii. 12, 13. 

Christopher, a knight, becomes monk 
at Venosa, ii. 395. 

Chrysogonus, a deacon, assists at the 
council of Rheims, iv. 4; publishes 
the decrees, 17. 

Church, state of in Normandy after 
the invasion of the Northmen, ii. 
186. 

Churchover, Warwickshire, church 
and land there granted to St. Ev- 
roult, ii. 257. 

Church-Laughton^ near Market-Har- 
borough, possessions of St. Evroult 
there, ii. 256. 

Churchyards places of refuge, ii. 127; 
extent of to be attached to new 
churches, 127. 

Chusus, a Jewish scholar, i. 227. 

Code of Justinian, ii. 144. 

Coenred, king of Mercia, ii. 90, 151. 

Cilicia, i. 104, 185; iii. 148, 145. 

Cinteaux, Henry I. and Robert Curt- 
hose meet there, iii. 373. 

Cintrai, the fortified mansion of, be- 
longing to Amauri de Montfort, iii. 
487. 

Cirinus, a Roman priest, i. 325. 

Cisai pillaged by Richer de Laigle, 
iii. 490, 491 ; dedication of the 
church to St. Aubin, iv. 66. 

Cistercians, order founded, iii. 45 — 
48; monks of the order, iv. 133. 

Citeaux, abbey of, founded, iii. 45 — 
48. 

Civita Castellana, the antipope Cle- 
ment III. interred there, iii. 195. 

Civita Vecch^a {Centum Cellce),\. 321. 

Clairvaux abbey founded, iii. 48. 

Clare, see Baldwin de, Gilbert de, 
&c. 

Clarembord de Lisors defends the 
citadel of Mans, iii. 239, 240. 

Clarendon, Robert de Belesme's mes- 
senger meets William Rufus there, 
iii. 240. 



GENERAL ITfDEX. 



317 



Clarice, daughter of David I., king of 

Scotland, iii. 15. 
Claudias Lysias, tribune of a cohort, 

i. 201. 
Claudius, Emperor, i. 85 — 87, 176, 

195,222, 313. 
Claudius II., i. 97, 323. 
Clemence, sister of Calixtus II., iv. 

16; widow of Robert II., count of 

Flanders, and regent, iii. 430; her 

letter to the council of Rheims on 

behalf of her son, iv. 16. 
Clemence of Hungary, iv. 264. 
Clemens of Alexandria, Saint, i. 92. 
Clemens Romanus, saint and pope, 

his "Recognitions," i. 189; history, 

189, 191, 192, 314—317; ii. 132, 

363. 
Clement II., Pope, 1. 372; ii. 163,348, 
Clement III., Pope, iv. 257. 
Clement IV., Pope, iv. 261. 
Clement VI., Pope, iv.266. 
Clement VII., Pope, iv. 267. 
Clepho, king of the Lombards, ii. 34, 

146, 153. 
Clermont, council of, i. 154; ii. 168; 

iii. 63—72, 204; the truce of God 

decreed there, iv. 9 ; Gontard, 

abbot of Jumieges, dies there, ii. 

68; iii. 207. 
Clermont-en-Beauvaisais, communes 

of, join the standard of King Louis, 

iii. 488. 
Cletus, Pope, i. 313, 314; ii. 363. 
Climate of Normandy, the severe 

cold of the winter, ii. 244, and 

note, 321, 322. 
Clinton, see Geoffrey de, and Roger 

de. 
Clodion, king of the Franks, i. 1 1 1 ; ii. 

142. 
Clodius Albinus slain, i. 92. 
Cloisters at St. Evroult, i. 468. 
Clotaire, king of the Franks, i. 113, 

115, 119; ii. 144, 273, 283. 
Clotaire II. (Lothaire the Great), i. 

119, 474; ii. 145,283. 
Clotaire III., i. 119; ii. 148. 
Clovis I., king of the Franks, i. 113; 
ii. 144. 



Clovis II., i. 119, 377; ii. 34, 146 

147. 
Clovis III., ii. 148. 

Cluni, i. 436, 442; foundation of, iv. 
13, 14; its privileges and exemp- 
tions, 13 — 15; its high repute, iv. 
128; the church built by Abbot 
Hugh, who is buried there, iii. 436; 
Urban II. consecrates the altar of 
St. Peter, iii. 63; Gelasius IV. 
dies there, iii. 464 ; persecutions 
suffered by the monks after the 
council of Rheims, iv. 45; dissen- 
sions among them, 46; the monas- 
tery sacked, ib.; the nave of the 
church falls to the ground, 47 
Innocent II. visits Cluni in 1130 
and consecrates the new churcl 
iv. 128; a great meeting at Cluni 
of all the monks of the order, 132 
reforms adopted, 133; rules of the 
Cluniacs, iii. 51 ; the monks of 
St. Evroult conform to them, i. 
423; Roger de Montgomery a be- 
nefactor to Cluni, ii. 197; monks 
of Cluni established at Nogent-le- 
Rotrou, iv. 108; at the priory of 
Lewes, ii. 472 ; the abbey claims 
superiority over that of St. Cyprian 
at Poitiers, iii. 50. 

Clwyd, the, North Wales, iii. 448. 

Cognizances worn at the battle of 
Biemeul, iii. 486. 

Cologne, battle of, ii. 333; Peter the 
Hermit halts there, iii. 76. 

Coloman, king of Hungary, iii. 76. 

Colossus of Rhodes, i. 87, 91. 

Columba, Saint, iii. 12. 

Columban, Saint, i. 119; ii. 146 ; iii. 
53. 

Comets, appearance of, in 912, ii. 
337; in 1066, i. 458; ii. 167; iv. 
249; in 1106, ii. 223; iii. 365; m 
1110, iii. 438; iv. 252. 

Commacchio, an island at the mouth 
of the Po, ii. 153. 

Commendam, in, the abbey of Peter- 
borough so held by Henry of 
Anjou on the gift of his cousin, 
Henry I., iv. 50. 



318 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Commerce protected by William the 

Conqueror, ii. 3, 4, 44. 
Commodus, Emperor, i. 90, 319. 
Communes, associations of, iii. 24, 

487, 488; see iv. xlix., 1. 
Comnenes, see Alexis, John. 
Compostella, the relics of St. James 

the Great said to be translated 

there, i. 179, and note. 
Conan II., duke of Brittany, i. 459; 

his death, ii. 79, 410; iv. 249. 
Conan It I., duke of Brittany, son of 

Alan Fergan, ii. 105 ; attends 

Henry I. to St. Evroult, iii. 439 ; 

marries his daughter Matilda, ii. 

105; iii. 444. 
Conan, a citizen of Rouen, ringleader 

of an insurrection, ii. 499 — 502. 
Conan the Breton, son of Geoffrey, 

cent de Lamballe, at the siege of 

Nice, iii. 95; serves under Bohe- 

mond, ^'d. 
Conches, ii. 189, 494; besieged, and 

the territory ravaged, 495, 496; 

William Rufus halts there, ii. 211 ; 

Ralph de Conches has the castle, 

487; Henry I. seizes it, iv. 147; 

lords of Conches, see Toeni; abbey 

of Conches, or Chatillon, ii. 495; 

founded, i. 382; Ralph I. and II. 

de Conches buried there, ii. 190. 
Concordius, a deacon, i. 331. 
Concordius, father of Pope Soter, i. 

319. 
Concubines of priests, ii. 8, 64, 125; 

ii. 185; iv. 18, 29, 31, 103; bishops 

as well as priests had them, ii. 186. 
Confirmation, sacrament of) ii. 63. 
Conon, Pope, i. 355, 356; ii. 148. 
Conon, count de Montaigu, brother- 
in-law of Godfrey de Bouillon, a 

crusader, iii. 136, 176. 
Conon, bishop of Preneste, iii. 464; 

iv. 4. 
Conon, see Conrad. 
Conraci, legate of Gelasius II. at the 

synod of Rouen, iii. 459, 460. 
Conrad I., king of Germany, i. 136. 
Conrad II., Emperor, i. 145, 150, 

416,431; ii. 160. 



Conrad III., Emperor, i. 158; iv. 84, 

254, 255. 
Conrad, father of Conrad I., king of 

Germany, i. 136. 
Conrad, son of Henry IV., rebels 

against his father, ii. 352. 
Consanguinity, impediments to mar- 
riage from, i. 433, and note. 

Constance, queen of Robert of France, 
i. 148, 347, 399; iv. 135. 

Constance, daughter of William the 
Conqueror, married to Alan Fer- 
gan, i. 441; ii. 22, 105, 182, 258, 
349. 

Constance, or Matilda, daughter of 
Henry I., married to Roscelin de 
Beaumont, iv. 146. 

Constance, daughter of Philip I., ii. 
348; married, first, Hugh, count of 
Champagne, iii. 6, 367; in 1106 
marries Bohemond, ii. 223; iii. 6, 
367, 409; brings up her son Bohe- 
mond at Tarentum, ib. 

Constans, Emperor, i. 102, 296. 

Constans II., Emperor, i. 131, 132, 
353; ii. 147. 

Constans II., Emperor, i. 121, 352, 
353; ii. 147. 

Constantia, sister of Constantine, i. 
101. 

Constantine the Great, Emperor, i. 
^%, 102, 325—327; ii. 139, 140, 
388; cross made by his order, 359; 
gives Albano to the pope, 365. 

Constantine II, Emperor, i. 102 ; ii. 
140. 

Constantine III. (Pogonatus), i. 122, 
224, 354, 356; ii. 147, 148. 

Consta4*tine IV. (Copronvmus), i. 
131—133, 359—364; ii. 150— 
152. 

Constantine V., i. 132, 133, 366 ; ii. 
152, 154. 

Constantine VI. (Porphyrogenitus), i. 
136, 137; ii. 157. 

Constantine VII., i. 139; ii. 159. 

Constantine, son of Michael Parapi- 
naces, ii. 354, 356. 

Constantine, Pope, i. 127, 128, 359 ; 
ii. 148, 151. 



OET^EEAL T]?rDEX. 



319 



Constantine, Antipope, i. 364, 365 ; 
ii. 152. 

Constantine, father of Pope Stephen, 
i. 363. 

Constantine, abbot of Monte Cassino, 
ii. 146. 

Constantinople, i. 98, 102, 104, 114, 
121, 122, 127, 129, 131—133, 158, 
296, 338, 339, 341, 344, 351, 353, 
357, 359, 360, 362; ii. 9, 139, 144, 
149, 154, 156, 157, 167; iii. 78, 83, 
85, 96; Constantinople built, i. 102; 
Golden gate at, 114; library, 123; 
church of St. Sophia, 123 ; coun- 
cils of, i. 105, 122, 123 ; ii. 61, 141, 
152 ; during the Crusades, ii. 255 ; 
iii. 78, 86—93, 293—300, 390, 
408. 

Constantius Chlorus, Emperor, i. 99, 
100, 324; ii. 139. 

Constantius II., Emperor, i. 102, 103, 
330 ; ii. 140. 

Constantius, father of Pope John L, 
i. 239. 

Constantius of Orleans, father of 
Odelerius, ii. 198. 

Conversana, see Counts of. 

Conway, river, ii. 449. 

Copenga (Kaupanger), Trondhjem, 
the ancient capital of Norway so 
called by Ordericus, iii. 214. 

Copsi, Earl, ii. 4, 12. 

Copyists at the ahhey of St. Evroult, 
i.'406, 407, 413, 429, 435, 442 ; ii. 
107, 204; their labours encouraged 
by a story of a miracle, i. 407. 

Corbet, Roger (?) the father of Roger 
and Robert, held under Roger de 
Montgomery in his earldom of 
Shrewsbury, ii. 48, 49. 

Corbonnais, the, i. 428 ; ii. 321 ; the 
inhabitants of, i. 452 ; ii. 108, 486 ; 
iii. 31, 51. 

Corby, Lincolnshire, the lordship 
claimed by William de Roumaie 
in right of his mother, iv. 61. 

Cordova, city of, iv. 118, 119. 

Cordovan leather, shoes made of, a 
present from the prior of Maule, ii. 
226 ; given by the monks of St, 



Evroult to Robert, son of Hugh 
Paganus, 238. 

Corinneus, companion of Brutus, iv. 
100, and note. 

Corinth, i. 185, 199,206. 

Cormeilles, abbey of, founded by 
William Fitz-Osberne, i. 384, 442 ; 
he is buried there, ii. 60. 

Cornelia, step-daughter of Eudes, a 
knight, ii. 433. 

Cornelius, Pope, i. 96, 321 ; ii. 364. 

Cornelius the Centurion, 171, 172. 

Cornelius, a disciple of St. Clement, 
i. 316. 

Cornwall, ii. 16, 26; iv. 98. 

Cosan, a Turkish chief, iii. 170, 171. 

Cosenza, ii. 371. 

Cospatric, earl of Northuml)erland, 
brother of Waltheof, abbot of 
Croyland, ii. 103 ; iv. 48, 49. 

Cotentin, the, i. 437, 453, 464; ii. 
299, 369, 406, 498 ; iii. 8 ; granted 
in 944 to Hugh the Great, li. 300, 
302 ; ceded by Duke Robert to 
Henry I., 431 ; restored to the 
duke, iii. 286 ; ravaged by free- 
booters, 360 ; troops from it at the 
siege of Montfort, iv. 63; wars 
therein 1138, 195, 198. 

Cotesford, Oxfordshire, the church 
and tithes granted to St. Evroult, ii. 
257. 

Cottenham, Cambridgeshire, manor 
of, granted by Turkytel to Croyland 
abbey, ii. 98. 

Cottian Alps,i. 126, 128, 358 ; ii. 149; 
monastery of Bobbio in, ii. 146 

Couceraut, near Mortagne, i. 389. 

Couci, ii. 299. 

Coulans, iii. 231. 

Coulombs, abbey of, ii. 261. 

Coulommiers, a castle of the count of 
Champagne, ii. 330. 

Cnilonces-sur-Dive, i. 396. 

Coancils, the six oecumenical, i. 123. 

Count Palatine, Odo, bishop of Bay- 
eux, has the title of, ii. 434. 

Courci, Robert de, wounded, iii. 481; 
gallantry at the battle of Brdmule, 
486. 



320 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Couture, La, a castle built there by 
Robert de Belesme, iii. 221; Elias, 
count of Maine, buried there, 277. 

Courcerault. i. 389. 

Courci-sur-Dive, siege of by Robert 
Curthose, ii. 507—510, *520 ; the 
inhabitants revolt against Henry I., 
468. 

Courci, see Richard and Robert de. 

Courjon, see Val de. 

Courtenai, see Joscelin de. 

Court-Nez, William. 

Courville, near Chartres, i. 451, 452. 

Coutances, the city founded by Con- 
stantius Chlorus, ii. 139 ; ceded to 
Henry I., ii. 431 ; who fortifies it, 
520; it remains in his hands, 473, 
498. 

Coventry, foundation of the abbey of, 
ii. 18. 

Crato, the philosopher, i. 228; be- 
comes a disciple of St. John, 241 ; 
writes the Acts of SS. Simon and 
Jude, 277. 

Crecy, battle of, iv. 266, and note. 

Crema, see John de. 

Crepon, see Osberne de. 

Crescens, the Cynic, i. 90. 

Crescentius, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 
143; iv. 236. 

Crespi, see Henry, Hugh, Ralph, 
counts de. 

Crespin, see Crispin. 

Cressy, family of, iii. 453, note. 

Crete, i. Ill, 204,206; iii. 291. 

Crispin, chief of a synagogue, i. 185. 

Crispin, father of Pope Hilary, i. 335. 

Crispin, William, his gallantry at the 
battle of Bremule, or Noyon, iii. 
483, 484. 

Croix-Saint-Leufroi, abbey of, ii. 53; 
meeting of rebel lords there, iv. 62; 
Roger de Toeni besieges a castle 
built there, 170; the abbey sacked, 
170, 171. 

Cross, feast of the exaltation of, 
founded, i. 125. 

Cross raised on the spot where Hugh, 
bishop of Liseux, died, ii. 129 ; a 
way-side cross, iii. 491; a brazen 



cross made by order of Constan- 
tine, ii. 359; a portion of the true 
cross, iii. 8. See Crucifix ; charters 
signed with, iii. 258, 440, ike, 

Croyland, history of the abbey, and of 
St. Guthlac its founder, ii. 86 — 
104; Ordericus visits it, 86. 

Crucifix of gold and silver, ii. 18; the, 
in cathedral at Rouen, ii. 117 ; in 
the church at St. Evroult, ii. 196. 

Crusade, the, preached by Urban II., 
iii. 65, 66; by Peter the Hermit, 
76; history of the first crusade, 75 
— 191; events in the second, 288 
—298. 

Crypt at St. Evroult, ii. 287. 

Cullei, now Rabondages, i. 396. 

CuUei, see Robert Burdet de. 

CuneghelJa, see Konghhelf. 

Cunipirt, king of the Lombards, ii. 
147, 153. 

Curboran, see Kerboga. 

Curds, the iii. 127, 162. 

Cuthbert, St., i. 125; ii. 149. 

Cyclades, see Orkney Islands. 

Cyprian, St., i. 97. 

Cyril of Alexandria, ii. 142. 

Cyril, patriarch of Jerusalem, i. 89. 

Cyril, chief priest of Jupiter, i. 288. 

Cyrus, bishop of Alexandria, i. 120, 
121, 122. 

Cyrus, abbot of Cora, in the Cherso- 
nese, i. 124, 127. 

Cyrus, king of Persia, i. 12, 112,286; 
ii. bo, 452. 

Dagobert, king of the Franks, i. 377; 

ii. 146, 148, 149, 284; id. 44. 
Daimbert, archbishop of Sens, iii. 5 ; 

at the council of Rheims, iv. 3. 
Daliman (or Danisman), a Turkish 

chief, iii. 99, 295, 297, 307, 310, 

312, 317—321. 
Dalmatia, i. 350. 
Dalmatics to be worn by deacons, i. 

329. 
Damasis, wife of Dionysius the 

Areopagite, i. 185, 198. 
Damascus, i. 169, 170, 19(5; iii. 110; 

iv. 187, 190. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



821 



Damasus, Pope, i. 104, 105, 123, 331; 
ii. 141, 348. 

Damasus II., Pope, i. 151, 372; ii. 
162. 

Damblainville, ii. 443 

Damian, archbishop of Ravenna, i. 
357. 

Danes, i. 146, 410 ; their origin, iii. 
72, 73, and note; massacre of in 
England, iii. 271; their invasion of 
England in 1069, ii. 24—30. 

Dangeul, fortified ; besieged, iii. 225; 
Elias, count de Maine, made pri- 
soner near, 228, 229. 

Dangu besieged by Louis VI., iii. 479. 

Daniel, a clerk, made king of the 
Franks, ii. 149. 

Daniel de Tenremonde conspires 
against William, count of Flanders, 
iii. 89. 90; his castle near Ypres, 91. 

Danube^ the, i. 104, 129; iii. 76. 

Dares, the Phrygian, i. 1 ; see Tro- 
gus Pompeus. 

Darius, i. 12. 

David I., king of Scotland, iii. 11, 14 
—17; holds Carlisle in 1138, iv. 
202; defeated at the battle of the 
Standard, 205; marries Matilda, 
daughter of Earl Waltheof, iii. 14. 

David, king of Georgia, iii. 402. 

David, prior of Maule, ii. 226, 227, 
229, 234, 235. 

David Scotus, his narrative of the 
wars of Henry V., iii. 197. 

David, a monk of St. Evroult, brings 
the corpse of Hugh de Grantmes- 
nil from England, iii. 55. 

Dean Forest, the Conqueror hunt- 
ing there, ii. 25. 

Decius, Emperor, i. 95, QQ ; iii. 30. 

Deeping, inhabitants of,ii. 9Q. 

Deiphobus, ii. 55. 

Deiri, the, ii. 413. 

Demetrius, Saint, ii. 243; iv. 188; 
apparition of, iii. 139. 

Demetrius, the silversmith, i. 199. 

Demetrius, an officer of the Greek 
emperor, i. 199, 341. 

Demetrius of Amasia, converted by 
St. Andrew, i. 225. 
YOL. IV. T 



Demigod (Parviim Deiim), Bohe- 

mond so called by the Turks, iii. 

308. 
Demoniacs healed by St. Judoc, ii. 

476. 
Denmark, i. 146, 147 ; ii. 29, 82, 96, 

246, 299, 432. 
Denys, Saint, see Dionysius. 
Deodatus, the biographer of St. Tau- 
Derbe in Lycaonia, i. 182, 183. 
Derbeus of Thessalonica, i. 200. 
Derby, see Robert de Ferrers, earl of. 

rinus, ii. 133. 
Dermot, king of Leinster, ii. 189. 
Desiderius, king of the Lombards, i. 

182, 363—366 ; ii. 152—154. 
Desiderius, abbot of Monte-Cassino, 

pope as Victor III., i. 439; ii. 462, 

463. 
Deusdedit, Pope, i. 349 ; ii. 147, 

284. 
Deusdedit, archbishop of Canterburv, 

ii. 147. 
Deux-.Jumeaux, monastery of, ii. 275. 
Devil, apparition of the, to a woman 

in Brittany, iii. 447, 448. 
Devizes, Robert Curthose confined 

there, iv. 97; Nigel, bishop of Ely, 

takes refuge in the castle, iv. 210; 

it is surrendered to King Stephen, 

211. 
Diadumenianus, i. 93. 
Dialectics, i. 423, 467; ii. 40. 
Diana, temple of at Evreux, ii. 133, 

136. 
Didias Julianus, i, 91, 92, and note. 
Dieppe, river of, iv. 22 ; a burgess of 

given to the monks of Aufay, ii. 

264 ; William the Conqueror em- 
barks there, ii. 14 {note, foundation 

of the town). 
Dijon, iv. 135, see William de jaren- 

ton, abbot of, &c. 
Dinan, see Alan de. 
Diocletian, Emperor, i. 99, 323 ; ii, 

138; iii. 30. 
Diogenes Romanus, Emperor, ii. 162 

—167,251. 
Dionysius (in legend of St. Thomas), 

i. 254—257. 



322 



GE^'ERAL INDEX. 



Dionysius, Saint, the Areopagite, i. 

91, 185, 198, 206 ; ii. 123, 131, 132. 

Dionysius, bishop (not a priest) of 

Alexandria, i. 96. 
Dionysius, Saint, pope, i. 323, 324. 
Dionysius the Little (his paschal 

cycle), i. 115, 345; ii. 144. 
Dioscorus, i. 340. 

Dioscorus, patriarch of Alexandria, 
i. 112. 

Dioscorus, heretic, ii. 142. 

Dive, abbey of, founded, i. 382 ; the 
fortress there, ii. 194, 347. 

Divitius, cardinal-bishop of Tusculum, 
dies on the road to the council of 
Rheims, iv. 16. 

Do], besieged by William the Con- 
queror, ii. 104 ; see Guelduin de, 
&c.,&c, 

Dolichian, patriarch of Jerusalem, 
i. 89. 

Domesday -book, ii. 51, 382. 

Domfront, belongs to the family of 
Talvas, ii. 453, 460 ; Henry I. gets 
possession of this strong fortress, 
iii. 1, 2, 27, 72 ; he reserves it on 
surrendering his other castles in 
Normandy, 285 ; visits it in 1104, 
356 ; in il05, Robert de Belesme 
holds it, iv. 110; the Empress 
Matilda acknowledged there, 156. 

Domitia, see Flavia. 

Domitian, Emperor, i. 88, 239, 240, 
313, 314 ; ii. 131, 132, 317. 

Donald VI., king of Scotland, iii. 14. 

Donatus, bishop of Epirus, ii. 141. 

Donatus, the grammarian, i, 144. 

Donus, Pope, i. 353, 354; ii. 147. 

Donus, commander of the forces, i. 
351. 

Dora, a town near Ptolemais, i. 190. 

Dorcas, i. 171. 

Dormitorv of the monks, i. 468 ; ii. 
129, 223. 

Dorsetshire, West-Saxons of, ii. 26. 

Doryloeum, battle of, iii. 99 — 102. 

Douet-Artus, a vill belonging to St. 
Evroult, i, 450. 

Douet-Moussu, lands of the abbey 
there, i. 397. 



Dourdan, Hugh the Great, dies there, 
ii. 340. 

Dover, ii. 450 ; William the Con- 
queror takes it, i. 488; entrusts it to 
Odo, bishop Bayeux, ii. 5 ; Eus- 
tace, count of Boulogne, fails in 
attacking it, 11; in 1069, the 
Danes attempt to land there, 24 ; 
in 1 1 38, Robert, earl of Gloucester, 
holds the castle, iv. 200 ; Walkelin 
Maminot garrisons it, 201 ; he sur- 
render's it to Stephen's queen, 
Matilda, 203, 204. 

Dreux, brother of Bernard du Neuf- 
Marche, ii. 267 ; see Drogo. 

Dreux, the inhabitants of, i. 452 ; iii, 
51; see Robert, count of; and 
Baudri de. 

Drogo, archbishop of Metz, i. 369 ; 
ii. 155. 

Drogo, a Norman, in Apulia, ii. 162. 

Drogo de Monci, iii. 452 ; takes 
the cross, iii. 78. 

Drogo, son of Geoffrey du Neuf- 
Marche,amonk of St. Evroult, ii. 
185, 249, 263, 267, 407 ; accom- 
panies Abbot Mainier to England, 
153. 

Drogo, son of Tancred, i. 411, 412, 
438; ii. 163, 465. 

Drogo, Count du Vexin, i. 448 ; ii. 
399, 400. 

Drusiana, i. 240. 

Drusilla, i. 203. 

Duda, daughter of Waleran de Meu- 
lan, wife of William de Moulins, 
ii. 193, 486. 

Dudo, dean of St. Quintin, his Acts of 
the dukes of Normandy, i. 375, 
426. 

Duel, a priest not to engage in, with- 
out licence from his bishop, ii. 128. 

Dunstan, Saint, i. 137 ; ii. 35, 98, 
160. 

Dunster castle, held by William de 
Mohun, iv. 201. 

Dunstanville ; see Reginald de. 

Durand, abbot of Troarn, i. 389 ; ii. 
69, 194, 208, 411 ; at the funend 
of William the Conqueror, 420; 



GEIs'EEAL ITTDEX. 



323 



inters Ainard, abbot of Dive, and 
Avrites his epitaph, ii. 106; his 
death and epitaph, 460, 461 . 

Durand, a monk and gardener at St. 
Evroult, i. 388. 

Durazzo, siege and capitulation of, 
ii. 358 — 365; crusaders land there, 
iii. 83 ; besieged by Bohemond, 
388. 

Durdan, the river, iv. 21. 

Durham, ii. 413 ; the county given 
by William the Conqueror to 
Robert de Comines, 21. 

Eadbald, king of Kent, ii. 50, 147. 
Eadmer, of Canterbury, chaplain of 
archbishop Anselm, iii. 203, 238, 
436 ; accompanies him in his exile 
and writes his life, ibid; it was pre- 
served at Bee, 238. 
Easter, schisms about the time of 
celebrating, i. 91, 92, 93, 98, 108, 
115, 119, 128. 
Eatta, Saint, ii. 118. 
Eaune, the river, or perhaps the 

Yere, iv. 22. 
Ebbo, archbishop of Sens, ii. 334. 
Ebionites, the, i. 25il, 
Ebbles, count of Poitiers, defeated bv 

Rollo, i. 136 ; ii. 157. 
Ebroin, mayor of the palace, ii. 148. 
i^chanfre, see Pont-Echaufre. 
}^chaufour, i. 390, 392, 394, 397, 

405, 427, 433, 450 ; ii. 193, 196 ; 

etymology of the name, 288 ; burnt 

by Geoffrey, count of Perche, 459 ; 

given to Robert de St. C^neri, 475 ; 

held by Simon the Red, iv. 197 ; 

church of St. Andrew founded, i. 
, 390, 397. 
lEchaufour, see Arnold, &c., d'!l^chau- 

four. 
Eclijise of the moon, in February, 

1096, iii. G8, 69 ; in 1290, iv. 262. 
E'couch^, ii. 476 ; burnt by the in- 
habitants, iv. 164, 165. 
Edessa, i. 253, 263, 264 ; iii. 143— 

148 ; ancient name Rages, 143 ; 

King Baldwin captured on his way 

there, 394. 



Edessa, see Abgarus. 
Edgar Atheling, i. 147, 489 ; ii. 56 ; 
acknowledged king by Stigand and 
others, i. 489 ; ii. 251 ; attends 
the Conqueror to Normandy, ii. 5 ; 
joins in the attempt to surprise 
York, 22 ; unites with the Danes, 
25 ; is in the councils of Robert 
Curthose, 476 ; accompanies him 
to the crusade, iii. 251 ; has the 
custody of Laodicea, ibid; his 
portrait and character, iii. 251. 
Edgar, king of England, i. 137, 147 ; 
ii. 35, 36, 98, 159, 160, 375, 468, 
iii. 286. 
Edgar, son of Malcolm III., king of 

Scots, iii. 11, 14. 
Edgiva, queen of Charles the Simple, 

ii. 157. 
Edith, dau:;hter of Earl Algar, and 
wife of Gryffith-ap-Llewellyn, 
and afterwards of Harold, i. 
461. 
Edmund, Saint, king of East Anglia, 

i. 138, 146; ii, 85,97, 98, 159. 
Edmund Ironside, i. 146, 147, 489 ; 

ii. 37, 400 ; iii. 12. 
Edmund, son of Edmund Ironside, 

i. 148. 
Edred, king of England, ii. 35, 97, 

159. 
Edric Streon, murderer of Edmund 

Ironside, i. 147 ; ii. 4, 400. 
Edric Guilda (the Wild), nephew of 

Edric Streon, ii. 4, 26. 
Edward the Elder, king of England, 

ii. 34, 97, 157, 198,376. 
Edward the Confessor, i, 148, 149, 
153 ; ii. 1, 5, 24, 36, 56, 79, 80, 
99, 161, 164, 399, 468 ; iii. 12, 16, 
286 ; iv. 98 ; his genealogy, iii. 
349, 350 ; iv. xliv— xlvii. ; his 
character, ii. 374, 375 ; knights 
Robert de Rhuddlan, 443, 444 ; 
gives Lothian to the king of Scots, 
iii. 10 ; appoints Duke William 
his successor, ii. 458 ; his death 
and burial, i. 153, 460, 490; ii. 
349, 350 ; iv. 249 ; suraamed 
" The Great," i. 490. 
2 



324 



GENERAL I-fTDEX. 



Edward I., king of England, iv. 261. 
Edward II., king of England, iv. 263. 
Edward III., king of England, iv. 

•266. 
Edward, son of Edmund Ironside 

(called, by Ordericus, king of Hun- 
gary), father of Edgar Atheling, 

i. 147, 489; iii. 12, 251. 
Edward of Salisbury, standard-bearer 

at the battle of Bremule, iii. 483 ; 

escapes shipwreck in the Blanche- 

Nef by leaving it, iv. 34. 
Edward, son of Siward, earl of 

Mercia, iv. 16. 
Edwin, earl of Mercia, son of Algar, 

i. 461, 488; ii. 4, 5, 17, 18, 19; 

his death and character, 45 — 47. 
Edwin, king of Northumbria, i. 119, 

494; ii. 32,145, 375; iv. 102. 
Edwv, son of Ethelred II., banished 

by Canute, ii. 400. 
Effidima, disciple of St. Andrew, i. 

233. 
Effreim, patriarch of Jerusalem, i. 8. 
Egbert, king of Kent, ii. 37, 50, 147. 
Egbert, a hermit, ii. 93. 
Egbert, preaches to the Scots, i. 128. 
Egburg, Abbess, ii. 93. 
Egeas (Ageates), pro-consul, i. 

233—237. 
Egfrid, king of Northumbria, i. 124. 
Egga, companion of king Ethelbald, 

ii. 90. 
Eglippus, an Ethiopean king, i. 371, 

372, 373. 
Egvpt, i. 99, 198, 276, 291, 293, 294, 

343. 
Elbert, son of Roger de Toeni, i. 401 ; 

ii. 489. 
Eleazer, son of Ananias, i. 1 1 . 
Eleazer, a disciple of St. Peter, i. 190. 
Elephant's tooth, presented to the 

abbey of St. Evroult, i. 415. 
Eleutheiius, patrician, i. 349. 
Eleutherius, Pope, i. 90, 319; iv. 98. 
Elfrida, abbess of Repton, ii. 87. 
Elias, son of Fulk II., count of Anjou, 

iii. 223 ; governs his father's states 

during his crusade, iv. 44. 
Elias de la Fleche, count of Maine, 



ii. 74, 455, 483 ; his castles, iii. 
222, 223, 225; invites Hugh, 
son of the marquis of Liguria, to 
Maine, 480, 481 ; places Hoel, 
the bishop of Mans, in confine- 
ment, 481 ; buys Hugh's title to 
the county, 482 — 484 ; becomes 
count of Maine, 484 ; takes the 
cross, iii. 223 ; relinquishes his cru- 
sade in consequence of a conference 
with William Rufus, 223, 224 ; his 
conduct in the election of a suc- 
cessor to bishop Hoel, 226, 227 ; 
his successes and disasters in wars 
with William Rufus and Robert de 
Belesme; alliance with Henry I., 
and administration of his county, 
iii. 31, 228, 236, 238—241, 
273—276, 371, 372, 376, 379, 
383—385 ; his death, 276, 438 ; 
iv. 252 ; his burial, iii. 276 ; his 
character and portrait, iii. 222, 224, 
225. 

Elias, vidame of Gerberoi, ii. 177. 

Elias, son of Walter de Heugleville, 
ii. 270. 

Elias, abbot of St. Benedict, at Bari, 
ii. 393, 394. 

Elias de Saint-Saens, marries an ille- 
gitimate daughter of Robert Curt- 
hose, ii. 474 ; iv. 2, 3 ; after- 
wards an illegitimate daughter of 
Henry I., iii. 382 ; Henry gives 
him the county of Arques, and 
makes him guardian of Robert's 
son William, 382, 430, 431 ; iv. 
23, 26, 86 ; his attachment to the 
young prince in his exile, and exer- 
tions for him, iii. 431, 432 ; iv. 
26, 79, 86 ; Henry confiscates his 
castle of Saint-Saens, and gives it 
to William de Warrenne, his 
cousin, iii. 431 ; William, now 
count of Flanders, gives him the 
castle of Montreuil-sur-Mer, iv. 89 ; 
his conduct on the count's death, 
93. 

Elinance d'Auteuil, iii. 460. 

Elinance, son of Roger de Toeni, 
i. 401; ii. 489. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



325 



Elisabeth, wife of Paganus Odo ii. 
218. 

Elisabeth, wife of Fulk de Bonneval, 
i. 428. 

Elisabeth, mother of St. Martial, i. 
296. 

Eliseus, a disciple of St. Peter, i. 190.. 

Ella, king of Deira, i. 117. 

Elmington, Northamptonshire, the; 
manor given to Croyland abbey, ii. 
98. 

Eloi, Saint, bishop of Noyon, i. 119 ; 
iii. 54. 

Elphege, Saint, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, ii. 37. 

[Elveira,] daughter of Alfonso, king 
of Galicia, wife of Raymond, count 
of Tholonse, iii. 254. 

Ely, isle of, ii. 44, 330 ; in 1117, 
three porkers found there in a cow, 
iv. 447, 448 ; abbey of St. Ethel- 
dreda, ii. 36 ; iii, 330 ; its founda- 
tion, i. 123, 124. 

Elymas, the magician, i. 181, 197, 
287 ; see Barjesus. 

Emadeddin Zenghi, sultan of Mossoul 
and Aleppo ; his expedition against 
the Christians in 1130, iii. 410; 
attacks and defeats them in 1137, 
iv. 186 ; obtains possession of the 
castle of Mont-Real, 187—190. 

Embalming of Henry I., iv. 150 ; 
and note of Hugh de Grantmesnil's, 
iii. 55. 

Emendreville, now St. Sever, at Rouen, 
ii. 212, 501 ; iv. 150. 

Emessa, i. 110 ; iv. 161. 

Emma, daughter of William Giroie, 
i. 390, 395, 398. 

Emma, daughter of Robert d'Estote- 
ville, wife of Robert de Grantmes- 
nil, ii. 505 ; buried at St. Evroult, 
iiL 56. 

Emma, wife of Richard Fresnel, iii, 
470, 471. 

Emma, wife of William, archbishop 
Robert's son, i. 439. 

Emma, daughter of Turstin Halduc, 
wife of Arnold d'Echoufour, ii. 
452. 



Emma, daughter of Hugh the Great, 
wife of Richard I., duke of Nor- 
mandy, i. 139. 

Emma, daughter of Roger de Mont- 
gomery, iii. 338 ; abbess of Almen- 
esches, ii. 195, 208, 209; iii. 338; 
Henry I. treats her harshly, ibid ; 
the abbey being burnt, she retires 
to St. Evroult, 342 ; begins to re- 
store her abbey — her death, ibid. 

Emma, daughter of Richard II., duke 
of Normandy, and wife of king 
Ethelred, takes refuge in Nor- 
mandy, i. 1 46, 458 ; after Ethelred's 
death, marries Canute, and sends 
her sons to Normandy, ii. 161; her 
influence supports the Norman 
party in England, iii. 435 ; she 
presents an illuminated i^salter to 
the archbishop of Rouen, i. 401 ; 
makes Stigand her chaplain, iv. 52. 

Emma, abbess of St. Leger de Preaux, 
ii. 46. 

Emma, mother of Roger, abbot of 
St. Evroult, iv. 57. 

Emma, daughter of Walkehn de 
Tani, wife of William Giroie, i. 
393, 398. 

Emmaus, name changed to Nicopolis, 
i. 93. 

Emmeline, wife of Geoffrey de Marcq, 
ii. 226, 227. 

Engelbert, duke of Carinthia and 
Frioul, iii. 346. 

Engelbert, Roger de Montgomery's 
provost, ii. 197. 

Engelbert, monk of St. Evroult, and 
afterwards of St. Martin de Seez, 
i. 405. 

Engenulf d'Aigle, i. 427 ; founds the 
priory of St. Sulpice, ii. 3/8, 380 ; 
falls in the battle of Hastings, i. 
486. 

Engenulf, son of Richer de Laigle 
and Judith, slain in jousting, ii. 
379, 380. 

Engenulf, son of Gilbert d'Aigle, in 
the household of Henry I., iii. 455; 
shipwrecked in the Blanche-Nef, 
ii. 380 : iv. 41. 



326 



GEXEKAL I]S'DEX. 



Enguerrand de Courtomer, iv. 1 69. 
Enguerrand, son of Ilbert (de Lacy), 

commands at Caen for Duke 

Robert, iii. 372 ; dismissed by 

Henry I., iv. 25. 
Enguerrand I., count of Poitou, de- 
feats the count of Brionne, i. 383. 
Enguerrand II., count of Pictou, falls 

in an engagement with the troops of 

William the Bastard, i. 152 ; iii. 

405, 406. 
Enguerrand de Sai, a partisan of King 

Stephen, iv. 198, 199; is at the 

battle of Lincoln, 217. 
Enguerrand de Trie, in garrison at An- 

deli in 1119, iii. 470; wounded 

and dies, 480. 
Enguerrand de Vascceuil, ravages the 

country of Caux in 1118, iii. 453. 
England, i. 146, 147 ; and passim. 
English language, William the Con- 
queror endeavours to learn, for the 

better administration of justice, ii. 

44. 
Englishman, or native of England, 

Ordericus Vitalis described himself 

assuch. ii. 103, 214, 269, 248. 
English and Normans, fusion of, in 

the first year of the Conqueror, ii. 

43, 44. 
English ville, {A nglisca villa), a vill and 

parsonage, so called, given to St. 

Evroult, ii, 396. 
Ennodius, bishop of Pavia, i. 338. 
Enoch de la Fleche, son of John, ii. 

74. 
Epaphras, disciple of St. Paul, i. 206. 
Epernon, iii. 212, 495. 
Ephesus, i. 88, 186, 199, 200, 206. 

239, 240, 243 ; council of, i. 123, 

385 ; ii. 142. 
Ephreim, see Effreim. 
Epidemic, iii. 369. 
Episcopal jurisdiction, in lay hands, 

i. 292 ; abbeys exempt from, i. 302 ; 

and note, iii. 244. 
Epitaphs, on Muarilius, archbishop 

of Rouen, ii. 7 ; Earl Walthrof, 

103 ; Ainard, abbot of Dive, 100, 
107; Hugh, bishop of Lisieux, 121 ; 



John d'Avranches, archbishop of 
Rouen, 123; Mabel de Belesme, 
194, 195; John of Rheims, 214, 
215, 216 ; Peter de Maule, 220, 
221 ; Ansold de Maule, 232 ; 
Avicia d'Aufay, 269 ; Walter 
d'Aufay, 269 ; Theodoric, abbot of 
St. Evroult, 316, 317 ; Queen Ma- 
tilda, 376, 377 ; William the Con- 
queror, 425 ; Robert de Rhuddlan, 
448, 449, 450 ; Durand, abbot of 
Troarn,461; William deWarrenne, 
earl of Surrey, 472, 473; Ansfrid, 
prior of Preaux, iii. 35 ; Nicholas, 
abbot of St. Ouen, 37 ; Fulbert, 
archdeacon of Rouen, 38 ; Hugh 
de Grantmesnil, 55 ; Walter Gif- 
fard, 342 ; the Duchess Sibylla, 
343 ; William de Ross, abbot of 
Fecamp, 413, 414 ; Roger Bigod, 
419 ; Gontier, abbot of Thorney, 
422 ; Roger, abbot of Noyon, 423 ; 
William Bonne-Ame, archbishop 
of Rouen, 437, 438 ; Warin, abbot 
of St. Evroult, iv. 180. 

Eote, the, i. 380, 456 ; ii. 131, 399, 
^407 ; iii. 211,454 ; iv. 68. 

Erastus, i. 199, 206. 

Ercombert, king of Kent, ii, 50, 147. 

Erembert, a monk of Venosa, ii. 396. 

Eremburge, wife of Fulk, count of 
Anjou, ii. 484 ; iii. 223, 276, 371. 

Eremburge, v/ife of Germond the Red, 
ii. 225. 

Eremburge, daughter of Peter de 
Maule, ii. 220 ; marries Baudri de 
Dreux, 225. 

Ermenfred, bishop of Sion, ii. 31, 42. 

Ermengarde, daughter of Fulk le 
Rechin, wife of Alan Fergan, ii. 
105. 

Ermenric, king of Kent, ii, 50. 

Ermentrude, daughter of Hugh de 
Clermont, wife of Hugh, earl of 
Chester, ii. 47; iii. 283. 

Ernest, a vassal of Richard de Cou- 
lonces, iii. 252. 

Ernest, lord of Coutances, ii. 185,249, 
252. 

Erve, the river, ii. 378. 



GENEEAL INDEX. 



327 



Escures, see Ralph d'Escures. 
Esledae, see Leeds and note. 
Essarts, les, in Ouche," i. 398 ; ii. 

259, see Warin des Essarts, abbot of 

St. Evroult. 
Essei, a castle of the Talvas family, ii. 

552. 
Essenes, a Jewish sect, i. 294. 
Estoteville, see Robert de 
Etampes, Louis VI. invades Nor- 
mandy from it, iii. 430 ; the inha- 
bitants march with him, 488. 
Etard, archdeacon of Evreux, iii. 248. 
Etard, monk and gardner of Jumieges, 

iii. 207 ; made abbot of Dive, but 

returns again to Jumieges, ibid. 
Eteocles, iii. 433. 
Ethelbald, king of Mercia, 90—92,94, 

95. 
Ethelbert, king of Kent, i, 117, 494 ; 

ii. 33, 50, 146, 167, 283, 375, 468; 

iii. 51, 102. 
Etheldrida, St., i. 123 ; iii. 324, 327, 

330. 
Ethelred, king of Mercia, ii, 87. 
Ethelred IL, king of England, i. 146, 

148, 153, 402, 458; ii. 36, 37,99, 

117; iii. 421; iv. 98. 
Ethel wold, bishop of Winchester, i. 

137 ; il 35, 36, 98, 160 ; founds 

Thorney Abbey, 96. 
Ethelwulf, king of England, ii. 33, 97, 

375, 408. 
Ethiopia, i. 265, 270, 27i, 273, 277, 

280. 
Ethiopians, i. 170, 271, 273, 276, 

283, 304, 513 ; iii. 185, 186, see 

Eguppus, Euphenisia, Hyrtacus, 
Etouvi, church of St. Martin's at, ii. 

252. 
Etrepa.t^ni, the neighbourhood ravaged 

by Henry I., iii. 480. 
Eu, the river of, (the Bresle) ii. 474 ; 

iv. 22. 
Eu, William Rufus holds his court 

there, 1091, ii. 510, 511 ; he gives 

the county of Eu to his brother 

Robert, 611. 
Eudes, duke of Aquitaine, i. 360 ; ii 

151. 



Eudes, count of Brittanny, iL 23. 
Eudes of Champagne marries the 

Conqueror's half-sister, and has the 

earldom of Holderness, ii. 49. 
Eudes, count of Champagne, gets pos- 
session of Melun, ii. 345. 
Eudes, count of Paris, after\<ards 

king of France, ii. 37. 
Eudes,. brother of Henry I., king of 

France, defeated at Mortemer, i. 

152 ; ii. 349, 407,408. 
Eudes, abbot of St. Stephen's at 

Caen, iii. 412 ; attends the synod 

at Rouen, 459. 
Eudes, count of Sutri, nephew of the 

antipope Guibert, ii. 354, 463. 
Eudes, archbishop of Treves, son of 

Baldwin V., count of Flanders, i. 

431 ; ii. 59, 173, 347. 
Eudes, see Odo. 
Eudoxia,the empress, carries the relics 

of St. Stephen to Rome, i. 109. 
Eudoxius, an Arian bishop, i. 104, 

123. 
Eugenius, of Ephesus, i. 242, 243. 
Eugenius, saint and martyr, ii. 131. 
Eugenius I., Pope, i. 352; ii, 147. 
Eugenius II,, Pope, ii. 368 ; i. 155. 
Eugenius III., Pope, iv. 255. 
EulaHus, antipope, I 333, 334. 
Eulogius, saint, 114. 
Eunomius, heretic, ii. 141. 
Euphenisia, an Ethiopian queen,i. 273. 
Euphranon, i. 272, 
Euphrasia is rai?ed from the dead by 

St. Taurinus, ii. 138. 
Euphrates, the, i. 16, 313 ; iii. 144, 

396, 398,' 410, 411. 
Eure, the, ii. 398, 478. 
Eusebius of Casarea, his works, i. 1, 

6, 80, 83, 93, 100, \l^, 407, 493 ; 

ii. 139, 143. 
Eusebius, in the legend of St. Barna- 
bas, i. 289. 
Eusebius, of Nicomedia, i. 330. 
Eusebius, Pope, i. 324 ; ii. 140. 
Eusebius, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 

141 ; iv, 234. 
Eusebius, Saint, of Vercelli, ii, 141. 
Eustace of Bari, ii. 391. 



328 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Eustace II., count of Boulogne, his 
states and power, ii. 12 ; at the 
battle of Hastings. 484, 486 ; iii. 
187 ; has a grant of lands in Eng- 
land, 50 ; his attempt on Dover 
fails, ii.ll ; reconciled with the king, 
12 ; joins the party of Robert 
Curthose, 434, 436 ; besieged in 
Rochester, ii. 205. 

Eustace III., count of Boulogne, son 
of Eustace II., ii. 12; iii, 182; takes 
the cross, 81 ; is at the battle of 
DorylcEum, 101 ; at the siege of 
Antioch, 136 ; at that of Jerusalem, 
176, 177; takes possession of Na- 
plouse, 181; is at the battle of 
Ascalon, 185 ; marries Mary of 
Scotland, 13; father of Matilda, 
wife of Stephen de Blois, i 3. 

Eustace de Breteuil, ii. 192 ; natural 
son of William de Breteuil, iii. 345; 
claims to succeed his father, ibid ; 
supported by Henry I., who gives i 
him Juliana, his natural daughtei, 
346, 347; aided by the earl of 
Meulan, 348 ; joins the King in 
Normandy, 356 ; revolts, 450; iv. 
86; claims the tower of Ivri,iii.465; 
receives hostages and mutilates 
them, 465, 466; his daughter suf- 
fers the same fate, 466; holds the 
castle of Paci, 467, 478; Richard 
Fresnel, his vassal, revolts against 
him, 47 1; defeated in an inroad, 
472, 473; his restoration proposed 
to Louis VI.. 486, 487; he is recon- 
ciled with King Henry I., receives 
a pension in lieu of Breteuil, and 
fortifies Paci, iv. 19; dies there in 
1136, iv. 157; his son William de 
Paci, 157, 170. 

Eustace, son of King Stephen, said to 
have married the daughter of the 
count of Flanders, iv. 198. 

Eustace de Carcuit, ii. 264. 

Eustace de Torci, ii. 264, 265. 

Eustachius, St. iii. 243. 

Eustasius, St., abbot of Lexeuil,iii.53. 

Eutyches, heretic, i. 110, 112, 113, 
123, 335,336; ii. 142, 144. 



Eutychia, mother of St. Taurinus, ii. 
132. 

Eutychian, Pope, i. 98, 323. 

Eutychius, patriarch of Constantino- 
ple, i. 116. 

Eutychius, exarch, i. 361. 

Eutychus, i. 200. 

Evain of Gand, conspires against 
William, count of Flanders, iv. 39 ; 
has a castle at Ypres, 91; laments 
the count's death, 93; nephew of 
Baldwin the Great, 89. 

Evantici, inhabitants of the district of 
Evreux, ii. 139. 

Evaristus, Pope, i. 317. 

Everard,son of Roger de Montgomery, 
chaplain to William Rufus and 
Henry I., ii. 195; iii. 33. 

Everard, brother of Ordericus Vitalis, 
ii. 21. 

Everard du Puiset, father of Adelaide, 
countess of Montgomery, ii. 195; 
takes the cross, iii. 78. 

Everard, priest of Speen, in Berks, ii. 
264. 

Evesham, abbey of, ii. 383. 

Evodius, bisohp of Antioch, i. 193. 

Evodius, St., archbishop of Rouen, ii. 
142; iv. 235. 

Evremer, patriarch of Jerusalem, ii. 
300. 

Evremond, St, his relics, ii. 303, 307. 

Evreux, name of, ii. 131, 139; temple 
of Diana, 133, 136; Duke William 
there, i. 422; the royal keep razed 
by William, count of Evreux, iii. 
420; the country restored to Wil- 
liam, 443; claimed by Amauri de 
Montfort, 449; the citadel delivered 
to him, 449, 460; besieged by Henry 
I., 476, 477 ; the city, cathedral, and 
St. Saviour's burnt, 478, 479, 252, 
253; iv. 7, 8; the citadel surren- 
ders, 478; iv. 19; the king takes 
the county into his own hands, and 
appoints justices, 70; the diocese 
ravaged, ii. 390; iv. 170; laid under 
an interdict, 174; limits of the dio- 
cese, i. 424, 425; dedication of the 
cathedral, ii. 116; completed by 



GEKEEAL INDEX. 



329 



bishop Gilbert, who has it conse- 
crated, endows it, and is buried 
there, iii. 438, 439; restored by 
bishop Ouen, iv. 209. 
Evroult,Saint,i. 119,378,385, 467; ii. 
102, 144, 146; his life, 273—296; 
date of his birth, iv. 236; of his 
death, 238 ; the pope sends him 
some relics, ii. 310; the saint's body 
is carried off from St. Evroult, 303, 
304; transported to Orleans, 305, 
307; part to Rebais, 308, 309; part 
to Angers, 309 ; some relics remained 
in the abbey, 311 ; some are 
restored, 316, 317, 318, 320; iv. 
267; a miracle in favour of Rualed 
by the saint's intercession, iii. 1, 3; 
another miracle, iv. 267; the prin- 
cipal altar in the abbey church 
dedicated to him, iii. 247; his office, 
i. 443; the chapel to which the 
saint retired for solitary meditation, 
iii. 342 
Exeter, description of, ii. 15; resists 
the Normans, the Conqueror reduces 
it, and builds a castle, 16; Harold's 
sons land there, 23; the insurgents 
in the West make it their rendez vous, 
26. 
Exhilarat, a duke of the Greek em- 
pire, i. 361. 
Exmes, the castle resists Ceesar, ii. 
276; given to Hugh the Great, 300; 
besieged by him, 300, 302; Roger 
de Montgomery, viscount of, i. 389; 
the castle given to Gilbert de Lai- 
gle, ii. 485; it resists an attack, ibid; 
Duke Robert marches there in 1103, 
iii. 340, 341; Robert de Belesme 
takes it, ibid; holds the viscounty 
in 1112, under Henry I., 442; the 
king builds a new bourg, which 
Gilbert de Clare burns, iv. 161; the 
Empress acknowledged there, 156. 
Exorcism, i. 227, 228. 
Exuperantia, a martyr, i, 322. 
Exuperia, a martyr, i. 322. 
Eynesbury, Huntingdon, ii. 98. 
Eystein, king of Norway, son of Mag- 
nus Barfod, iii. 213. 



Fabian I., Pope, 96, 321; iii. 363. 
Fala, the name of a bull, ii. 312. 
Falaise, Walter of Pontoise and his 
wife poisoned there, ii. 79 ; besieged 
by Henry I., Robert of Gloucester 
slain, iii. 373; Duke Robert holds 
court there, 374; the townsmen's 
engagement to him, 381; it submits 
to Henry I., William Clito brought 
up there, 381, 382 ; the viscounty 
given to Robert de Belesme, 385; 
meeting of the king and barons 
there, 412; Henry L demands an 
account of the revenues from Robert, 
442; Henry I. holds his court there, 
468; garrisons it, 473; his treasure 
kept there, iv. 149 ; besieged by 
Geofirey, count of Anjou, 206, 207. 
Famine, in the north of England, 
under William the Conqueror, ii. 
28; general, in 1094, iii. 61; in 
France, 1095, i. 154; ii. 168 ; iii. 
63; iv. 251; in 1109, 154; iii. 
434,438; iv. 252. 
Farisia, the mare of Baldwin, king of 
Jerusalem, iii. 302 ; called the 
Gazelle, ibid. 
Farisius, a monk of Malmesbury, 

abbot of Reading, iii. 269. 

Faron, Saint, bishop of Meaux, iii. 53. 

Fashions of the age. Wearing the hair 

long and curled, ii. 473; iii. 9, 71, 

362, 364; long-peaked shoes, ii.363, 

478, and notes. 

Fatima, daughter of Ali, iii. 398, 400. 

Faustinian, father of Clement, i. 189, 

192, 314. 
Faustinus, brother of Clement, i. 191. 
Faustus, the Manichean, i. 253. 
Faustus, ex-consul, i, 338. 
Fecamp, short history of the abbey, 
ii. 66; a Merovingian monastery, 
i. 377 ; restored by Duke Rich- 
ard, i. 381 ; ii. 161 ; iii. 412 ; the 
body of St. Taurinus translated 
there, ii. 137; Duke Richard II. 
gives St. Gervais at Rouen to this 
abbey, iii. 401 ; Henry I. meets 
Robert Curthose there, 399 ; 
King William celebrates Easter 



130 



GENERAL INDEX. 



there, in 1067, ii. 6 ; in 1075, 
115; iv. 250 ; the church conse- 
crated, ill. 412 ; the place garri- 
soned by Henry L, 473; Baudri, 
bishop of Dol, takes refuge in the 
abbey, 191 ; the monks' ransom 
to Geoffrey of Anjou, iv. 176 ; 
monks of Fecamp established at 
Mantes, ii. 227, 228 ; their rule 
followed at Troarn and Seez, ii. 
462. 

Felicia, daughter of Garnier de 
Connerre, wife of Robert Giroie, 
iii. 29. 

Felicissimus, deacon, i. 323. 

Fehcitas, Saint, i. 108, 334. 

Felix de Brie, abbot of St. Evroult, 
iv. 268. 

Felix, Saint, pope, i. 323. 

Felix II., Pope, i. 380 ; ii. 141. 

Felix IL, or in., pope, i. 335, 336 ; 
ii. 143. 

FelLx III., or IV., Pope, i. 340 ; ii. 
144, 284. 

Felix, archbishop of Ravenna, i. 
359. 

Ferentino, Bonus, bishop of, i. 344. 

Fergan, see Allan. 

Ferrers, see Robert de, &c. 

Ferri d'Etampes, count, an ally of 
Roger deToeni, 170, 171, 

Ferrieres, New, near Bernai, iv. 
162. 

Ferte, eu-Brai, ii. 474 ; iii. 453, 
458. 

Ferte, Fresnel, iii. 471, 473. 

Festus, procurator of Judea, i. 86, 
248. 

Festus, an officer of Nero, i. 217. 

Festus, ex-consul, i. 337. 

Finmarken, not Finland, subject to 
the kings of Norway, iii. 215, 
note. 

Firth of Forth, William Rufus en- 
camps there, iii. 9. 

Flambard, the corrupt minister of 
William Rufus, iii. 200, 301, 416; 
see Ranulf Flambard. 

Flanders, ii. 40 ; earldom of, 59 ; 
its contingent to the army of 



Louis VI. in 1119, iii, 488 ; inun 
dations there in 1134, iv. 142. 

Flavia Domitia, i. 314. 

Flavius, archbishop of Rouen, i. 
113; ii. 143 ; ii. 284. 

Fleet of William, duke of Nor- 
mandy, assembled for the con- 
quest of England, i. 464, 465, 
and note. 

Fleche, La, castle of, iii. 222, 236. 

Flemings, the, ii. 176, 297 ; iii. 72, 
136, 225 ; in the pay of Arnold 
d'Echoufour, ii, 452 ; in the pay 
of William Rufus, iii. 229 ; of 
King Stephen, iv. 175, 178, 216 ; 
a colony of them settled in 
Wales, by Henry I., to cm-b the 
natives, 143. 

Fleuri, abbey of, ii. 34, 35 ; iii. 
424. 

Floi-ence, ii. 406 ; MaurUius arch- 
bishop of Rouen, an abbot there, 
ii. 164. 

Florence, see Gerbert, a monk of. 

Florence, count of Holland, ii. 59. 

Florence of Worcester,. i. 493, 494, 
and note. 

Florian, Emperor, i. 98. 

Florus, counsellor of king Theode- 
bert, iii. 43. 

Florus, son of Philip I. and Ber- 
trade, iii. 5 ; intrigues of Ber- 
trade for him against Louis le 
Gros, 354 ; he defends the citadel 
of E\Teux, 478. 

Florus, a surname of Louis VII., 
iii. 424. 

Fontenay. battle of, i. 135 ; ii. 
155, 156. 

Fontenelles, abbey of, i, 378, 381; 
ii. 130. 

Fontevraud, nuns of, see Juliana, 
Matilda d' Anjou. 

Forests, Of Brotonne, iv. 72 ; of 
Goutfern, iii, 278 ; of Lions, i. 
401 ; of Ouche, i. 378 ; ii. 276, 
and note; tithes of the forest of 
Neuf - Marche i. 397 ; forfei- 
tures in the I'oyal forests, ii. 
126 ; fire-bote of the monks ia 



GENERAL INDEX. 



331 



the forests of the lords of Aufay, 
iii. 264; rights of feeding hogs 
and cattle in forests, ii. 189, 196, 
205. 

Formosus, Pope, i. 371. 

Pormosus, bishop of Porto, ii. 336. 

Portunatus, archdeacon, i. 291. 

Portunatus, bishop of Catania, i. 
339. 

Portunatus, bishop of Poitiers, ii. 
150. 

Praga, iv. 121, 122, 124; battle of, 
124, 126, 143, 254. 

France, i. 119, 131, 140, 142, 143, 
145, 153, 154; ii. 140. 

Franco, archbishop of Eouen, i, 
135, 380; ii. 156, 166; iv. 245, 
246. 

Francus, founder of the dynasty of 
the kings of the Pranks, i. 111. 

Pranks, i. 131, 132, 134, 135, 153; 
ii. 142. 

Franks, general term, for the cru- 
saders, iii. 85, note. 

Frea, a Scandinavian goddess, ii. 24. 

Prealaf, ii. 250. 

Fredegunde, wife of Chilperic, ii. 
145. 

Fredelende, i. 395. 

Frederick, afterwards pope by the 
name of Stephen IX., i. 431. 

Frederick, archbishop of Cologne, 
sends legates to the council of 
Rheims, iv. 11, 12. 

Frederick, brother of Herman count 
of Namur, bishop of Liege, iv. 3. 

Frederick, duke of Suabia, a candi- 
date for the empire in 1125, iv. 
82, 83 ; does homage to Lothaire, 
84 ; treasonably attacks him, ibid. 

Fredesende, wife of Tancred de 
Hauteville, i. 438. 

Fresnai-sur-Sarthe, ill 75, 378; iii. 
229. 

Fresnel, family of, ii. 473, 471, 
note. 

Frigheard, chaplain to Lothaire, 
king of Kent, archbishop of Can- 
terbury, iv. 51, and note. See 
Wigheard. 



Frioul, dukes of, see Eugelbeit, 

Pemmon, Hatches. 
Prisia, ii. 24, 166. 
Prisons, i. 124, 128, 357. 
Frithowald, ii. 250. 
Prodo, a monk of Seez, afterwards 

of Shrewsbury, ii. 202. 
Progere, bishop of Seez, iv. 256. 
Promont, Saint, oratory of, in the 

abbey of Fecamp, iii. 413, 
Fromont, son of Pulk, dean of 

Evreux, ii. 185. 
Fromont IL count de Sens, ii, 345, 

346. 
Promont, son of Promont II. count 

de Sens, ii. 347. 
Frosinone, i. 338. 
Pructtiosus, Saint, iv. 114. 
Pulbert de Beine, lord of Laigle, i. 

393; ii. 108. 
Fulbert, bishop of Chartres, i. 443 ; 

ii. 185. 
Pidbert, abbot of St. Sepulclu-e at 

Cambrai, i. 494, 495. 
Fulbert, canon of Paris, ii. 317. 
Fulbert, archdeacon and dean of 

Eouen, iii, 38, 39. 
Fulbert, councillor of Maurilius, 

archbishop of Rouen, i. 417. 
Fulcher, monk of St. Bertin, iii. 

422; William the Conqueror 

gives him the abbey of Thomey, 

his works, ibid. 
Fulcher of Chartres, scales the walls 

of Antioch, iii. 123. 
Fulcher, canon of Chartres, ii. 204; 

his charter, 204, 206. 
Fulcher of Chartres, historian of the 

crusade, iii. 59. 
Fulcher de Chaudri, i. 458, 470, 

471. 
Fulcher, son of the preceding, a 

monk, 471. 
Fulcher, brother of Ranulf Flam- 
bard, iii. 200; consecrated bishop 

of Lisieux, 287; his death, ibid. 
Fulchered, monk of Seez, and abbot 

of Shrewsbury, ii. 202, 262; his 

death, iv. 50. 
Fulcoin, the priest, i. 395. 



832 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Fulk, son of Fredenlend, i. 395. 

Fulk, a monk of St. Evroult, i. 412. 

Fulk, son of Fulcher de Montreuil, 
or Giroie, i. 393, 398. 

Fulk, prior of St. Evroult, i. 442. 

Fulk, bishop of Amiens, son of 
Dreux, count of the Vexin, ii. 
399. 

Fulk d'Aunou, son of Baldwin the 
Teutonic, i. 427. 

Fulk Dastin, dean, and afterwards 
bishop, of Lisieux, iv. 260. 

Fulk, dean of E^^•eux, father of 
Fulk de Guemanville, i. 388; ii. 
185; retires to St. Evroult, and 
gives benefactions to the abbey, 
186, 187. 

Fulk de Guemanville, son of Fulk 
the dean, and a monk of St. Ev- 
roult, i. 388, 415; accompanies 
the abbot to Rome, 432 ; attends 
Arnold d'Echaufour in his dying 
hour, 452; pi'oposed for abbot, 
467; is the abbot's coadjutor, ii. 
185; his family and character, 
185, 186. 

Fulk, son of Azo, marquis of Ligu- 
ria, ii. 481, 484. 

Fulk, priest of IMaule, ii. 338; farms 
three acres of land, 234. 

Fulk de Montfort, a Breton, ii. 233. 

Fulk Nerra, count of Anjou, founds 
the abbey of St. Nicholas, ii, 395; 
his hostilities with Herbert Eveil- 
lechien, ii. 73. 

Fulk le Rechin, count of Anjou, 
son of Alberic count du Gatinais, 
ii. 74; revolts against his brother 
Geoffrey le Barbu, and confines 
him at Chinon, i. 440; ii. 74; iii, 
370; induces the Manceaux to 
revolt against the Normans, ii, 74, 
75; attacks John de la Fleche, 
76; makes peace with Iving Wil- 
liam, 77; allies himself with Ro- 
bert Curthose, ii. 475, 476; 
marries Bertrade, 477; iii. 433; 
she deserts him, iii. 3; occupies 
Mans, 231; lays siege to Ballon, 
232; submits to William Rufus, 



233; joins Elias de la Fleche in 
besieging the tower of Mans, 273, 
274; cedes some places to the 
duke of Aquitaine for the ransom 
of his son, 376 ; his death soon 
after, 376. 

Fulk the Younger, count of Anjou, 
son of Fulk le Rechin and Ber- 
trade, ii. 477; iii. 370], 371, 432; 
invested by Philip I. in the county 
of Anjou, and committed to the 
care of the duke of Aquitaine, 
iii. 370; imprisoned by the duke, 
his release, 371; marries Erem- 
burge, daughter and heiress of 
Elias count of Maine, ii. 484; iii. 
23, 276, 371, 441; revolts against 
Henry L, and seeks aid from 
Louis VI., 441 ; joined by Robert 
de Belesme, 442; makes peace 
with Henry L, obtains Maine, 
and betroths his daughter to 
William, the king's son, 443 ; at 
the siege of Belesme with Henry, 
445 ; besieges la Motte-Guatier, 
454; and Alen9on, defeating the 
royal army, 463; the king offers 
him peace, and William, the Ethe- 
ling, maiTies his daughter Ma- 
tUda, 475; iv. 44; goes to Jeru- 
salem and joins the Knights Tem- 
plars, 44; contracts his daughter 
Sibylla to William of Normandy, 
60 ; with the county of Maine, iii. 
432, 433 ; iv. 60 ; Henry I. breaks 
off the alliance, iii. 433; iv. 79; 
Fulk returns to Jerusalem, 106; 
marries Melesinde, daughter of 
King Baldwin, iii. 149; iv. 106; 
becomes king of Jerusalem, i. 
155; iii. 411; iv. 106, 107,254; 
defeated by Emadeddin Zcnghi, 
iv. 86; besieged in the castle of 
Mont-Real, 187, 188; he capitu- 
•lates, 189, 190; falls sick, 192; 
counsels Raymond to do homage 
to John Comnenes, 193, 194. 

Fulk, a monk, and afterwards prior 
and provost of St. Evroult. ii. 107, 
208, 317; iii. 207; abbot of St. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



333 



I^erre-sur-Dive, ii. 107, 317; iii. 
207; at the funeral of William 
the Conqueror, ii. 420; at the 
election of an abbot of St. Evroult, 
522 ; goes to Rome to appeal, ii. 
214; in exile at Monte- Cassino, 
iii. 207 ; returns to his abbey, 207 ; 
dies at Winchester, iii. 207, 368. 

Fulgent ius, his work on mythology, 
ii. 375. 

Furius, a sorcerer, i. 207. 

Furnes taken by Thierri d' Alsace, 
iv. 90. 

Fuscehnont;Chateau-]S3"euf-sur-Epte, 
founded there by William Rufus, 
iii. 479. 

Gahsdsijiow Djebali in Syria, i. 1 9 1 ; 
iii. 163, 164. 

Gace, ii. 5, 276, 300, 475 ; iii. 491 ; 
iv. 160. 

Gael, castle of, in Brittany, ii. 82; 
iv. 32. 

Gaeta, i. 414. See John of. 

Gaillefontaine, ii. 474; iii. 453. 

Galatia, i. 184, 186, 193. 

Gallicia (the body of St. James, 
the Great, caiTied to Compos- 
tella), i. 1 79 ; the people of, iii. 78 ; 
iv. 120. 

Gallienus, emperor, i. 97, 322 ; iv. 
114. 

Gallus, emperor, i. 96, 321. 

Galon, see Walo. 

Gambara, a Scandinavian, mother 
of Lombard chiefs, ii. 152. 

Gambaron, a surname of Robert, 
son of WUliam the Conqueror, ii. 
108, and note. 

Gand, ii. 297 ; iv. 90. See Evain de. 

Gandras, a city of Asia Minor, iii. 
296. 

Gani, ii. 131, 226; iv. 257. 

Gapree, iv. 141. 

Garcio Ramiiais IV., king of Na- 
varre, iv. 125, 127. 

Gardening, Durand a monk, gar- 
dener at St.E-Na-oult, i. 388; Etard, 
a monk and gardener of Jumi 
eges, promoted to be abbot of 
Dive, iii. 207. 



Garenne, the riverof Arques, ii. 406. 
Garibald, duke of Bavaria, ii. 153. 
Garibald, king of the Lombards, ii. 

158. 
Garlande, the heirs of, claim Gour- 

nai-sur-Marne, iii. 429. 
Garnier de Montmorillon, a monk 

of Chaise-Dieu, iii. 49. 
Garonne, the, i. 308; iii. 258. 
Gascony, ii. 40, 154, 173; iii. 48, 

258,288. 
Gascons, the, i. 301, 304, 311; iii. 

77; iv. 112, 222. 
Gaston, is at the battle of Ascalon, 

iii. 185. See the next entry. 
Gaston IV., viscount of Beam, fights 

the Saracens in Spain, iv. 112. 
Gatinais, see Alberic, count of. 
Gaucb-i, not Baudri, takes Duke 

Robert prisoner, at the battle of 

Tinchebrai, ii. 380; is chaplain 

of Henry I. and made bishop of 

Laon ; his death, ibid. 
Gaul, i. 104—106. 
Gazelle, see Farisia. 
Gazi the emir, Balak's nephew, iii. 

399, 402, 404. 
Gazi, a Persian emir, iii. 407. See 

Ylgazy. 
Gazo de Montfort, ii. 313 — 315. 
Gazo de Poissi, i. 472; ii. 235. 
Gebail, formerly Byblos, iii. 167. 
Gelasius, pope, i. 253,290, 336; ii. 

143. 
Gelasius II., pope, i. 373; ii. 139; iv. 

172; iii. 446—447, 460; his death 

at Cluni, 464. 
Gelduin of Dol, a freebooter, iv. 

183. 
Gelimer, king of the Vandals, i. 

114; ii. 144. 
Gellone, abbey of, ii. 245, 246. 
Gemblours, see Sigebert, monk of. 
Genoese, the, iii. 77. 
Geoffrey d' Andria, (Bari), iv. 137. 
Geoffrey I. count of Anjou, ii. 309. 
Geoffrey II. count of Anjou. sur- 

named Martel, ii. 74; makes war 

on William the Conqueror, i. 424, 
ii. 410; dies in 1060,1. 441. 



134 



GENERAL INDEX. 



GeofFrey III. count of Anjou, sur- 
named le Barbu, son of Alberic 
count of the Gatinais, ii. 74; cedes 
Maine to Kobert Cui'those, ibid. ; 
kept in captivity at Chinon, by 
his brother, Fulk le Rechin, i. 
440; iii. 74; liberated at the in- 
stance of Urban II., iii. 74, 370. 

Geoffrey IV. count of Anjou, sur- 
named Maitel, iii. 364, 369, 370; 
iv. 108 ; his death, iii. 370; iv. 2.52. 

Geoffrey V. count of Anjou, sur- 
named le Bel and Plantagenet, 
i. 130, 131; son of Fulk V., ii. 
223; regent during his father's 
crusade, iv. 44; marries the 
Empress Matilda, iii. 198; iv. 
105, 106; quarrels with his 
father-in-law, iv. 145, 146; burns 
Beaumont-le-Vicomte, 146; sends 
his wife to Nonnandy and fol- 
lows her there, 156 ; Robert de 
Sable and other vassals revolt 
against him, ibid.; returns to 
Normandy, 157 ; concludes a truce 
with Theobald count de Blois, 
158; makes an irruption into 
Normandy in 1137, 175, 177; 
makes a truce with King Stephen, 
188, 197; again enters Normandy, 
but retires, 199; besieges Falaise, 
206 ; retreats, foiled before it and 
Touque, 207, 208; Normandy 
submits to him and Matilda, 219, 
221; his death, 255. 

Geofl^"rey of' Bayeux, a monk of 
Cerisi, afterwards abbot of Sa- 
vigni, iii. 53. 

Geoffrey, son of Guy Bullein, i. 428. 

Geoffrey, count of Brittany,brother of 
Judith, wife of Richard IL, i. 382. 

Geoffrey, the Breton, an inhabitant 
of the Corbonnais, from a robber 
becomes a monk, ii. 321 ; a story 
of him, 321, 322. 

Geoffrey de Briolai, taken prisoner 
by the Normans in 1098, iii. 232. 

GeofFrey, count de Brionne, son of ! 
Richard I., duke of Normandy, ' 
and father of Gilbert, ii. 163,490. ! 



GeofFrey I,, bishop of Chartres, ii. 
206, 209, 263. 

Geoflfrey IL, bishop of Chartres, ii. 
206, 263; disputes the privileges 
of Cluni at the council of Rheims, 
iv. 16; counsels Matilda, Avidow of 
William the Etheling, to take the 
veil, iv. 59, 60; assists at the con- 
secration of the cathedral of Seez, 
84; present at the synod of Rouen 
in 1128, 105. 

Geoffrey de Clinton charged vrith 
treason, iii. 16; is advanced by 
Henry I., 328; his nephew Roger 
made bishop of Coventry, iv. 49. 

Geoffrey de Conversana, ii, 368; 
nephew of Robert Guiscard, iii. 
256; entertains Robert Curthose 
on his return from the crusade, 
257; gives him his daughter 
Sibylla, and money to redeem his 
duchy, 256, 257; is lord of Brun- 
dusium, 257. 

Geoffrey, bishop of Evreux, iv. 265. 

Geoffrey de Gace is taken prisoner 
in an expedition against the 
Manceaux, iii. 221, 222. 

Geoffrey de Girouart, abbot of St. 
Evroult, previously prior of Aufay, 
iv. 262; resigns, 263. 

Geoffrey le Grele, a prisoner to the 
Moslems; escapes in company 
with Joscelin de Courtenay, iii. 
396—398. 

Geoffrey, son of Gilbert de Laigle, 
and brother of Richer, ii. 487 ; one 
of the household of Henry I., iii. 
455; saved in the shipwreck of 
Blanche-Nef, iv. 35; is said to 
have perished, iii. 380. 

Geoffrey, abbot of Lessai, is present 
at the consecration of the abbey- 
church of St. Evroult, iii. 248. 

Geoffrey, duke of Louvain, his 
daughter Adelaide married to 
Henry L, iv. 43 ; is at the siege 
of Alost, 91. 

Geoffrey Mala-Terra, historian of 
the Norman conquests in Italy, i. 
437. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



335 



Geoffrey Mancel, brother of Hubert, 

viscount du Maine, i. 449. 
Geoffrey de Marcq, becomes a 
monk at Maule; his wife Emme- 
line, and sons, ii. 226, 227. 

Geoffrey, a priest of Maule, his worth 
and simplicity of character, ii. 
219; erects a small church, ibid. 

Geoffrey, brother-in-law of William 
de Maule, ii. 228 ; receives an invi- 
tation from Henry I., iii. 443. 

Geoffrey de Mayenne, taken pri- 
soner by WilUam Talvas, i. 393; 
resists the duke of Normandy, 
448 ; revolts against King William, 
about 1069, ii. 75 ; again 1088, 
455 ; supports Hugh, son of 
the marquis of Liguria, 48 1 ; 
leagued with Robert Giroie, iii. 
27, 28 ; obtains a truce from 
William Rufus, iii. 230 ; submits 
to him, ii. 236. 

Geoffrey the monk, comes de Mareis, 
fights against the Mussulmans in 
1124, iii. 203 ; encounters Balak. 
and both fall, ibid. 

Geoffrey de Moubrai, bishop of 
Coutances, comes over with the 
Conqueror, is at the battle of 
Hastings, i. 483; ii. 50 ; assists 
at the coronation, i. 49 1 ; crushes 
a revolt in the West, ii. 26 ; is 
at the king's funeral, 420 ; his 
immense domains in England, ii. 
50; iii. 17; his character, 17, 18; 
makes his nephew, Robert de 
Moubrai, his heir, ii. 50; iii. 18. 

Geoffrey de Monte-Scaf^Iioso, falls 
at the battle of Dorylisum, iii. 102 ; 
his troops, 181. See Humphrey de. 

Geoffrey du Neuf-Marche, son of 
Turkytel, ii. 367 ; marries Ada, 
daughter of Richard du Neuf- 
Marche, 367; his sons, ii. 185, 
249, 264,267 ; expelled by Duke 
William, ii. 455. ^ 

Geoffrey, a monk of Noron, ii. 211. 

Geoffrey d'Orleans, monk, and after- 
wards prior, of St. Evroult, ii. 103, 
185, 525 : goes to England, iii. 



55; abbot of Croyland, ii. 86, 101, 
102, 124 ; his death, iv. 48, 49. 

Geoffrey Parented, de Castel-Sagrat, 
scales the walls of Antioch, iii. 123. 

Geoffrey II. count of Perche, son of 
Rotrou, ii. 459; iv. 108; is at the 
battle of Hastings, i. 484 ; has large 
domains in England, ii. 50 ; he 
burns Echaufour, 459 ; has hos- 
tilities with Robert de Belesme, 
460 ; his last hours and death, 
iv. 108; his character, ii. 459,460. 

Geoffrey, count of Perche, who died 
in 1202, iv. 258. 

Geoffrey, abbot of Preanx, iii. 36. 

Geoffrey Ridel, perished in the 
shipwreck of the Blanche-Nef, 
iv. 41. 

Geoffrey, archbishop of Rouen, a 
Breton, ii. 168, 169; iii. 30, 226, 
227 ; dean of Mans, ii.l68, 169 ; iii. 
30, 408 ; count Elias proposes him 
for the archsee of Mans, iii, 227; 
made archbishop of Rouen, iii. 
227, 438;.iv. 252; holds a synod 
at Rouen, iii. 459 ; prosecutes 
Ascelin for encroachmg on his 
rights at Andeli, 469 ; attends the 
council of Rheims, iv. 3; accom- 
panies the pope to Mouzon, 6; 
holds another synod at Rouen, 29 ; 
his conduct in the tumult there, 
30, 31 ; his counsel to Roger, ab- 
bot of St. Evroult, 54; consecrates 
the cathedral of Seez, 84, 85; con- 
verts William de Roumare, 95; 
consecrates a church at Gisors, 70; 
the abbey church of St. Ouen at 
Caen, iii. 38 ; confirms the grants 
of the priory of Aufay, ii. 265 ; his 
death, i. 156; iv. 103, 105, 254; 
his administration and character, 
iii. 438 ; iv. 30. 

Geoffrey of St.Denys-sur-Sie, a man- 
at-anns of Goubert de Heugleville, 
ii. 263, 264; his death in 1218. 

Geoffrey, abbot of St. Evroult,iv.259. 

Geoffrey, monk of St. Evroult, i. 388. 

Geoffrey, abbot of St. Thierri, at the 
council of Rheims, iv. 9. 



33G 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Geoffrey, bishop of Seez, previously 
a canon of Rouen, iv. 260. 

Geoffrey, monk of Seez and abbot 
of Shrewsbury, ii. 202 ; iv. 50. 

Geoffrey de Serans, son of Herbert 
le Bouteiller, i. 470 ; commands 
troops in the Vexin, iii. 210; is 
in garrison at Andeh, 470; at the 
battle of Bremule, 483. 

Geoffrey (le Sor?) defends Alen9on 
against Heniy I., iii. 364 ; takes 
Cande, 369; his virtues, 370; his 
death and burial at Angers, ibid. 

Geoffrey Talbot, revolts against King 
Stephen and occupies Hereford, 
iv. 201; he is driven out, 203. 

Geoffrey, son of Tancred de Haute- 
ville,Y437. 

Geoffrey de TourvUle has his eyes 
put out by Henry I., iv. 75. 

Geoffrey de Triqueville, canon and 
treasurer of Lisieux, ii. 122. 

Geoffrey de Vendome, attends Geof- 
frey Plantagenet in Normandy, 
iv. 164. 

Geofii'ey, prior of Winchester, ii. 250. 

George, Saint, ii. 243; iv. 188; his 
martyrdom, iii. 168; apparitions 
of, 139, 168. 

George, patriarch of Constantinople, 
i. 122, 354; ii. 148. 

George, bishop of Palestrina, i. 364. 

Georgia, see DaAdd, king of 

Gerard, bishop of Angouleme, at- 
tacks the privileges of Cluni at 
the council of Rheims, iv. 16; at- 
tends the consecration of the ca- 
thedral of Seez, as legate, 85; his 
death, iv. 172. 

Gerard de Fecamp, ravages the 
territory of Caux, iii. 453. 

Gerard Fleitel, father of William, 
bishop of Evreux, i. 400, 425, ii. 
48 ; a benefactor to St. Wandi-ille, 
161. 

Gerard de Gournai, son of Hugh 
a,nd Basile, ii. 476, 477; lord of 
Ecouche, 476; a partisan of Wil- 
liam Rufus, 474; iii. 72; succours 
Ralph de Toeni, ii. 495; the king 



gives his castles to his brother 
Robert Curthose, 510; Gerard 
joins the crusade, iii. 81 ; after the 
siege of Nice, he follows Bohe- 
mond, 99. 

Greard, nephew of Walkelin, bishop 
of Winchester, iii. 201; bishop of 
Hereford, 201, 268; archbishop 
of York, ibid. Ordericus says er- 
roneously that he solemnized the 
marriage of Henry I. with Ade- 
laide, 271. 

Gerard, afterwards pope, by the 
name of Nicholas II., i. 481. See 
Nicholas. 

Gerard de Saint Hilaire, governor 
of the castle of Vignats for Robert 
de Belesme, iii. 333. 

Gerard, bishop of Seez, ii. 211, 
465; iii. 416; at the funeral or 
William the Conqueror, ii. 420; 
tries to raise the siege of Courci, 
iii. 509; his treatment of Robert, 
de Belesme, and death, 510. 

Gerberge, queen of Louis d'Outre- 
mer, ii. 159. 

Gerberoi, Robert Curthose takes 
refuge and is besieged there, ii. 
177, 178. 

Gerbert, preceptor of king Robert, 
i. 143, 344; ii. 164; archbishop of 
Rheims, i. 143, 144; ii. 344; pope 
by the name of Silvester I., i. 145. 

Gerbert, a monk of Florence, comes 
to Normandy, ii. 164. 

Gerbert, abbot of St. Wandrille, ii. 
69, 100, 411; iii. 36; at the fune- 
ral of William the Conqueror, ii. 
420 ; figures in the ghost story of 
the priest of Bonneville, 514, 

Gerbert, abbot of Troarn, i. 389. 

Germans, the, i. 91; iii. 76, 84, 85, 
136. 

Germanus, St., bishop of Auxerre, i. 
110; ii. 142; iv. 96. 

Germanus, bishop of Capua, i. 338. 

Germanus, patriarch of Constanti- 
nople, i. 361. 

Germanus, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 
142; iv. 236. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



337 



Germany, L 87, 359; ii. 173, 175; 
iii, 76. 

Germer, Saint, ii. 147. 

Germond, patriarch of Jerusalem, i. 
156; iv. 103. 

Gerokl of Aquitaine, founds the 
abbey of Ckxni, iv. 14. 

Gerokl of Avranches, chaplain of 
Hugh d' Avranches, earl of Chester, 
ii. 242, 243, 249 ; becomes a monk 
at Winchester, 250; algbot of 
Tewkesbury, ibid.; his adminis- 
tration and death, 251. 

Gerokl d'Envermeu, taken prisoner 
by the French and ransomed, iii. 
210. 

Gerokl tke Steward, governor of the 
castle of Neuf-Marche, i. 456. 

Gersende of Mans, wife of Azo, mar- 
quis of Liguria, ii. 74, 

Gcrvase and Proteus, SS., martyrs, 
their rehcg discovered, i. 105, 106, 
221. 

Gervase, an Englishman, bishop of 
Seez in 1223, iv, 259. 

Gervase, a Breton, son of Haimo, 
viscount of Dol, knighted by Tan- 
cred's widow, for the defence of 
Antioch, iii. 392; slays the emir 
Gazi? 393; his captivity, 395; is 
sent to the king of Media, 401; 
returns to Antioch. 

Gervase of Chateau-du-Loire, iii. 
222 ; bishop of Mans, iii. 415 ; arch- 
bishop of Elieims, i. 415; iii. 222. 

Gervase of Chateau-du-JLoire, son of 
Robert Brochard, and nephew of 
the archbishop, iii. 222. 

Gervase, lord of Chateau-neuf, ii. 
487; iii. 442. 

Gervase, son of Fulcher de Caudri, 
i. 471. 

Gervase de Montreuil, priest of Sap, 
his children, ii. 259. 

Gervase, abbot of Eennes, iii. 435. 

Gervase, father of Eoger, abbot of 
St. Evroult, iv. 57. 

Gessius Florus, governor of Judea, 
i. 86. 

Gevissse, the West Saxons, ii. 33. 



Gherbod, the Fleming, has a grant 
from the Conqueror of the city and 
earldom of Chester, ii. 47; he re- 
turns home, 242; William de 
WaiTcne marries his sister Gun- 
drede, 49. 

Giffard, Alice, wife of Walter Tirrel, 
of this family, iii. 226. See Waker, 
William, Robert, Giffard. 

Gilbert, a canon and afterwards 
monk of Aufai, ii. 264, 266. 

Gilbert, duke of Burgundy, i. IS 9, 
ii. 341. 

Gilbert, count de Brionne, Duke 
William's guardian, defeated, iii. 
163; nepliew of Duke Richard. 
i. 427; invades the Vexin, 383; 
the territories of Giroie, 391 ; his 
death, i. 139, 391, 449; ii. 163, 
445, 490. 

Gilbert de Clare, his expeditions 
against Exmcs, iv. 160; created 
earl of Pembroke, 203; besieges 
Leeds castle, 204; is at the battle 
of Lincoln, 217. 

Gilbert, abbot of Conches (Ciiatil- 
lon), i, 382, 389, 400. 

Gilbert Crispin, ii, 187; castellnn of 
Tillieres, iii, 490; takes Hugh de 
Cliaumont, Louis VL's son-in-law, 
prisoner, ibid. 

Gilbert de Cresd ravages the coun- 
try of Caux, iii, 454. 

Gilbert des Essarts, a monk of St. 
Evroult goes to the court at 
Rouen, to have a charter sealed, 
iii. 440; his journeys to England, 
iv. 53 — 55. 

Gilbert d'Exraes commands at Ev- 
reux, under Henry I., iii. 473; 
jjcrishcs in the shipwreck of the 
Blanche-Nef, iv. 38. 

Gilbert de Gand, father-in-law of 
Ives de Grentemesnil, ii. 506. 

Gilbert de Glos, a monk of St. 
Evroult, afterwards abbot of Lire, 
ii. 524. 

Gilbert de Laigle, son of Engenulf, 
ii. 380: Duke Robert gives him 
tlie castle of Exmes, 485 ; slain in 



Z 



338 



GENERAL INDEX. 



a skirmish and buried at St. Sul- 
pice-sur-Risle, 48 G. 

Gilbert de LaiL,de, sou of Richer and 
Judith, ii. 380, 485; iii. 249; sup- 
ports king William, 478; taken 
prisoner by the French, 210; is 
placed in garrison at Mans, 236; 
his benefiiction to St. Evroult, 249 ; 
opposes Robert de Belesme, 340; 
his death, iii. 21. 

Gilbert de Laigle, son of Gilbert and 
Juliana, ii. 380, 486. 

Gilbert, archdeacon of Lisieux, his 
mission to Rome in 1066, i. 463. 
[Perhaps the same person as Gil- 
bert Maminot, or Gilbert Fitz- 
Osbernc] 

Gilbert Maminot, son of Robert de 
Courbepine; physician and chap- 
lain of William the Conqueror, ii. 
121 ; consecrated bishop of Lisieux 
in 1078, ihkl; his character, 121, 
122; the historian of William de 
Poictiers his archdeacon, 122; at- 
tends the king in his last illness, 
401 ; assists at his funeral, 420 ; con- 
fesses the priest of Bonneval after 
his Adsion of purgatory, 519; the 
bishop observes the stars, and is an 
astrologei-, iii. 02 ; attends a synod 
at Rouen, 72 ; his disputes with the 
chapter of St. Evroult, 244; gives 
the benediction to the abbo*: Roger 
du Sap, 245 ; consecrates the new 
abbey-church, 247; gives sub- 
deacon's orders to Ordericus, ii. 
122; iv. 224; poetical epistle of 
Giroie Grossif to him, ii. 479; his 
death, iii. 287, 415. 

Gilbert, the constable (of Roger 
de Montgomeri), ii. 197. 

Gilbert, brother of Roger de Mont- 
gomeri, i. 451. 

Gilbert Fitz-Osberne, canon and 
archdeacon of Lisieux, ii. 44. 
bishop of Evreux, ibid. ; sur- 
named the Crane from his long 
figure, iii. 71 ; attends a synod 
at Rouen in 1072, ii. 61, 65 ; 
again in 1074, iv. 250 ; and in 



1096, iii. 71; buries Hugh, bi- 
shop of Lisieux, ii. 121 ; conse- 
crates William Bonne-Ame, 
archbishop of Rouen, 133 ; gives 
the benediction to Anselm, abbot 
of Bee, 117 ; officiates at the 
funeral of Richer de Laigle, 380 ; 
and of Gilbert de Laigle, 486 ; 
assists at the funeral of William 
the Conqueror, 420 ; makes the 
funeral oration, ibid. ; attends 
the council of Clermont, iii. 69 ; 
with Odo, bishop of Bayeux, 
at Palermo at his death and buries 
him, 206 ; assists at the consecra- 
tion of the abbey-church of St. 
EvTOult, 246 ; his'death, iii. 438; 
iv. 252 ; buried in his cathedral, 
which he had finished, endowed 
and consecrated, iii. 438. 

Gilbert du Pin commands at the 
siege of Brionne, and is killed, 
ii. 492. 

Gilbert, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 
154, 155; iv. 242. 

Gilbert, abbot of St. Stephen's at 
Caen, received the corpse of Wil- 
liam the Conqueror, ii. 409. 

Gilbert, a monk of St. E\TOult, i. 
388. See Gilbert des Essarts, 
and Gilbert de Glos. 

Gilbert, abbot of Seez in, 1137, 
iv. 179. 

Gilbert, archbishop of Tours, ii. 
72 ; is at the council of Rheims, 
iv. 3 ; his dccith at Rome, 80. 

Gilbert de Tunbridge (de Clare), 
son of Richard de Bienfaite, ii. 
493, iii. 18, and note; conspires 
against William Rufus, but be- 
trays the treason, 18, 19 ; his 
castle of Tunbridge besieged and 
surrendered, iii. 205. 

Gilbert the Universal, bishop of 
London, iv. 173. 

Gilbert, abbot of Westminster, 
ii. 329, 330. 

Gilbert, see Gulbert or Guilbcrt, 

Gildas, quoted, iii. 271 ; iv. 97. 

Giles, saint and confessor, an altar 



GENERAL IKDEX. 



339 



dedicated to, in the church of St. 
Evroult, iii. 247. 

Gilo, or Gilles, de Sulli, a knight in 
the household of Henry, king of 
France, reconnoitres the army of 
Maine, iii. 230. 

Giroie, son of Arnold le Gros, i. 
389 ; defeats Herbert, count of 
Maine, 390 ; marries Gisela and 
obtains Montreuil andEchaugour. 
ibid. ; founds churches, 390, 391. 

Giroie, son of Fulcher Giroie, 394, 
398, 436. 

Giroie, son of Giroie, i. 390, 394. 

Giroie de Courville, i. 451, 452. 

Giroie Grossif, his poetical epistle 
to bishop Gilbert Maminot, ii. 
479. 

Giroie des Loges, i. 395. 

Gisela, daughter of Charles the 
Simple, married to RoUo, i. 166, 
380 ; ii. 157. 

Gisela, daughter of Turstin de 
Bas'.enbourg, wife of William 
Giroie, i. 390. 

Gisela, mother of Warin, abbot of 
St. Evroult, iv. 179. 

Gislebert, see Gilbert. 

Gisors, fortress of, built by William 
Rufus, iii. 209, 278, 444, 479 ; 
iv. 23, 69, 70, 87 ; battle of Gisors 
in 1198, iv. 257 ; church of St. 
Gervase there, 70. See Paganus 
de, Theobald Paganus de, &c. 

Gisulf, duke of Benevento, i. 126, 
358. 

Gisulf, prince of Salerno, ii. 209, 
366, 371. 

Gisulf, secretary of Heniy I., pe- 
rishes in the wreck of the B/ancAe- 
Nef, iv. 41. 

Githa, wife of Earl Godwin, i. 482, 
487; ii. 23, and nofe. 

Glanfeuil, abbey of, iii. 42. 

Glanville, see William de. 

Glastonbury, abbey of, ii. 35; dis- 
sensions of the monks respecting 
the chant, 53; Ukytel, ex-abbot 
of Croyland, sent there, 1 00. 

Glendfield, Leicestershire, church 



and tithes there given to the 
abbey of Evroult, ii. 256. 

GIos-Ia-Ferriere, near Lisieux, ii. 
191; church of St. Peter founded, 
i. 390, 397; the castle of, iii. 466, 
491, 492; iv. 33. 

Glos-sous Lisieux, i. 300. 

Gloucester, Robert earl of, holds the 
castle, iv. 200. 

Gloucester, see Robert earl of ; 
Roger de. 

Goblin, a demon so called, ii. 136, 
and note. 

Goda, sister of Edward the Con- 
fessor, wife of Dreux, count of the 
Vexin, ii. 18, 399, 

Godard, St., archbishop of Rouen, 
i. 113; ii. 143, 144. 

Godechild, daughter of Ralph de 
Toeni, marries Robert du Neu- 
bourg {not Robert count de Mcu- 
lan), and afterAvards Baldwin of 
Boulogne, ii. 190, note. 

Godebert, king of the Lombards, ii. 
148. 

Godehoc, king of the Lombards, ii. 
153. 

Godescalch, flither of Juliana, an at- 
tendant of Queen Adelaide, ii. 270. 

Godft-ey de Bouillon, duke of Lor- 
raine, king of Jerusalem, son of 
Eustace count of Boulogne, by 
Ita, ii. 12, 497; iii. 187,188,250; 
did not make war on Henry IV. 
as Ordericus states, 352, and 
7iote ; nor mortgage the castle of 
Bouillon, iii. 204, and 7iote; takes 
the cross, 83 ; arrives at Constan- 
tinople, 86, 92; is at Nicomedia, 
93; at the siege of Nice, 94, 95; 
joins the count of Thoulouse, 99; 
at the battle of Dorylaium, 101; 
at the siege of Antioch, 118, 122, 
136, 138, 140; endeavours to re- 
concile Bohemond and the count 
of St. Gilles, 159; marches to 
Laodicea, 1 63 ; arrives at Tripoli, 
166; besieges Jerusalem, 169, 170, 
1 74, 176, 177 ; is elected king, 187, 
188, 250; gains the battle of As- 
z 2 



340 



GENERAL INDEX. 



calon, 183 — 189, 250; refuses As- 
calon to the count of Thoulouse, 
188, 189; is poisoned by the in- 
habitants of JatFa, 299; his death, 
after reigiiincj three years, 250, 
299; Falk of Chartres not his 
chaplain, iii. 59, note. 

Godfrey, see Geoffrey. 

Godrie, abbot of Croyland, ii. 99. 

Godwin, Earl, father of Queen Edith, 
Harold, Sweyn, and Tostig, i. 
153, 487; ii. 23, 167. 

Goisbert, a citizen of Chartres, 
skilled in medicine and physician 
to Arnold d'Echaufour, sells his 
property and gives the price to St. 
Evroulc, becoming a monk there, 
iii. 185, 189, 204; his portrait and 
character, 204; persuades Peter 
de Maule to give his churches to 
the abbey, 216; becomes prior of 
Maule, 219; resigns the office, 
237. 

Goisbert de la Fleche, a knight who 
becomes a monk, ii, 74; iii. 222. 

Goisbert, a monk of Marmouticr, 
abbot of Battell, ii. 2. 

Goisbert, the physician, pi'ior of 
Pai-nes, i. 471; [probably the 
same person as Goisbert of 
Chartres.] 

Gomerfontaine, besieged by Henry I. 
470. 

Gonfriere, la, Richard Fresnel gives 
a portion of the church and tithes 
of, to St. Evroult, iii. 473. 

Gontard, see Guntard, Gunter. 

Gordian, emperor, i. 94. 

Gordian, a priest, father of Pope 
Agapete, i. 341. 

Gordian, praitor, father of St. 
Gregory, i. 347. 

Goscelin, see Joscelin. 

Gospels, books of, ornamented, i. 
121. 

Gothelon, duke of Lorraine, father 
of Frederick, pope as Stephen IX., 
i. 372, 431. 

Gothland, iii. 215. 

Goths, the, i. 97, 104, 106, 108, 



115, 117, .301, 304,311,341,494; 

ii. 56, 143; iii. 309; iv. 222. 
Gouffern, forest of, given by Duke 

Robert to Robert de Belesmc, 

iii. 278. 
Gouffiers de Lastours, at the first 

crusade, iii. 157. 
Gouffiers de Villerai, ii. 110, 258; 

iii. 221. 
Gournai-en-Brai, castle of, iii. 474, 

499, 453. See Gerard de, Hugh 

de. 
Gournai-sur-Marne, iii. 428, 488. 
Goz, a surname of Richard d'Avran- 

ches, father of Hugh earl of Ches- 
ter, ii. 445. 
Gradual, a, copied by Abbot Thierri, 

i. 406. 
Graffham, Sussex, a hide of land 

there granted to the abbey of 

St. E^TOult, ii. 146. 
Grammar, i. 423, 435, 443, 467 ; 

ii 40. 
Grammarian, the, see Philip le Clerc. 
Grancei, see William de, Reynold 

de. 
Grandcourt, William de. 
Grantmesnil, see Grentemesnil. 
Gratian, emperor, i. 104, 105, 106, 

123; ii. 141. 
Gratiosus, i. 364. 
Gravenqon, ii. 476. 
Greeks, i. 295, 338,343; ii. 10,359, 

365. 
Greeks in Apulia, called pseudo- 

Chi'istians, ii. 162, and note. 
Greenland, subject to the kings of 

Norway, iii. 215. 
Gregory the Great (Saint), pope, 

i. 114, 116, 117, 346—348, 362; 

ii. 144, 145, 147. 
Gregory H. (Saint), pope, i. 359, 

360; ii. 148. 
Gregory IH., pope, i. 361, 362; ii. 

149. 
Gregory IV., pope, i. 368; ii. 155. 
Gregory VII., pope (Hildebraad), 

i. 372, 439; ii. 58, 70, 115, 124, 

168 ; his character and life, 251 ; 

he excommunicates Heury IV., 



GENERAL INDEX. 



341 



ibid.', is driA'^en from Rome, and 
retires to Beneventum, 351, 353; 
released by Eobert Guiscard, 363, 
361 ; his cause espoused by the 
Countess Matilda, iii. 198; re- 
tains Robert de Tombelaine at 
his court, ii. 429; his death and 
burial, 353, 462. 
Gregory VI II., see Bourdin. 
Gregory IX., Pope, before bishop 

of Ostia, iv. 259, 260. 
Gregory X., Pope, iv. 261. 
Gregory XL, Pope, iv. 267. 
Gregory, a deacon of Pavia, after- 
wards pope, as Innocent II., 
156, 313 ; iv. 107; comes to Seez 
as papal legate in 1123, iv. 55. 
Gregory Thaumaturgus, i 97. 
Gregory of Tours, i. 263. 
Grente, Ralph, abbot of St. Evroult, 

(1315-1320,) iv. 170. 
Grentemesnil, i. 384; ii. 508; iv. 
55. See Arnold de, Hugh de, 
&c. 
Grimo, archbishop of Rouen, iii. 151. 
Grimoald, duke of Beneventum, 
afterwards duke of the Lom- 
bards, i. 352 ; ii. 147, 153. 
Griinoald, a pi'iest of Bari, ii. 388. 
Grimoald, lord of Bari, iv. 138. 
Grippo, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 

148, 149. 
Grossoeuvre occupied by king Ste- 
phen, iv. 182. 
Gryffith-ap-Conan, king of North 
Wales, ii. 442, 445, 447, 449 ; 
iv. 102. 
Gryffith-ap-LleweUyn , king of North 
Wales, i. 461; ii. 18; his daugh- 
ter JSTesta, — and Blethyn, not his 
son, but his brother, i. 461. 
Gualtelm, bishop of Chartres, i. 

136. 
Guernanville, ii. 184 ; iii." 249. 
Guiard, son of Basilia, wife of Roger 
de Rolleboise, a benefactor of St. 
Evroult, ii. 237. 
Guibert, archbishop of Ravenna, 
antipope under the name of 
Clement, III., i. 372 ; ii. 351, 



353, 463 ; his death, iii. 194 ; 
verses on him, 195. 
Guigau Algason raised from a low 

estate by Henry I., iii. 328. 
Guildford, iv. 98. 
Guillecrip, a favourite of Henry I., 

iii. 328. 
Guines, count of, ii. 12. 
Guinimar, a canon of Aufay, ii. 266. 
Guinimund, emir, the governor of 
Jerusalem (Iftikar-Eddaule), iii. 
175, 188. 
Guiribecs, the, iv. 165, 169. 
Guiscard de Beaujeu, marries Lu- 

cienne de Rochefort, iii. 426. 
Guiscard, see Robert. 
Guitbert, see Guibert. 
Guitmond, father of William 

d'Avranches, ii. 426. 
Guitmond, a monk of Cormeilles 

and St, E\Toult, i. 443. 
Guitmond, a monk of la Croix- St.^ 
Leufroi (afterwards bishop of 
Aversa), ii. 53 ; his letter to 
King William declining prefer- 
ment, 53, 57 ; obtains leave to 
travel, and accepts from Gregory 
VII. the bishoprick of Avei'sa, 
58, 59. 
Guitmond, prior of Maule, ii. 219, 
236, 237 ; before priest of Sou- 
langi, 237; he is robbed and ill- 
used by Ralph de Cravent, 260, 
261. 
Guiumar, the Breton, son of count 
Alan Fergan, a crusader, iii. 395, 
401 ; his captivity among the 
Mussulmans, 395, 397 ; sent to the 
king of the Medes, 401; his re- 
turn to Antioch, 402. {Nut Gru- 
mar). 
Guiumar, the Breton, bishop of 
Mans, iv. 8 1 . See Guy d'Etampes. 
Guibert or Guilbert d'Aufai, son of 
Richard de Heugleville, and 
founder of the priory of Aufay, 
ii. 263, 264, 425; his death in 
1087, 264, 425; maiTied Beatrix 
de Valenciennes, 268; a relation 
and companion of the Conqueror, 



342 



GENERAL IXDEX 



but refuses a grant of lands in 

England, ibid. 
Gulbert, advocate of St. Valeri, 

son-in-law of Richard duke of 

Normandy, and father of Bernard 

de St. Valeri, ii. 266. 
Gumbald, or Gunbald, archbishop 

of Rouen, ii. 155; iv. 244. 
Gundafor, king of India, i. 254, 

257, 259. 
Gundrede, sister of Gerbond the 

Fleming, wife of William de War- 

rene, ii. 49, 473. 
Gundrede, sister of Hugh de Gour- 

nai, Avife of Nigel D'Aubigni, iii. 

21, 452. 
Gundulf, bishop of Rochester, ii, 

455; iii. 349. 
Gunhard, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 

157, 158. 
Gunher d'Aunai, a partisan of 

Duke Robert, iii. 359, 361 ; 

assists Robert Fitz-Hamon, 359; 

Henry I. besieges and takes him 

at Bayeux, 371; iv. 25. 
Gunilde, daughter of Canute by 

Emma, married to Heniy the 

emperor HI., ii. 146; iii. 161. 
Gunnor, wife of Richard II., duke of 

Noraiandy, i. 375. 
Guntard, a monk of St. Wandrille, 

abbot of Jumieges, ii. 66; attends 

William the Conqueror on his 

deathbed, 401; is at his funeral, 

420; dies at the council of Cler- 
mont, ii. 67; iii. 207. 
Gunter, bishop of Bamberg, i. 

431. 
Gunter, Gontier, or Gunthard, of 

Mans, a monk of Battle-abbey, 

archdeacon of Salisbury, abbot of 

Thorney, iii. 421; his character 

and epitaph, 442; his death, iv. 

50. 
Guntran, king of the Franks at 

Orleans, i. 115; ii. 283. 
Gurth, son of Earl Godwin, i. 482, 

487. 
Guthlac, saint, his life, ii. 86—95; 

his apparifion, 102. 



Guy, bishop of Amiens, his poem 
on the battle of Hastings, i. 492, 
493; ii. 17; attends Queen Ma- 
tilda to England, ii. 17. 

Guy, brother of Bohemond, his 
treachery at the siege of Durazzo, 
iii. 388, 389; falls sick, 390. 

Guy Bollein, a knight of the Cor- 
bonnais, and his wife Hodierna, i. 
428. 

Guy, of Burgundy, son of William 
count of Burgundy, i. 373; iii. 
464 ; archbishop of Vienna, i. 
373; pope, under the name of 
Calixtus II., iii. 465. 

Guy, son of Reynold count of Bur- 
gundy, i. 149; ii. 404; Duke 
'NVilii^iai gives liim Vernon and 
Brionne, ii. 404; revolts, and is 
defeated at Vales-dunes, i. 149 — 
151; ii. 167, 405, 465; besieged in 
Brionne, 405; surrenders after a 
three years' siege, 491. 

Guy, count of Chateau-Fort, uncle 
of Guy Troussel, iii. 78. 

Guy of Clermont; is at the battle 
of Bremule, iii. 482; taken pri- 
soner there, 484; dies in prison 
at Rouen, 485. 

Guy d'Etampes, called Guiumar the 
Breton, bishop of Mans, iii. 228; 
iv. 81 ; his death, iv. 172. 

Guy, son of Robert Guiscard, joins 
the first crusade, iii. 112, 134. 

Guy, or Guiard, d'Harcourt, bishop 
of Lisieux, iv. 26.3, 266. 

Guy of Mantes, squire of Hugh de 
Grentemesnil, becomes a monk at 
St. Evroult, ii. 249. 

Guy Mauvoisin, retiring to Paci at- 
tacks the partisans of Henry I., 
iii. 478, 479; leagues with Wa- 
le ran de Meulan against the 
king, iv. .68. 

Guy de Merlerault, bishop of 
Lisieux, iv. 261, 262. 

Guy, count of Ponthieu, made pri- 
soner by the Normans in 1 054, i. 
150; ii. 349, 407—409; set at 
liberty, i. 152; his death, iii. 326; 



GEXEKAL INDEX. 



313 



cal!ed the count d'Abbeville, 
ibid. 

Guy, count of Ponthieu, son of Wil- 
liam Talvas, iv. 136. 

Guy, son of Hugh Paganus, ii, 238. 

Guy de la Roche, in 1047 sells to 
King William his strongholds of 
La Roche and Veteuil, iii. 209. 

Guy the Red, killed in a joust, wear- 
ing red colours, ii. 507. | 

Guv the Red, count of Rochefort, \ 
iii. 425. I 

Guy de Sable, attends the Empress 
Matilda to England, iv. 212. 

Guy, abbot of St. Josse, i. 476 — 
477. 

Guy, abbot of St. Wandrllle, ii. 152; 
iv. 241. 

Guy, bishop of Soissons, ii. 159. 

Guy de Trois-Fontaines, abbot .of 
Citeaux, iii. 47. 

Guy Troussel, nephew of Guy 
count de Chateau- Fort, takes the 
cross in 1096, iii. 78; makes his 
escape from Antioch, 128. 

Habits of the court of Robert Curt- 
hose, ii. 477, 478; iii. 9. 

Huchet, or Haget, Robert de, and 
note on this family, iii. 453. 

Haigrold, a Danish king, ii. 159, 
299. 

Haimon-aux-Detits revolts against 
King William, ii. 404. 

Haimon, viscount of Dol, father 
of Gervase the Breton, iii. 
392. 

Haimon, duke of Ponthieu, i. 472, 
473. 

Haimon of Falaise, owes his ele- 
vation to Henry I., iii. 324. 

Haimon, a monk, the scholar of 
Gerbert, i. 144. 

Haimon de Prunelai, described as 
Icgitimits eques, iii. 421. 

Hainault, the people of, ii. 166. 

Hainault, see Baldwin count of. 

Hales, or Sherififhales, Stafford- 
shire ; the church and tithes 
given to St. Evrouk, ii. 255. 



Halfdene, a Danish king, ii. 34, 
96. 

Halis, king of the Medes, iii. 397 ; 
liberates some crusaders given 
up to him, 401, 402. 

Hamel, see Notre Dame de. 

Hamon, see Haimon. 

Harcourt, see Guy, William, Philip 
Robert, de. 

Hardicanute, king, i. 146 ; ii. 24, 
37, 161, 164. 

Hardouin, a knight, ii. 315. 

Hardouin the Lombard, ii. 163. 

Harenc, see Anthony, Humfrey, 
Ralph, Simon. 

Harenc, castle of, near Antioch, iii, 
109, 113, 115, 243. 

Harfager, see Harold. 

Harlequin, family of, an apparition, 
ii. 514, and note. 

Harleve, concubine of Robert 
count of Evreux and archbishop 
of Rouen, ii. 160. 

Harold I., king of England, ii. 37. 

Harold H., king of England, i. 153; 
ii. 1, 17, 167, 171, 357, 412, 413 ; 
son of Earl Godwin, i. 153, &c ; 
visits Normandy, 458 ; does hom- 
age to the duke, and accompanies 
him in an expedition to Brittany, 
459 ; his portrait and character, 
460, 482 ; betrothed to Agatha, 
the duke's daughter, ii. 182 ; 
marries Edith (or Edgiva), i. 461 ; 
ii. 18 ; usurps the throne, i. 458 ; 
is crowned by Stigand, 460 ; col- 
lects a fleet and guai'ds the sea, 
464 ; defeats the Danes at Stam- 
ford bridge, 480 ; returns victo- 
rious to London, 481 ; prepares 
to fight the Normans, 482 ; de- 
feated and slain at the battle of 
Hastings, 483—488 ; il 242 ; iii. 
251. 

Hai'old Hardraade, king of Norway, 
his invasion of England, i. 464, 
480, 483, 485. Ordericus has 
called this king, Harold Harfaa- 
ger. 

Harpin sells the city of Bourgcs to 



344 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Philip I., and goes on the cru- 
sade, iii. 289 ; besieged and made 
prisoner at Eamula, 302, 303 ; 
his liberation, 305 ; returns by 
vv-ay of Constantinople, visits 
Pope Paschal, and becomes a 
monk at Cluni, 306. 

Harptree, Somersetshire ; the castle 
held by William Fitz-John, 
against King Stephen, iv. 202. 

Harvest, time of, at Tripoli in 
Syria, iii. 106. 

Haspres, near Valenciennes, ii. 149, 
150, 297. 

Hasting, the Dane, his invasions 
and "pillages, i. 379, 381 ; ii. 296, 
310,456. 

Hastings, battle of, i. 480, 482— 487 ; 
ii. 50, 107, 167, 242, 298, 412, 
444 ; iii. 187 ; Hvimphrey de 
Tilleul made governor of the 
castle at Hastings, ii. 20. 

Haton, bishop of Viviers, attends 
the council of Rheims, iv. 4 ; 
attacks the privileges of Cluni, 
16. 

Haute-Bi-uyerre, ii. 190 ; Isabel, a 
nun at. 

Hautrive, near Alen9on, church of 
St. Martin founded, i. 391, 397. 

Hauteville, i. 412 ; Tancred de. 

Hautpoui, Peter Raymond de. 

Havise, countess of Aumale, iii. 
451 ; iv. 20. 

Havise, daughter of Gb-oie, i. 390, 
397, 400, 401 ; man-ies Robert 
de Grentemesnil, 395, 400 ; and 
afterv/ards William, son of Ro- 
bert, the archbisho]), 395, 402. 

Havise, daughter of Hugh de Gren- 
temesnil, ii. 505, 506. 

Havise, Avife of Himiphrey Harenc, 
ii. 237. 

Havise, see Avicia. 

Hegen Huvel, see Huvel. 

Hcgesippus, his Ecclesiastical His- 
tory, i. 248. 

Helena, mother of Constantine, i. 
101, 328; concubine of Coustan- 
tius ChloraLS ii. 139. 



Helenopolis founded, i. 102. 

Helgo, prior of Caen, afterwards 
abbot of St. Ouen at Rouen, iii. 
37, 38. 

Helias, see Elias. 

Heliogabalus, emperor, i, 320. 

Helisende, vidame of Chartres, 
entertains Innocent H., iv. 128, 
vote. 

Hellespont, i. 226. 

Helraechis, assassinates Alboin king 
of the Lombards, ii. 1 53. 

Helpo, a chief of the Saxons, i. 139, 
140. 

Helvise, countess of Evrenx, daugh- 
ter of AYilliar-' cou»t de Xevers, 
ii. 475,494; iii. 419, 420. 

Helvise, sister of William Pantulf, 
ii. 208. 

Hengist and Horsa arriA'c in Bri- 
' tain, i. 494; ii. 56, 142. 

Henry I. king of England, son of 
William and Matilda, i. 441 ; born 
in 1068, ii. 17; his education, 
ibid.; quarrels with his brother 
Robert, 108, 109; at his father's 
death-bed, 402 ; his bequest from 
the king, 414; receives his bless- 
ing, 182; Duke Robert cedes to 
him the Coteniin, 43 a ; governs it 
firmly, 498; receives knighthood 
from Lanfranc, 431; aids Duke 
Robert in (pelling an insurrection 
at Rouen, 459, 502; disputes Avith 
his brother William Rufas, 498 ; 
occupies Domfront, iii,, 1, 27, 73; 
besieged in Mount St. Michael, ii. 
520; takes refuge in the Vexin, 
521; in arms against his brothers 
and Robert de Bel sme, iii. 27; 
commands for William Rufus 
against Philip I,, 208; is hunting 
with him when he is killed, 264; 
seizes the tower at Winchester 
and the royal treasure, 264, 265; 
hastens to London, 267; ascends 
the throne and is croAvned at West- 
minster, the 5th August, 1100, i. 
154; ii, 168, 267; mames Edith 
(or Matilda) of Scotland, iii. 13 



GENERAL INDEX. 



545 



270, 271; refuses to interfere in 
Normandy, 275; his alliance with 
the count of ISfeine, 276; enter- 
tains Louis of France at his 
court, 352; rejects the over- 
tures of Bertrave against him, 
353 ; the English malcontents 
oifer the crown to Eobert Curt- 
hose, 277 ; the Normans offer 
the duchy to Henry, 279 ; the 
counsel of the earl of Mellent, 
283, 284; Eobert in arms in Eng- 
land, 285 ; treaty between the 
brothers, 285, 286 ; his severity to 
the conspirators, 325, 329, 331, 
332 ; cites Eobert de Belesme to 
appear in his court, 330 ; besieges 
his castle of Arundel, 332 ; claims 
from the duke, in virtue of the 
treaty, that Eobert de Belesme 
should be outlawed, 333 ; be- 
sieges Bridgnorth, which sur- 
renders, 334, 336; lays siege to 
Shrewsbury, 336; Eobert de Bel- 
esme submits and retires to Nor- 
mandy, 337 ; gives refuge in Eng- 
land to Serlo bishop, and Ealph 
abbot, of Seez, 349; gives the 
earldom of Leicester to Eobert 
de Beaimiont, 34 ; attaches to his 
party several Norman lords, 330, 
355, 356; he negotiates with Eo- 
bert Curthose, 326 ; the death of 
JMagnus king of Norway relieves 
his apprehensions, 351, note ; seizes 
that king's treasure at Lincoln, 
350, 351; in 11 04, he crosses over 
to Normandy, 356; has a confer- 
ence with his brother at Dom front, 
356, 357 ; iv. 25 ; makes peace with 
him, iii. 357; returns to England, 
ibid. ; recalled to Normandy by the 
malcontents, iv. 24, 25 ; lands at 
Bai-fleur, iii. 360, 371 ; spends Eas- 
ter at Carentan, and hears a ser- 
mon from the bishop of Seez, 360, 
363; suffers the bishop to crop his 
hair, 364; he besieges and burns 
Bayeux, 371; Caen submits, 372; 
iv. 25- fails in his attemps on Fa- 



laise, 372; treats fruitlessly with 
his brother at Cinteaux, 373; 
destroys the fortifications at the 
abbey of Dive, 374, 375; declines 
avisit from Bohemond, 365 ; sends 
his ultimatum to Duke Eobert,37 7, 
378; on its being rejected, figlus 
the battle of Tinchebrai, in wliich 
the duke is made prisoner, i. 154; 
iii. 260, 375, 376, 379, 380; iv. 
25, 26; Falaise submits, iii. 381; 
the king takes the duke to Eouen, 
382; holds a council at Lisieux, 
383; destroys unlicensed castles, 
385; sends Eobert Curthose and 
his other prisoners to England, 
386; assumes the government of 
the duchy, his administration and 
prosperity, 386, 431; commits 
William, the duke's son, to the 
careof Eiias de Saint-Saens, 381, 
382, 431; employs Eobert de 
Beauchamp to carry him off, 
opposes his marriage with Si- 
bylla of Anjou, 432, 433 ; is 
reconciled with Eanulf Flam- 
bard, and restores him to his 
see of Durham, 416; gives the 
county of Mortain to Stephen 
de Blois, ii. 183; takes measures 
for the pacification of Normandy, 
iii. 411; holds a meeting of the 
barons at Falaise, 412; a council 
at Lisieux, ib. ; gives the bishopric 
of Eochester to Ealph d' Escures, 
ii. 465; invites Geoffrey, dean of 
Mans, to England, and appoints 
him archbishop of Eouen, iii. 
408 ; the king's rupture with Fulk 
of Anjou, who looks for succour 
from Louis of France, 441; Henry 
fortifies Nonancourt and Sorrel, 
he arrests Eobert de Belesme 
at Bonneville, 442; while envoy 
from the king of France, iv. 4; 
he spends the feast of the Purifi- 
cation, 1113, at St. Evroult, 439; 
besieges and takes Alen9on, 442; 
Fulk of Anjou meets him there, 
and betroths his daughter to the 



346 



GENERAL IXDEX. 



king's son, 443; doing homage 
for the cotinty of Maine, ibid.; 
makes peace with Louis VI. at 
Gisors, 444; tlie suzerainty of 
Belesme, Maine, and Brittany 
confirmed to Henry; he besieges 
and biurns the fortress of Belesme, 
445; in 1118, he takes the castle 
of St. Clare-sur-Epte, ii. 226; iii. 
446 ; and others, to awe the free- 
booters, 447; several Norman 
lords revolt, taking the part of 
William, the heir of Robert Curt- 
hose, 449, 450; the king arrests the 
count d' Eu and Hugh de Gournai 
at Rouen, 450; he garrisons Bures 
inBrai, ibid. ; i*ecovers Plessis, 452, 
453; comes toAlen^on, and gives 
that place and Seez to Theobald 
count de Blois, 454,455; the king 
marches against Laigle, which 
Richer de Laigle had garrisoned 
with French, 456, 457 ; recalled to 
Rouen, he ravages Brai and be- 
sieges la Ferte there, 458; besieges 
and burns Neubourg, ibid. ; is pre- 
sent at a synod at Rouen, 459 ; his 
expedition against Laigle, 461; 
is defeated under the walls of 
Alen§on by the count of Anjou, 
463; revolt of his son-in-law, Eus- 
tace de Breteuil, 465; the king 
besieges Breteuil, 466, 467; while 
at Falaise, he razes the fortified 
mansion of Reginald de Baliol, 
468 ; fortifies and garrisons Noyon 
against the French, 470; la 
Ferte-Fresnel, a stronghold of 
freebooters, near St. Evroult, 
surrenders to him, 472, 473; 
the king offers peace to the 
count of Anjou, 474 ; his 
son William maiTies the count's 
daughter, 474; undertakes an 
expedition to punish the rebels 
and burns Pont-saint-Pierre, 475; 
besieges and burns the city of 
Evreux, iii. 476, 478, 480; iv. 8, 
18, 252; on the 20th August, 
1119, betakes his position and 



hears mass at Noyon, iii. 480; 
burns the environs of Etrepagni, 
ibid. ; gives battle to Louis le Gros 
at Bremule, i. 155; iii. 481 — 486; 
keeps the standard of Louis as a 
trophy, 485; sends his natural son 
Richard to reinforce the garrison 
of Breteuil, 489 ; marches into the 
territory of Ouche, and the insur- 
gent barons submit, 49 1 ; returns 
to Rouen, ibid.; permits his bi- 
shops to attend the council of 
Rheims, iv. 1 ; Louis VI. prefers 
complaints against him, 5, 6; the 
archbishop of Rouen defends him, 
6; the pope promises to mediate, 
10; Henry pardons his daughter 
Juliana, and Eustace de Breceuil 
her husband, 19 ; makes peace 
with Amauri de Montfort, Hugh 
de Gournai the count d'Aumale 
and other rebel lords, 19 — 20; 
his conference with Pope Calixtus 
II., at Gisors, 22 — 28 ; he justifies 
his conduct towards his brother 
Robert Curthose, 24 — 26 ; in 1 120, 
he prepares to return to England, 
i. 155; iv. 32; embarks at Bar- 
fleur on the 25th November, and 
lands safely the next morning, 33 ; 
his grief at hearing of the ship- 
wreck ofthe Blanche-Nef., in which 
his son and many young lords 
had embarked, 37 ; he marries 
Adelaide de Louvain, 43 ; accepts 
the resignation of Roger du Sap, 
abbot of St. Evroult, 53- -55 ; con- 
firms the election of Warin, his 
successoi', 56; makes a progress 
to York, 55; in 1123, the counts 
of Evreux and Meulan revolt 
against him, i. 155; iv. 61, 62; he 
assembles an army at Rouen, and 
marches against them, 62 ; takes 
or burns Montfort, Brionne and 
Pontaudemer, i. 156; iv. 62, 63, 
67, 77; during the siege of Pont- 
audemer, sends John bishop of 
Lisieux to the funeral of Serlo, 
bishop of Secz, 66 ; his hasty march 



GENERAL INDEX. 



347 



to Gisors, 70; suspends hostilities 
during the winter, 71; at Kouen, 
he sentences the rebel lords, his 
prisoners, 75; razes the tower of 
Vatteville, 77 ; obtains the surren- 
der of Beaumont, 78 ; is present at 
the consecration of the cathedral 
of Seez, 84, 85; at the synod at 
Rouen in 1128,103, 105; in 1129 
marries his daughter Matilda, to 
Geoffrey of Anjou, 105, 106; 
David king of Scotland accuses 
Geoffrey de Clinton of treason, 
in king Henry's court, iii. 16; re- 
ceives his nephew Theobald de 
Blois at Vernon, ii. 320; has a 
conference with Innocent II. in 
1131, at Chartres, iv. 128; insur- 
rection of the Welsh in 1 134, 144 ; 
the king prepares an expedition 
iigainst them from Normandy, 
145; he is detamed by his quar- 
rels with his son-in-law Geoffrey 
Plantagenet, 146 ; employs the 
troops to garrison Conches, and 
at their head reduces Alen9on 
and Almenesches, fortifies Ar- 
gentan, 147; returns to the castle 
of Lions near Rouen, 148; is 
seized with illness, his last hours, 
death and funeral, i. 157; iii. 346; 
iv. 149 — 150 ; his career and 
character traced, ii. 431 ; his vir- 
tues and good actions, iii, 267, 
268,386; iv. 151,152; his deme- 
rits, 386; his greatness, 327, 328; 
called "the Lion of Justice" in 
Merlin's prophecies, 102 ; his 
scholarship (literatus rex), iii. 352, 
and note; esteem of Louis le 
Gros for him, 355; prosperity of 
England under his govern- 
ment, 286 ; his counsellors, 
270 ; his favourites, 328 ; his de- 
tention of Rol)ert de Moubrai 
in prison for thirty-four years, ii. 
580; his chapel royal, iii. 33; 
Everard son of Roger de Mont- 
gomery, and William son of 
Roger bishop of Coutances, were 



in the number of his chaplains, 
iii. 33; iv. 36; bishops and 
abbots appointed by Henry I., 
iii. 268, 269, 438; his attachment 
to Ouen bishop of Evreux, iv. 209 ; 
is a benefactor to the abbey of 
St. Evroult, charters granted to 
that monastery, ii. 192,265; iii. 
440, 444; iv, 56. His wives, Edith 
or Matilda, of Scotland; Ade- 
laide of LouA^ain. His sons by 
Matilda, William and Richard; 
his daughter Matilda, married first 
to the Emperor Henry V. and 
second to Geoftrey, count of An- 
jou, His illegitimate sons, Robert 
of Caen and Gloucester, ii, 473, 
Reynold, iv. 195; his illegitimate 
daughters, Constance or Matiida, 
married to Roscelin de Beaumont, 
iv,146, Juliana, wife of Eustace 
de Breteuil, iii, 346, 466; Ma- 
tilda, wife of Conon, duke of 
Brittany, ii, 105; Matilda, wife of 
Rotrou, count of Perche, iii, 346 ; 
iv. Ill; Sibylla, married to Alex- 
ander king of Scots, iii. 14; one 
of his natural daughters was 
married to Ehas of Saint- Saens, 
382. 
Henry II. king of England, iv. 255, 

256, 257; his birth, iii. 199. 
Henry, son of Henry IL, iv. 256, 
Henry IIL king of England iv, 259, 

261, 
Henry V. king of England, iv, 267. 
Henry de Blois, son of Stephen 
count de Blois, a monk of Cluni, 
abbot of Glastonbury, ii, 182; iii. 
346; bishop of Winchester, iii. 
346; iv.213; elected archbishop of 
Canterbury, iv. 173; is opposed to 
laying siege to Bedford, 195; pro- 
poses his nephew, Henry de Sulli, 
for'the bishopric of Salisbury, 213; 
not succeeding, leaves his brother 
King Stephen's court in anger, 
ibid.; in 1141, he declares openly 
for the empress, and receives her 
as queen at Winchester 219. 



S48 



GEXERAL INDE: 



Henry L, son of Hugh the Great, 
duke of Burgundy, i. 139, 140; 
ii. 341,342, 346. 

Henry, son of liobert I., duke of 
Burgundy, iii. 347; iv. 135. 

Henry {read Hugh) duke of Bur- 
gundy, Elias de Saint-Saens so- 
licits his support for William of 
Normandy, iii. 432. 

Henry, prior of Canterbmy, ahbot 
of Battle, ii. 3. 

Henry, son of Hugh count de 
Crepi, iii. 77. 

Henry, son of David king of Scots, 
iii. 14, 15; he marries Adeline, 
daughter of William de War- 
renne, iv. 205. 

Henry, the Eowler, emperor of Ger- 
many, i. 136, 137; ii. 159, 166. 

Henr}' H., emperor, i. 145; ii. 160. 

Henry III., emperor, i, 147, 150, 
371, 417, 431. 

Henry IV., emperor, i. 154, 372, 
431; ii. 167, 350, 352, 353, 360, 
361; iii. 61, 196, 373. [Ordericus 
is mistaken in giving him, for 
wife, the daughter of Eustace 
count of Boulogne, ii. 12, 351.] 

Henry V., empci-or, i. 154, 158; 
iii. 196, 197, 198, 373,430,438, 
460; iv. 11; excommunicated at 
the council of Rheims, iv. 17; his 
death, i. 154; iv. 81; married 
Matilda daughter of Henry I., 
ii). 199, 373, 434, 435. 

Henry count d' Eu, ii. 356, 450 ; 
iv. 86 ; at the battle of Bremule, 
482. 

Henry, son of Walkelin cleFerrieres, 
has Tutbury castle from the Con- 
queror, ii. 50. 

Henry, a clerk, son of Baldwin V. 
count of Flanders, ii. 59, 347. 

Henry I., king of France, i. 148, 150, 
152, 153, 424, 478; iii. 160, 167, 
347, 348, 399, 400, 407, 491; 
iv. 135. 

Henry son of Louis VI., king of 
France, iii. 424. 

Henry duke of Lorraine, a candi- 



date for the empire in 1125, iv. 

32. &c. 
Heniy de la Pommeray, iv. 71, 72 ; 

a partisan of King Stephen, iv. 

171. 
Henry, abbot of St. John d' Angeli, 

a relation of Henry, abbot of 

Peterborough, iv. 50. 
Henry de Sulli, nephew of Iving 

Stephen, abbot of Fecamp, iv. 

213 ; a candidate for the bishop- 
ric of Salisbury, ibid. 
Henry earl of Warwick, son of 

Roger de Beaumont, ii. 19, 179, 

459, 439 ; iii. 34 ; his son Robert 

du Neubourg, iii. 458. 
Heraclea, i. 98. 

Heracloonus, emperor, i. 120; ii. 147. 
Heraclius of Alexandria, i. 95. 
Heraclius, emperor, i. 118, 119; ii. 

145, 146, 147. 
Heraclius son of the Emperor Con- 

stantius, i. 122 ; ii. 148. 
Heraclius Constantine, i. 120, 121 ; 

ii. 147. 
Heraclius, brother of Constantino 

IIL, i. 354, 355. 
Heraclius, disciple of St. Paul, i. 

289. 
Heraclius, standard- bearer of the 

bisiiop of Puy in the crusade, 

iii. 111. 
Herault, the river, ii. 247. 
Herbert de Lisieux, iv. 72. 
Herbert bishop of Lisieux, i. 442 ; ii 

117—119. 
Herbert, a priest, of Lisieux, ii. 118. 
Herbert Losauge, bishop of Thetford 

(Norwich), iii. 201, 202. 
Herbert, count of Maine, surnamed 

Eveille-chien, L 390, 448 ; ii. 73, 

480. 
Herbert II., count of Maine, i. 448; 

ii. 74, 77. 
Herbert de Montreuil, a monk of 

St. Evroult, accompanies abbot 

Thierri in his pilgrimage, i, 419, 

420. 
Herbert, abbot of St. Evroult in 

1214, iv. 258. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



849 



HerlDert, novice and scholar at St. 
E\Toult, i. 388. 

Herbert de Serans, or le Bouteiller, 
i. 457, 470. 

Herbert, abbot of Shrewsbury, iv. 50. 

Herbert count de Troyes, i. 141. 

Herbert count de Vermandois, i. 
13. 

Herbert 11. count de Peronne or 
Vermandois, i. 136; ii. 157. 

Herbert III. count de Vermandois, 
i. 141. 

Herbei-t, see Nicholas. 

Herbold, abbot of St. Judoc, ii. 474. 

Hereford, the earldom of given to 
William Fitz-Osberne, ii, 47 ; his 
son Roger succeeds to it, 60, 190; 
an earthquake in the county 
A. D. 1119, iv. 48 ; the city held 
by Geoffrey Talbot, 201 ; be- 
sieged by King Stephen, 203. 

Heremburge, daughter of Giroie, i. 
390, 395. 

Heretic, Robert the, ii. 208. 

Herfast, father of Osberne de 
Crepon, i. 442 ; ii. 403. 

Herfred de Roiville, i. 398. 

Herimar, abbot of St. Remi at 
Rheims, i. 151 ; ii. 186. 

Herleve, see Harleve. 

Herluin, interpreter at the siege of 
Antioch, iii. 135. 

Herluin, a country knight, takes 
charge of the funeral of William 
the Conqueror, ii. 419. 

Herluin, founder and abbot of Bee, 
i. 383, 385, 386 ; ii. 40, 42, 67, 
116, 117. 

Herluin de Conteville, marries 
Harleve, mother of William the 
Conqueror, ii. 415. 

Herluin, abbot of Glastonbury, be- 
fore a monk of Caen, iii. 259. 

Herluin, chaplain to the bishop of 
Lisieux in 1099, iii. 245. 

Herluin, count of Ponthieu or Mon- 
treuil, ii. 159. 

Herluin, chancellor of Hugh the 
Great, and abbot of St. Pierre- 
en-Pont, iii. 300, 303, 306, 307. 



Hermagoras, i. 291. 

Herman, son of Tancred de Haute- 

\alle, i. 412. 
Herman de Cannes, at the first 

crusade, iii. 83. Cf. Herman de 

Hauteville. 
Herman count of Namur, brother 

of Frederick bishop of Lieges, 

iv. 3. 
Herman, cellarer of St. Evroulc, i. 

433. 
Herman, prior of St. Evi-oult, ii. 522. 
Hennas (not Hermes), author of the 

book called The Pastor, i. 90. 
Hermenegild, king of the Goths, i. 

116; ii. 283. 
Hermenric, see Ennenric. 
Hermes, Saint, ii. 364. 
Hermit, see Peter the, and note on the 

name. 
Hermogenes, the magician, i. 176-7. 
Hermon, patriarch of Jerusalem, i. 89. 
Herod Agi-ippa, i. 85, 175, 179, 180, 

203, 238. 
Herod the Great, i. 11, 85, 110. 
Herod the Tetrarch, i. 11, 84, 85. 
Herodias, i. 11. 

Herodian the Grammarian, ii. 40. 
Hersande, daughter of Peter de 

IMaule, ii. 220, 224, 225. 
Herve, the Breton, killed at the siege 

of Sainte-Suzanne, ii. 381. 
Hervc', the Bi-eton, bishop of Ely, iii. 

448; a letter written under his 

dictation, iii. 323, 331. 
Herve de Dodeman is at the first 

crusade, iii. 99. 
Herve de Gisors, son of Paganus, 

iv. 71 ; taken prisoner at the battle 

of Bremule, iii. 485. 
Herve, chaplain of Hugh bishop of 

Lisieux, ii. 209. 
Herve de Montfort, standard-bearer 

to the count of Maine, iii. 229. 
Hesdin, see Arnold de. 
Heudicourt, near Etrepagni, i. 457, 

469. 
Heugle\ille, ii. 264, 265. 
Heugieville, see Walter de, &c. 
Heugon, lord of Moutreuil and 



350 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Echaufour, i. 390, 391, 398,436; 

ii. 187. 
Hexham, Northumberland, ii. 29. 
Hiemois, the, see Exmes. 
Hide of laud, ii. 196, 255—257, 

407, and 7iote. 
Hierapolis, i. 118, 252, 256. 
Hilary, Saint, bishop of Poictiers, i. 

102, 139; ii. 141, 340. 
Hilary, Saint, pope, i. 1 12, 335 ; ii.l43. 
Hildcbald, see Idilvadus. 
Hildebert, bishop of Mans, arch- 
bishop of Tours, 72; ii. 168; iii. 

227, 234, 276, 413. 
Hildebrand, king of the Lombards, 

ii. 154. 
Hildebrand, Pope, see Gregory VH. 
Hildegarde, countess of Poictiers, 

her complaint to the council of 

Rheims, iv. 7. 
Hildehoc, king of the Lombards, ii. 

153. 
Hilderic, king of the Vandals, i. 1 14 ; 

ii. 144. 
Hildiarde, sister of Giroie, i. 390. 
Hildiarde, wife of Charlemagne, ii. 

134. 
Hildulf, Saint, archbishop of Rouen, 

ii. 145, 284. 
Hilgot, abbot of Marmoutier, ii. 2. 
Hilibecs, a nickname given to the 

troops of Geoffrey Plantagenet. 

See Guiribecs. 
Hilbi-ee (formerly Hildburg-eye), 

Chester, church of, given to the 

abbey of St. Evroult, ii. 257, 443. 
Hiltrude, wife of William Giroie, i. 

343. 
Hippolj^tus, Saint, bishop, i. 12, 93, 

323. 
Hodierna, wife of Guy Bollein, i. 428. 
Hodierna, daughter of David I., 

king of Scots, iii. 15. 
Hoel v., duke of Brittany, ii. 76. 
Hoel, bishop of Mans, ii. 71,72, 168, 

208, 452,481, 482. 
Hogs, pasture of, in the forests, i. 

205 ; salted, a donation of to the 

monks of St. Evroult by Henry L, 

iii. 440. 



Hogue, la. King Stephen lands there, 

iv. 174, 175. 
Holderness, earldom of, given by the 

Conqueror to Eudes of Cham- 
pagne, ii. 49. 
Holland, Florence count of. 
Honorius, Emperor, i. 106, 108, 333; 

ii. 141, 142. 
Honorius, archbishop of Canterbury, 

ii. 147. 
Honorius L, Pope, i. 119, 122, 170, 

350; ii. 145, 146. 
Honorius II., Pope, (Lambert of 

Ostia), i. 373; ii. 72, 169; iv. 80, 

85, 172; receives a visit from 

Robert Burdet, iv. 115; his death, 

i. 156; iv. 127. 
Honorius III., Pope, iv. 259. 
Honorius, patriarch of Constanti- 
nople, i. 122. 
Horace, i. 403, 416. 
Hospital for pilgrims on the frontiers 

of Hungary, i. 419. 
Hospital, the, for sick and lepers at 

St. Evroult, i. 447. 
Hospitality of the monks of Bee, ii. 

63. 
Hormaheva, see Orm's Head. 
Hormesta,Orosius's history so called, 

i. 1, 2, and note; ii. 141. 
Hormisdas, Pope, i. 338, 339; il 

144, 284. 
Horsa, i. 494; ii. 56, 142. 
Hotot, near Dieppe, ii. 264. 
Howel-ap-Grono, lord of Tegengle, 

a Welsh prince, ii. 449, note. 
Howel-ap-Conan, brother of Rhys- 

ap-0\ven, prince of South Wales, 

ii. 449, note. 
Hubert d'Anciens, i. 399. 
Hubert, son of Fulk dean of Evreux, 

ii. 185. 
Hubert de Montreuil, a monk of St. 

Evroult, i. 435, 443. 
Hubert de St. Suzanne, viscount of 

Maine, i. 448, 450; ii. 377, 379, 

381. 
Hubert, son of Hubert, the viscount, 

ii. 382. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



351 



Ilubold, musician, a scholar of Ger- 
bert, i. 143. 

Ilugli of Amiens, a monk of Cluni, 
abbot of Reading, archbishop of 
Rouen, his acts, iv. 107, 254; liis 
death, 134, 145, 149, 150, 209, 
214, 220. 

Hii<;h Asinus, a vassal of William 
i'itz-Osberne ; he held lands in 
Herefordshire, ii. 187. 

Hujih d' Avranches, or Hugh Lupus, 
carl of Chester, son of Richard 
Goz,viscount of Avranches ; comes 
over with the Conqueror, and re- 
ceives the earldom of Chester, ii. 
47, 242, 380, 444; engaged in 
hostilities with the Welsh, 47; 
contemplates sharing the fortunes 
of Odo, bishop of Bayeux, at Rome, 
373; sells his fiefs in Normandy 
to Henry, afterwards king, 431; 
adheres to William Rufus, 436; 
becomes a partisan of Henry, 498 ; 
deserts him in 1091, 520; cmelty 
to his brother-in law the count 
d'Eu, iii. 21, 22 ; commands troops 
of William Rufus in Wales, 208, 
218; resists a descent of Magnus 
king of Norway, 218; his death 
in the habit of a monk, 283; foun- 
der of St. Werburgh's, Chester, 
where he is interred, ii. 447; iii. 
282; his character, ii. 242; his 
vices, 47, 48; gives churches and 
lands to the abbey of St. Evroult, 
ii. 257; his wife Ermentrude de 
Clermont, 48. 

Hugh, bishop of Bayeux, ii. 187 ; son 
of Ralph, count d'lvri, 416; bro- 
ther of John archbishop of Rouen, 
iii. 25. 

Hugh de Rocheland, one of the low 
persons elevated by Henry I., iii. 
328. 

Hugh I., duke of Burgundy, ii. 347; 
iv. 135; becomes a monk at Climi, 
136. 

Hugh n., duke of Burgundy, son 
and successor of Eudes Borel, iv. 
136. 



Hugh Botterel wounds Baldwin 

count of Flanders, iii. 451. 
Hugh Bunel (son of Robert d'Igi), 

the assassin of Mabel de Montgo- 

meri, ii. 210, 455; takes refuge in 

Apulia, goes to Constantinople 

and Palestine, iii. 170. 
Hugh Capet, i. 141—143, 389, 

390, 416; ii. 160, 309, 342, 345; 

Ordericus sometimes calls him 

Hugh the Great. 
Hugh I., count of Champagne, ii. 

182; iii. 6, 367; iv. 2. 
Hugh, the chanter, a monk of St. 

Evroult, i. 388. 
Hugh, a copyist, monk of St. Ev- 
roult, i. 406. 
Hugh de Chateau-Neuf,ii. 109, 179, 

195; iv. 61, 72, 74, 78. 
Hugh, abbot of Cluni, i. 423, 436; 

ii. 70; iii. 435, 436; iv. 13, 133. 
Hugh, abbot of Cluni, appointed in 

the place of Pons, iv. 45. 
Hugh de Crece, son of Guy the Red, 

iii. 428. 
Hugh, the Englishman, a monk of 

St. Evroult, his eloquence and 

worth, ii. 206. 
Hugh d'Envermeu, brother of Tho- 

rold bishop of Bayeux, iii. 206. 
Hugh le Porcene, at the siege of 

Antioch, iii. 205, 
Hugh de Grace, prior of Maule, ii. 

219, 226, 234—236. 
Hugh, son of Giroie, i. 340; acci- 
dentally slain, 394. 
Hugh de Gisors, son of Paganus, a 

partisan of Henry I., iv. 70. 
Hugh de Gournai, iii. 21, 450, 453, 

457, 458; iv. 20, 151, 178. 
Hugh the Great, duke of Orleans, i. 

138, 339 ; ii. 157, 159, 300—303, 

306, 309,338—341. 
Hugh the Great, count de Verman- 

dois, or de Crepi, son of Henry 

I., ii. 348; in the first crusade, 

iii. 77, 82, 83, 90, 99, 10], 136, 

140, 149. 
Hugh de Grentemesnil, founder of 

St. Evroult, i. 151, 384—387, 401, 



352 



GENERAL INDEX. 



404, 416, 431,441, 450, 455, 456, 
484;ii. 5,20,49,249,258,434,505; 
his death and epitaph, iv. 54, 55. 

Hugh, son of Hugh de Grentemesnil, 
ii. 426; buried at St. Evroult, iv. 
56. 

Hugh, son of Joubert de Heugle- 
ville, a monk of St Evrouh, ii. 
268. 

Hugh, the chanter, a monk of Ju- 
nii'ges, transferred to St. Evroult, 
ii. 388, 406. 

Hugh de Laci, iii. 21. 

Hugh, son of Azo, marquis of Ligu- 
ria, ii. 481 — 484. 

Hugh, bishop of Lisieux, i, 387, 392, 
400, 417, 424, 425,432,434, 462, 
466; ii. 46, 61, 208; he finishes 
and consecrates the cathedral at 
Lisieux, 119; his last hours, death, 
burial, and epitaph, 119 — 121 ; 
the canons and officers of the 
church appointed by him, 122 ; 
his apparition to the priest of 
Bonneval, 514. 

Hugh de LongucA'ille, a priest in- 
sulted in the cathedi'al of Rouen, 
iv. 31. 

Hugh, abbot of Loulai, ii. 209. 

Hugh, son of Louis VI., iii. 424. 

Hugh I., count of Maine, ii. 74. 

Hugh II., countof Maine, i. 448. 

Hugh, son of Herbert Eveille-chien, 
ii. 73, 74. 

Hugh de Medave, ii. 146, 443. 

Hugh, count de Meulan, ii. 489 ; 
becomes a monk at Bee, i. 383. 

Hugh de Montfort, i. 149, 450, 484; 
ii. 5, 11. 

Hugh de Montfort, husband of Ade- 
line, daughter of Robert count de 
Meulan, iv. 61 — 63, 72; is made 
prisoner at Bourgteroude, 74; his 
^ong captivity, 78. 

Hugh de Montgomeri, son of Roger, 
ii. 168. 

Hugh de Montgomeri, son of Roger 
and Mabel, ii. 194, 195, 197,487; 
iii. 21, 218, 219; succeeds his 
father in England as earl of 



Shre\\'sbury, ii. 203; iii. 21, 32; 

his death, 218, 219; buried at 

Shrewsbury, 220. 
Hugh de Montpingon, ii. 212, 213, 

506; iii. 233. 
Hugh de Morimont, son of Turkyt^l 

du jSTeuf-Marche, ii. 267. 
Hugh de Moulins perished in the 

shipwreck of the Blanche-Ncf, iv. 

41. 
Hugh de Xonant, ii. 458; iii. 31, 

340, 361, 382. 
Hugh, dean of Orleans, iv. 130, 131. 
Hugh the Poor, son of Robert earl 

of Mellent, iii. 331 ; marries the 

daughter of Simon de Beauchamp, 

iv. i94, 195. 
Hugh Paganus, surnamcd Crassa 

Lingua, ii. 238. 
Hugh du Plessis, iv. 78. 
Hugh du Puiset, iii. 388, 390, 428. 
Hugh, Saint, archbishop of Rouen, 

bishop of Paris andBayeux (abbot 

of Jumieges and St. Wandrille), 

i. 131; ii. 149; iv. 240. 
Hugh II., archbishop of Rouen in 

942, ii. 158; iv. 247. 
Hugh, son of Safred, archdeacon? 

assists at the consecration of the 

abbey-chiu'ch of St. Evroult, iii. 

248. 
Hugh de St. Calais (called also Guy 

d' Etampes), bishop of Mans, iv. 

172, and note. 
Hugh IV., abbot of St. Denys, i. 

434. 
Hugh II., count de Saint-Pol, a cru- 
sader, iii. 80, 95, 99. 
Hugh Sans- Avoir, a crusader, iii. 

367. 
Hugh, bishop of Seez in 1228, iv. 

259. 
Hugh Stavel, of Mantes, ravages 

the E%Tecin, ii. 198. 
Hugh Talbot, has the custody of 

Plessis, iii. 452. 
Huisne, the, ford and bridge of, iii. 

239, 241. 
Humber, the, i. 118; ii. 25, 28. 
Humbert, archbishop of Lyons, at 



GEXEEAL INDEX. 



353 



the council of Rheims, iv. 3, 12; 

persecutes the monks of Ciuni, 

45. 
Humbert, marquis of Susa, count of 

Maurienne, iii. 424. 
Humphrey Harenc, ii. 237. 
Humphrey de Monte Scaglioso, at 

the first crusade, iii. 83. 
Humphrey son of Ealph, a cru- 
sader, iii. 83. 
Humphrey son of Tancred de Hau- 

teville, ii. 412, 438. 
Humphrey, a monk of St. E\TOult, 

i. 388. 
Humphrey, a monk of St. Evroult, 

goes to Apulia, i. 413. 
Humphrey du Tiileul, i. 454; ii. 20, 

98, 443. 
Humphrey de Vielles founds two 

monasteries at Preaux, i. 383; iii. 

33. 
Huneric, king of the Vandals, i. 12; 

ii. 140. 
Hungary, i. 132, 147; iii. 76, 82; 

hospital for pilgrims on the bor- 
ders of, i. 419. 
Huns, invasions of the, i. 104, 105, 

136; ii. 154, 239. 
Huntingdon, ii. 20, 325; earldom of, 

iii. 14. 
Huvel Hegen, a bad forest road near 

Shi-ewsbury, iii. 336, 337, and 

note copied from the French ed.; 

■which correct, — the signification 

being, as Ordericus states, a foul 

way. Evil Veyen ; in Norsk, Uvei. 
Hyginus, Saint, pope, i. 318. 
Hjmenseus, patriarch of Jerusalem, 

i. 84. 
Hypacius, ambassador of Justinian 

to the pope, i. 341. 
Hyrcanians, the, i. 253. 
Hyitacus Adelphius, a king of 

Ethiopia, i. 270, 273 — 275. 

I-Colm-Kill, see lona. 

Ibor. a chief of the Lombards, ii. 
153. 

Iceland, subject to the kings of Nor- 
way, iii. 215. 



Icles, lord of the Mercians, ii. 87. 
Iconium, now Koniah, i. 182, 288; 

iii. 103. 
Idilvadus (read Hildebaldus), arch- 
bishop of Cologne, i. 367. 
Iftikar-Eddaule, see Guinimund. 
Ikanhoe, St. Botolph abbot of. 
Ilbert, father of John of Eheims, ii. 

214. 
Ilbert de Lacy, at the battle of Lin- 
coln, iv. 217; his son Robert de 

Pontcfract, iii. 277, 325. 
Hger Bigot, with Tancred in the first 

crusade, iii. 178, 179. 
Rliers I'Eveque, iii. 441, 473. 
Illiterate priests of Danish race, ii. 

186. 
Illyria, i. 97, 109, 133, 197; iii. 73, 

82, 485. 
Illuminated manuscripts, i. 429 ; ii. 

191. 
Ina, king of Wessex, i. 125. 
India, i 254, 256, 259,262; divided 

into three regions, 265. 
Indians, the, i. 253, 254,263, 278. 
Indulgences granted by William 

archbishop of Rouen, ii. 124. 
Infidels, the, in Spain, iv. 119. 
Ingran, an aged clerk of St. E\TouIt, 

i. 385. 
Inguar, ii. 33, 96. 
Ingulf, a monk of St. Wandrille, 

afterwards abbot of Croyland, ii. 

100 — 102; was secretary to the 

king, and made a pilgrimage to 

Jerusalem, 100. 
Ingunde, wife of King Herminigilde, 

n. 283. 
Innocent L, Pope, i. 106,332; ii.l41. 
Innocent, father of Pope Innocent I., 

i. 332. 
Innocent IL, Pope, i. 156, 158, 159, 

373; iv. 107, 127—131, 133, 144, 

148,173,208. 
Innocent IIL, Pope, iv. 257, 258, 

259. 
Innocent IV., Pope, iv. 260. 
Innocent V., Pope, iv. 261. 
Innocent, Saint, archbishop of 

Rouen ii. 142; iv. 235. 



A A 



354 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Interdict, in the diocese of Mans, ii. 
482; in the states of Philip I., iii. 
5; on the temtories of Robert de 
Bel sme, 30 ; on those of William 
Talvas, iv. 173, 174; on those of 
Eoger de Toeni, 174, 
Inundations, in 1119, iii. 475; in 
January 1134, iv. 139; in Flanders 
in September of the same year, 
142; in 1294, in the district of 
Exmes, 262, 263; in 1296, in the 
valley of the Seine, 263. 
Investiture, of abbots, by a pastoral 
staff or crozier, i. 423, 432, 466. ; 
by laymen forbidden by the 
council of Eheims, iv. 17; by 
a synod at Rouen, iii. 71; iv. 
104. 
lona, monastery of, called also I- 

Colm-KiU,ii. 12. 
Ionian sea, i. 438. 
Iphigenia, daughter of an Ethiopian 

king, i. 274. 
Ipswich, the neighbourhood pillaged 

in Sweyn's expedition, ii. 25. 
Irene, Empress, i. 132, 133 ; ii. 

154. 
Ireneus, Saint, bishop of Lyons, i. 91. 
Ireland, ii. 15; Arnulf de Montgo- 
mery's adventures there, iii. 338, 
350, 351; invasion of Magnus 
Barfod king of Norway, 212, 213, 
349—351. 
Ironside, see Edmund. 
Isaac, the exarch, i. 350, 351. 
Isabella, abbess of Caen, gTand- 
daughter of Stephen count de 
Blofs, ii. 27. 
Isabella, daughter of "William de 
Breteuil, marries Ascelin Goel, 
ii. 238, 487; iii. 23. 
Isabella, daughter of Simon de 
Montfort, wife of Ralph de Toeni, 
ii. 190, 494, 496; iii. 344; nun at 
Haute-Bruyerre, ii. 190. 
Isabella, daughter of Hugh de Ver- 
maudois, and niece of the king of 
France, iii. 78, 330, 348. 
Isabella, wife of Robert de Chandos, 
iv. 69. 



Isembard de Flem-i, i. 474, 477. 
Isembard, a monk of St. Evroult, i. 

473. 
Isembeit, abbot of the Holy Trinity 

at Rouen, i. 382, 442; ii. 106. 
Isemburga, wife of Walter de 

Heudeberge, ii. 227. 
Isidore of Seville, i. 6, 83, 407. 
Isnard of Charancei, a benefactor 

to St. EAToult, ii. 206. 
Isnard d' Ecublei, a partisan of 

Henry II., 456, 457. 
Isueauville, ii. 266. 
Tstria, i. 351. 

Ita, sister of Geoffrey duke of 
Lorraine, marries Eustace II., 
count of Boulogne, ii. 12; iii. 
187, 250. 
Ita, daughter of Hennar de Pontoise, 
wife of Fulchcr de Chaudri, 1. 471. 
Italians, the, i. 339,348, 353; iii. 72, 

137. 
Italy, i. 106, 115, 130, 132—134, 
197, 221, 233, 290, 303, 313,341, 
344, 346, 351, 352, 353, 359, 362, 
365; ii. 522; iii. 36. 
Iton, the, ii. 132, 136. 
Ivo, count de Beaumont, ii. 505. 
Ivo, lord of Belesme, bishop of Seez, 
i. 405, 423, 424, 425, 462; ii. 43, 
453. 
Ivo, bishop of Chartres, ii. 206, 262; 

iii. 5, 6, 50, 195, 346. 
Ivo, de Creil, Balistarius ( ? master 
of the ordnance) to Louis d'Outre- 
mer, ii. 299. 
Ivo de Grentemesnil, a crusader, ii. 
108, 109, 505, 506, 508; iii. 57, 
278, 325, 329—331; two of his 
sons wrecked in the Blanche-Nef, 
iv. 40. 
Ivo de Grentemesnil, son of the 

preceding, iv. 330, 331. 
Ivo, son of William Pantulf, ii. 211, 

397. 
Iveline, forest of, near Rambouillet, 
Louis le Gros falls sick in it, iv. 
181. 
Ivri, the fortress of, ii. 237, 428, 4S4, 
487, 488; iii. 23, 465, 477; iv. 6. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



355 



Ivri, abbey of Notre Dame at, iii. 

23, 24. 
Ivri, Goel d', Ralph count d', (and 

of Bayeux), Roger de. 

Jacobus de 1' Espinasse, see James, 

J. Cholet, papal legate at Paris in 
1283, iv. 262. 

Jaffa, i. 171, 189; ii. 213; iii. 172; 
the inhabitants poison Godfrey de 
Bouillon, 299; a body of crusa- 
ders march there in 1102, 301; 
king Baldwin hastens there, 302 ; 
the Saracens tlnreaten it, 303, 

James, Saint, the Less, bishop of 
Jerusalem, i. 89, 183, 186; his 
acts and martyrdom from Hege- 
sippus, 248—250. 

James, Saint, bishop of Nisibis, i. 
102. 

James, Saint, the Great, son of 
Zebedee, i. 176—179, 187, 193, 
238 ; his relics carried to Spain, 
I 179. 

James de 1' Espinasse, monk of 
Cluni and abbot of St. E\Toult, 
iv. 268. 

Jane, the half-sister of Adelaide, 
queen of France, marries William 
of Normandy, iv. 87. 

Jane d' E-vtcux, queen of France, 
iv. 265. 

Jane or Johanna, lady of Meules, on 
whom a miracle was performed 
in 1353, by the merits of St. Ev- 
roult, iv. 267. 

JanuarJus, Saint, i. 323. 

Jarenton, abbot of Dijon, ii. 430. 

Jaroslaw, duke of Russia, ii. 348. 

Jarrow, see Wearmouth ; and Bene- 
dict, and Ceolfrid, abbots of. 

Jason, i. 135. 

Jerome, Saint, i. 6,83, 95, 106, 108, 
239, 331, 370, 406; ii, 40, 141, 
240; iii, 154. 

Jerusalem, i. passim ; ii. 146 ; iii. 
170, 177 ; iv. 108 ; laid in ruins 
by Titus, i. 87; relics sent from, 
to Charlemagne, ii. 245 ; pilgrims 
to the holy places, iii. 37, 316, 



393, 437 ; iv. 45 ; siege of, by the 
crusaders, i. 154 ; ii. 168 ; iii. 
169—181, 243, 244 ; iv. 251 ; 
crusades of Sigurd king of Nor- 
way ; iii. 213 ; of Robert de Mont- 
fort, 387, 388 ; Hugh de Puiset 
and others, 390 ; Fulk count of 
Anjou, 437 ; and again, iv. 106, 
107 ; of some of the folio vfers of 
William of Normandy, count of 
Flanders, 94 ; the bishop's mea- 
sures during Balwin's captivity, iii, 
405 ; iv. 187, &c. ; the tower of 
David, 175, 179, 180 ; the church 
of our Lady, 164, 170 ; of St. 
Stephen, 169 ; of the Holy Se- 
pulchre, 178, 180 ; the Temple 
of Solomon, 180. 

Jerusalem, Jewish bishops or pa- 
triarchs of, i. 89; Gentile, ilid. 
For kings of, see Baldwin, &c. 

Jemsalemite, a surname given to 
pilgrims to the holy places. See 
Robert duke of Normandy, iii. 
73 ; Robert n., count of Flanders, 
ii. 60 ; iii. 429, &c 

Jobianus, father of Pope Anaclete, 
i. 353. 

Jocundus, a priest, father of St. 
Boniface, i. 333. 

Joel, the prophet, i. 162. 

John Algaso, a clerk in the chancery 
of Henry L, iv. 151. Cf iii. 328. 

John, patriarch of Antioch, iii. 308. 

John of Arras, a monk of Citeaux, 
iii. 47. 

John, canon of Aufai, ii. 264, 266. 

John, bishop of Avranchcs, after- 
wards, archbishop of Rouen, son 
of Ralph count of Bayeux, L 153, 
462 ; ii. 7, 8, 61, 65, 116, 120, 121, 
156, 167, 265 ; iii. 25 ; his death 
and burial ; ii. 58, 122 ; epitaph, 
123 ; character, 8. 

John the Baptist, St., i. 160, 175, 
186 ; his relics, 103, 110. 

John, archdeacon ofBari, ii. 384, 
395. 

John, son of Eudes bishop of 
Bayeux, ii. 429 ; iv. 94. 



35! 



GENERAL INDEX. 



John de eaunai, a monk of St. 

Evroult, i. 456, 471. 
John de Berners, bishop of Seez, iv. 

261, 262. 
John de Bois-Gencelin, abbot of St. 

Evi-oiilt, iv. 266, 267. 
John, father of Boniface m., a phy- 
sician, i. 348. 
John, son of Herbert le Bouteiller, 

i. 470. 
John, a Campanian of Naples, 

father of Boniface IV., i. 349. 
John Catadioces, father of Boni- 
face III., i. 348. 
John Catiis (le Chat), ii. 265. 
John Comnenes, the emperor, i. 1 58 ; 

ii. 169, 357 ; iii. 402, 406, 407 ; 

iv. 191. 
John, father of Pope Constantine, 

i. 359. 
John, a consul, father of Pope 

Vigilius, i. 342. 
John, son of Richard de Coulonces, 

a monk of St. E^TOult, ii. 253. 
John de Crema, cardinal; at the 

election of Calbctus II., iii. 464 ; 

at the council of Rheims, iv. 4 ; 

his speeches there, 10, 11, 14 — 16 ; 

draws up the decrees, 17. 
John, deacon, legateof Pope Agatho, 

ii. 496. 
John, deacon at Rome, heads a 

tumult on the election of Pope 

Sergius, 1 . 368. 
John king of England, iv. 258, 259. 
John, missionary to the English 

with Augustine, i. 117, 348 ; ii. 146. 
John, a bishop in England (? bi- 
shop of Hexham, afterwards arch- 
bishop of York), ii. 150. 
John the Evangelist, St., i. 88, 

162, 163, 168, 178, 187, 231 ; his 

acts and martyrdom from legends, 

238—249 ; iii. 179. 
John II., bishop of Evi-eux, before 

dean of Tours, iv. 260. 
John, abbot of Fecamp, ii. 66, 164 ; 

iii. 37, 414, 415. 
John de la Fleche, ii. 74, 76, 77, 

272, 455, 483 ; iii. 222, 272. 



' John, king of Prance, ix. 267. 
John of Gaieta, see Gelasius II. 
John, father of Gregory III., i. 361, 
John, father of Gregory IV., i. 
368. 

John, patriarch of Jenisaiem, i. 89, 
168 ; ii. 141. 

John de Jort, a man-at-arm.s of 
earl Robeit of Caen, iv. 200. 

John, bishop of Lisieux, iii. 288, 
416, 417, 441, 459 ; iv. 54, 56, 
66 ; iv. 85, 105, 214 ; took 
refuge in England in 1107, from 
the persecutions of Robert de 
Belesme, iii. 417 ; mandate o^ 
Henry I. to him, iv. 50 ; he sub- 
mits reluctantly to Geoffrey Plan- 
tagenet, just before his death, 
221 ; his character, iii. 416, 417 ; 
dies in 1141, just before Ordericus 
closed his history and his life, iv. 
221 ; John bishop of Seez was 
his nephew. 

John, commander of the forces to 
the Emperor Justinian, i. 342. 

John, surnamed Mark, i. 179, 183, 
286, 287, 288, 289. 

John, the physician, bishop of Bath, 
iii. 201. 

John, son of Stephen de Meulan, 
his deliverance from the dungeon 
of 'Ascelin Goel, iii. 348. 

John I., Pope, i. 339, 340 ; ii. 144. 

John IL, Pope, i. 340, 341; ii. 144. 

John III., Pope,i. 344, 345; ii. 145. 

John IV., Pope, i. 119, 350; ii. 147. 

John v., Pope, i. 122, 355; ii. 147. 

John VI., Pope, i. 126, 441 ; ii. 
148. 

John VH, Pope, i. 126, 350; ii. 
149. 

John Vni., Pope, i. 371; ii. 156, 
336. 

John Xn,, Pope, i. 371; ii. 159. 

John XIIL, Pope, i. 371; ii. 159. 

John XVIL, Pope, ii. 160 ? 348. 

John XVIII, Pope, ii. 160 ? 

John XIX., Pope, ii. 160, 348. 

John XXII., Pope, iv. 266, (not 
John XVII). 



GENERAL INDEX. 



357 



John, bishop of Perugio, i. 344. 
John, bishop of Porto {not Oporto), 

i. 122 ; ii. 148. 
John de Preaux, or du Prat, bishop 

of Evreux, iv. 265. 
John, St., priest and martyr, i. 

322. 
John, scholar of Rheims, monk of 

St. Evroult, i. 485 ; ii. 224, 229, 

238 ; his hfe and character, 212, 

214 ; death and epitaph composed 

by Ordericiis, 214, 216; the 

epitaph written by John of 

Eheims on Peter de Maule, 220, 

221. 
John, archbishop of Ronen, ii. 156; 

iv. 245. 
John, of St. Denys, a pilgrim, with 

his wife Mary, to Jeiaisalem, ii. 

233. 
John of St. E^T0lllt, dean of Li- 

sieux, iv. 260. 
John de Saint-Jean, commands the 

garrison at la Motte-Gautier, iii. 

455. 
John de Semes, bishop of Rennes, 

afterwards of Lisieux, iv. 263. 
John bishop of Seez, nephew of 

John, bishop of Lisieux, ii. 211; 

iv. 66, 85, 105. 
John a monk of Seez, afterwards 

abbot of Peterborough, iv. 50. 
John the Deaf, physician to Henry 

king of France, i. 430. 
John, a monk of Worcester, conti- 

nuator of the Chronicle of Flo- 
rence, i. 493, 494, and note. 
John Zimiscns, emperor, i. 138, 159. 
Jordan, the, i. 160 ; iii. 172. 
Jordan, prince of Capua, ii. 368, 

464. 
Jordan, keeper of the records, i. 

361. 
Jordan, son of "Walter de Heugle- 

ville, ii. 270. 
Jordan, bishop of Lisieux, iv. 258, 

259. 
Jordan, son of Herbran de Sanque- 

ville, ii. 268, 270. 
Jort, ,see John de. 



Joscelin d' Arques, founder of the 

abbey of the Trinity at Rouen, 

i. 382,442 ; ii. 106. 
Joscelin de Courtenai, a crusader, 

iii. 289, 390, 391", 394—403. 
Joscelin, novice and scholar at St. 

Evroult, i. 388 ; becomes a monk 

there and is a skilful copyist, 406, 

424. 
Joseph, surnamed Barnabas, i. 1 64. 

See Barnabas, St. 
Joseph, patriarch of Jerusalem, L 

89. 
Josephus, the historian, i. 175, 

179. 
Josse, see Judoc, St. 
Jourdain, see Jordan. 
Jovian, emperor, i. 103 ; ii. 141. 
Judas, surnamed Barnabas, i. 183. 
Judas the Galilean, i. 166. 
Judas Iscariot, i. 60, 62, 284, 285. 
Judas, patriarch of Jerusalem, i. 19. 
1 Jude, St., i. 187, 277, 284. 
I Judea, i. passim. See Palestine. 
Judicail, bishop of Aleth, iii. 227. 
Judicail, king of Brittany, i. 473. 
Judith d' Avranches, wife of Richard 

de Laigle, ii. 380 ; iii. 18. 
Judith, sister of Geoffrey count de 

Bretagne, wife of Duke Richard 

IL, founds the abbey of Bernai, 

i. 382. 
Judith, daughter of Baldwin V. 

count of Flanders, wife of Tostig, 

i. 462 ; ii. 59, 347. 
Judith, niece of William the Con- 
queror, wife of Waltheof, ii. 49, 

84, 86, 100; iii. 14, 355. 
Judith, wife of Roger count of 

Sicily, i. 395, 440. 
Judoc, St., ii. 472,^479. 
Julia, Cffisar's daughter, her name 

given to the city of Lillebonne, 

iv. 22. 
Julicin the Apostate, emperor, i. 103; 

ii, 141. 
Julian, the deacon of Athanasius, 

i. 103. 
Julian L patriarch of Jerusalem, 

i. 89. 



358 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Julian n., patriarch of Jerusalem, 
i. 89. 

Julian, St., bishop of Mans, ii. 72 ; 
in. 228, 234 ; iv. 141. 

Juliana, daughter of Godeschald, 
•wife of Jourdan de Heugleville, 
iii. 270. 

Juliana, illegitimate daughter of 
Henry I., married to Eustace de 
Breteuil, iii. 345, 466, 467 ; iv. 19. 

Juliana, daughter of Geoffrey count 
of Perche, wife of Gilbert de 
Laigle, iii. 380, 459, 486. 

Julius Africanus, i. 93,94; translates 
the work of Abdias, 277. 

Julius Caesar, i. 10 ; ii. 31, 138 ; 
in Britain, i. 86 ; besieges the city 
of the Caletes ii. 130 ; iv. 21 ; 
founds Lillebonne, ii. 130 ; iv. 21, 
22 ; Rouen, ii. 131 ; iv. 22 ; Car- 
lisle, 201. 

Julius, Pope, i. 123, 330, ii. 141. 

Julius, martyr in Britain, i. 100. 

Jumieges, abbey of, founded, i. 378; 
iii. 47 ; ruined by Hasting, 381 ; 
the relics of saints removed, 149, 
150, 297; the abbey restored by 
William Longue-Epee, i. 380, 
381; ii. 157, 158; consecration 
of the abbey church, ii. 6 ; visited 
bv Baudri, archbishop of Dol, 
iii. 191. 

Jumieges, seeTVilliam de, Roger de. 

Justin, the Elder, emperor, i. 114, 
338, 339 ; ii. 144. 

Justin the Younger, i. 115 ; ii. 145, 
284. 

Justin Martyr, i. 89, 90. 

Justina, the empress, supports the 
Arians, i. 105. 

Justinian I., Emperor, i. 114, 115, 
340—345, 356; ii. 144. 

Justinian IL, i. 124, 127, 355, 359; 
ii. 148. 

Justus, bishop of Rochester, arch- 
bishop of Canterbmy, i. 119 ; 
ii. 147. 

Justus, bishop of Jerusalem, i. 89 ; 
ii. 189. 

Juthael, king of the Bretons i. 472. 



Kakava, the island of, ii, 391. 

Kaupanger, see Copenga. 

Kent, i. 117, 468 ; conversion of 
the people of, i. 119; iv. 51; 
submits to William the Conqueror, 
i. 488 ; the county given to 
Odo, bishop of Bayeux, ii. 5, 
376 ; called Palatine, 434 ; the 
men of Kent revolt, ii. 11, 12. 

Kenulf, abbot of Croyland, ii. 96. 

Kenulf-stan, a boundary stone, be- 
tween Croyland and Deeping, ii. 
96. 

Kerboga, prince of Mossul, iii. 126, 
127, 137, 141. 

Khartpert, a fortress on the east of 
the Euphrates, where King Bald- 
win, with Joscelin de Courtenai 
and other crusaders, were in cap- 
tivity, iii. 395—398, 402. 

Kilidge-Arslan (Daliman), a Turk- 
ish chief, iii. 99. See Soliman. 

Kilian, St., bishop of Wm'zbourg, ii. 
106. 

KirkbyWest, in Cheshire, the church, 
manor, and tithes of, given to the 
abbey of St. Evroult, by Hugh 
earl of Chester, ii. 257, 443. 

Kirkby Malory, Leicestershire, pos- 
sessions of St. Evroult there, ii. 
255. 

Kongelf, or Kongshall (Cunegalla) , 
on the Gotha-elv, near Gotten- 
burgh, iii. 214. 

Koniah, see Iconium. 

Korasan, iii. 84, 127. 

Laci, family of, iii. 277, note. See 

Enguen-an, Walter, Hugh, Hbert, 

de Laci. 
Lacman, king of Sweden, i. 146; ii. 

36. 
Lafracoth, an Irish king, whose 

daughter married Arnulf de Mont- 

gomeri, iii. 338. 
Laigle, bourg and castle of, near 

St. Evroult, i. 393; ii. 108, 503; 

iii. 156, 157,458, 461; iv. 87, 159, 
I 160,161. See Engenulf, Gilbert, 
1 and Richer I. and H. de Laigle. 



GENERAL IXDEX, 



359 



Lambert, count of Clermont near 
Liege, iv. 90. 

Lambert, bishop of Ostia, iii. 464; 
It. 4; pope by the name of Ho- 
noring n.., i. 372 ; iv. 80. See Ho- 
norius. 

Lambert the Poor, deserts the Cni- 
saders at Antioch, iii. 128. 

Lambert, brother of Herluin, count 
de Poitou, ii, 159, 300. 

Lambert de Saint-Saens, father of 
Elias count of Maine, iii. 474. 

Lamissio, king of the Lombards, ii. 
153. 

Lampadius, consul, i. 340. 

Lance, the holy, discovered at An- 
tioch, iii. 255. 

Lancelin de Bauqnenci, marries the 
daughter of Herbert count of 
Maine, ii. 483. 

Lancelin, son of the last and father 
of count Elias, ii. 483. 

Lancelin de la Fl che, iii. 222. 

Landri, ii. 206. 

Landri count de Nevers, ii. 346. 

Landri viscount d'Orbec, ii. 515. 

Lanfranc, his birth and education, 
ii. 39; becomes a monk at Bee, 
i. 383; ii. 40; is at the council of 
Vercelli, where he opposes Be- 
renger, 41 ; is sent to restore St. 
Evroult, i. 385, 418; made prior 
of Bee, 432, 436; ii. 117; his 
school there, 40 ; has Anselra 
among his scholars, 68; goes to 
the council of Rome in 1059, 41 ; 
abbot of Caen, i. 466; ii. 39, 43; 
offered the archbishopric of Rouen, 
8; archbishop of Canterbury, i. 
153,466; ii. 39, 117, 172, 411; is 
consecrated, 42 ; goes to Rome, 
115; deposes Ulfkytel, abbot of 
Croyland, 100 ; in 1077, assists 
at the dedication of several 
churches in Normandy, i. 468; 
ii. 116; receives a visit from 
Mainier, abbot of St. Evroult, 253; 
confers knighthood on Henry, the 
king's son, 431; William the 
Conqueror writes to him on hi^ 



death-bed to crown "William Ru- 
fus, 414; iii. 201; cro^vns him at 
Westminster, ii. 429 ; offers him 
his support in the revolt of 1088, 
435; his death and burial, 466; 
iii. 8; his character, i. 466; An- 
sehn wTites his epitaph in verse, 
ii. 465. 

Lanfrid, a famous architect, built 
the tower of Ivri, iii. 2.5. 

Langres, see bishops of; William 
Reynold, and Robert the Bur- 
gun dian. 

Laodicea, i. 191, 288, 420; iii. 163; 
Edgar Atheling commands there, 
251; retaken by the emperor 
Alexius, 251, 252 ; Robert Curt- 
hose occupies it, 252. 

Laon, Richard I., duke of Nor- 
mandy, prisoner there, iL 299; 
Hugh the Great summoned there 
to do homage to Louis d'Ou- 
tremer, ii. 302, 303; that king 
crowned there, 339 ; Hugh Capet 
besieges and takes it, i. 141; ii. 
343; in 1119, the bishop and 
commons of Laon join the ex- 
pedition of Louis VL against 
Henry L, iii. 488. 

Laughton, Church, near Market- 
Harborough, possessions of St. 
Evroult there, ii. 255. 

Laumer, a saint in Gaul, i. 119; ii. 
144. 

Lawrence, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, ii. 32, 147. 

Lawrence, bishop of Nocera in Italy^ 
i. 337. 

Lam-ence, Saint, i. 104, 322, 334, 
335; ii. 364. 

Lazarus, resurrection of, i. 296. 

Lazarus, a disciple of St. Peter, i. 
190. 

Leander, bishop of Seville, i. 116. 

Leeds castle in Kent, held hy Robert 
earl of Gloucester, iv. 200, and 
note; surrenders to Gilbert de 
Clare, 204, and note; called by 
Ordericus Ludas and Esledas. 

Legends of the Apostles and Saints, 



S60 



GENERAL INDEX. 



1.189, 205, 217, 223, 238,247, 
250, 252,266, 270, 276, 289, 290, 
296; Ordericus remarks that they 
are to be received with caution, 
253. 
Leger, Saint, ii. 148; iii. 430. 
Leicester, granted by the Conqueror 
to Hugh de Grentemesnil, ii. 49, 
434; the earldom given to 
Robert de Beaumont, iii. 34; in 
1102, the town belonged to four 
lords, 330 ; Robert earl of Mel- 
lent acquires the whole, ibid.-, 
his son Robert succeeds him as 
earl of Leicester, iv. 59; Richard 
abbot of St, Evroult was a canon 
of Leicester, iv. 180. 
Leinster, Dermot king of. 
Leo the Armenian, his quarrels with 

Bohemond, ii. 410. 
Leo I, Emperor, i. 112; ii. 143, 148. 
Leo II., Emperor, i. 112; ii. 125. 
Leo IIL, Emperor, i. 128, 131, 133, 

359; ii. 148. 
Leo IV., Emperor, i. 132, 133, 360, 

361, 364; ii. 152, 154. 
Leo v.. Emperor, i. 134; ii, 154. 
Leo VI,, Emperor, i. 136; ii. 157. 
Leo, abbot of St, Boniface, papal 

legate, i, 143, 144; ii, 345. 
Leo I, Saint, pope, i. 108, 334, 335; 

ii. 62, 142. 
Leo II,, Pope, i. 354, 355; ii. 147, 

148. 
Leo III., Pope, i 133, 366, 367; ii. 

154. 
Leo IV., Pope, i. 369, 370; ii. 156, 
Leo VIII., Pope, i, 371; ii. 159, 160, 
Leo IX., Pope (Bruno), i. 151; ii. 

58, 162, 163, 186; ii, 348. 
Leofric holds lands at Peatling, Lei- 
cestershire, under Hugh de Gren- 
temesnil, ii. 257. 
Leofric, abbot of Peterborough, ii. 99. 
Leofric, son of Earl Godwin, called 
by Ordericus, Leofwin, ii. 485, 
487. [Omitted in text before 
Wulnoth,] 
Leofwin, see Leofric. 
Leon, family of, iv. 12, note. 



Leon, see Peter de. 
Leon, Alfonso VI. and Alfonso Ray- 
mond, kings of. 
Leon, Walo bishop of. 
Leonard, Saint, Bohemond's pil- 
grimage to his shrine, iii. 321, 
365 ; feast of, observed at BeUsme, 
ii. 208. 
Leonidas, father of Origen, i. 95. 
Leonilla, wife of the consul Licinius, 

ii. 134. 
Leonine city at Rome fortified, i 

370. 
Leontius, Emperor, i. 125, and note ; 

ii. 149. 
Leotheric, archbishop of Bourges, 

iii, 5 ; iv, 3, 
Leothei'ic, archbishop of Sens, i. 143; 

ii. 344, 345. 
Lepers supported at the abbey of St. 
Evroult, i. 448; Ralph Mal-Co- 
rona is afflicted with leprosy, i. 
394, 424; lepers burnt throughout 
France in 1321, iv. 265. 
Lerida in Spain, iv. 124. 
Lesceline, wife of the count d' En, 
foundress of the abbey of Dive, i. 
382; ii. 106. 
Lessai, abbey of, Geoffrey and Roger 

abbots. 
Letald, one of the first who scaled 

the walls of Jerusalem, iii. 177. 
Letald, abbot of Bee, iv. 208. 
Lethu, king of the Lombards, ii. 

153. 
Letter of Osberne abbot of St. 
Evroult, to Pope Alexander II. 
ii. 444—446; of Warin des Es- 
sarts to the Benedictine monks, 
323—331 ; of Roger du Sap, 
abbot of St. Evroult, to Henry I., 
iv. 54; of Henry I. to John 
bishojD of Lisieux, 56. 
Leuconaus (^Legonaus) in the Vi- 
meux, abbey of, afterwards St. 
Valeri, i. 142. 
Leufroi, Saint, ii. 53, 147; chapel 

dedicated to, i. 424. 
Leuvigild, king of the Goths, i. 116. 
Levi, patriarch of Jerusalem, i. 84. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



361 



Levies en masse, iii. 24, 487, 488. 

Leviova, sister of abbot Oskytel, 
lady (not abbess) of Ejnesbury, 
Huntingdon, ii. 98. 

Liberius, Pope, i. 331; ii. 141. 

Licinius, Emperor, i. 101. 

Licinius, consul, a persecutor of St. 
Tauriuus, is converted, ii. 134, 
135. 

Lidda, near Jaffa, i. 170, 171, 
189. 

Liege, famous for its schools, ii. 7, 
430. 

Liguria, i. 338; people of, ii. 481; 
iii. 79, 290; Azo, Boniface, Fulk, 
Hugh, marquises of. 

LUle, the people of, join the levy en 
masse under Louis le Gros, iii. 488 ; 
it is taken by Thierri d' Alsace, 
iv. 91. 

Lillebonne, founded by Julius Caesar, 
ii. 130; synod there, 124 — 130; 
residence of William the Con- 
queror and the Norman dukes, i. 
434, and note ; held by Henry L 
when count of the Cotentin, iii. 
473; besieged by King Stephen, 
iv. 175. 

Limesi, see Eobert de. 

Limoges, i. 195, 299, 331, 304, 308. 

Limousin, the, i. 302 ; iii. 365. 

Linus, Saint, pope, i. 209, 213; 
ii. 364; his works, i. 209, and 7iote. 

Lincoln, possessions of St. Evroult 
in the county of, ii. 253, 255; the 
castle built, 20; the garrison cap- 
tures the attendants of Edgar 
Atheling, 25; Henry L contis- 
cates the effects of Magnus Barl'od 
in the hands of his agent, a bur- 
gess of Lincoln, iii. 351, and 7iote ; 
the castle surprised by the earl of 
Chester, iv. 214, 215; the battle 
of Lincoln, i. 157 ; iv. 216—219. 

Lindisfanie, see St. Cuthbert. 

Lindsey, ii. 26, 27. 

Lions, forest and castle of, i. 400; iii. 
481; Henry L dies there, i. 157 ; 
iv. 148, 150. 

Lipari, the island of, i. 265, 270. 



Lire, abbey of, founded, i. 384 ; ii. 
60; William de Breteuil buried 
there, 191, 192; iii. 344; castle of 
fortified by Eustace de Breteuil, 
486; surrendered to Henry L, 
491, 492 ; restored by him to 
Ralph de Guader, 492 ; given up 
to Ki chard, the king's son, iv. 
32, 33; Richer de Laigle taken 
there, 220. 

Lisbius, proconsul, i. 231, 232. 

Lisiard, son of Ansold de Maule, ii. 
223. 

Lisiard de Sable, i. 395. 

Lisiard, bishop of Seez, iv. 256, 257. 

Lisieux, i. 418; ii. 139, 519; iii. 382, 
383, 412, 474, 475; iv. 170, 178, 
221; cathedral and diocese of, i. 
393, 394, 424; ii. 118—121; iii. 
244, 287, 288 ; the city and churches 
burnt in the attack of Geoffrey 
Plantagenet, iv. 166, 167. 

Liutbert, bishop of Cambrai, i, 
495. 

Liutpert, king of the Lombards, ii. 
158. 

Liutprand, king of the Lombards, 
i. 128, 130, 360, 362 ; ii. 149, 
153. 

Livia, mother of Tiberius, i. 11, 24. 

Livia, Nero's wife, embraces Chris- 
tianity? i. 209. 

Lizard, see Weston. 

Lodbroc, a Danish king, i. 379. 

Lodeve, territory of, ii. 245. 

Loire, the, ii. 34, 76, 309. 

Lombards, the, i, 115, 116, 126, 130, 
344, 346, 348, 361, 452; ii. 55, 
145, 150, 153, 358. ^ee Longo- 
bards, distinguished by Ordericus 
from the Lombards. King of the 
Lombards, one of the titles of the 
emperors of Germany, iv. 790. 

Lombards, the, succession of their 
chiefs, ii. 152, 154. 

Lombardy, the countess Matilda is 
in possession of, iii. 199. 

London, i. 146, 460, 489; ii. 1, 14, 
26, 168, 326, 338,339,424,436, 
iii. 267, 284; fire of London, and 



3G2 



GENERAL ES^DEX. 



St. Paul's burnt, 417; Tower of 
London, 108. 

Louginus, Saint, i. 218, 219, 221. 

Longueville, Walter Giffard buried 
in the churcli of, iii. 342. 

Loo, Saint {not Leo), bishop of Cou- 
tances, ii. 143; iv. 236. 

Lorraine, i. 140, 141; ii. 149, 155, 
173, 335, 341, 342; Lothaire first 
king of, ii. 156; Charles, God- 
frey de Bouillon, Gothelou, Henry, 
dukes of. 

Lorrainers, i. 372; ii. 251; iii. 136; 
iv. 83. 

Lothaire L, Emperor, i. 134, 135, 
369; ii. 155, 156. 

Lothaii'e IL, Emperor, i. 155, 156; 
ii. 169, 199; iv. 81, 84, 129, 195; 
his death, i. 158; iv. 254. 

Lothaire, king of the Franks, i. 119, 

138, 140, 141; ii. 145, 148. 
Lothaire, king of Kent, ii. 50: iv. 52. 
Lothian, iii. 10. 

Louis, Pius (or le Debonnaire), king 
of France, i. 134, 135, 367, 378; 
ii. 155, 247, 334, 336. 

Louis IL le Begue, king of France, 
i. 136; ii. 157,336, 337. 

Louis IV. (d'Outre-mer), i. 137 — 

139, 371, 381; ii. 157, 158, 160, 
299—303, 339, 340. 

Louis V. (le Faineant), king of 
France, i. 141; iii. 157, 343. 

Louis VI. (le Gros), king of France, 
son of Philip I, i. 143, 154, 158; 
ii. 168, 226. 336, 348; iii. 3, 6, 208, 
352—355,424—427,429,430,432, 
434, 441, 444, 446, 456, 469, 470, 
476, 479—488 ; iv. 85, 86—88, 94, 
105, 129, 130, 148, 172, 175; his 
death, iv. 181, 182, 254. 

Louis VII. (le Jeune) king of France, 
i. 158; iii. 424; iv. 130, 148, 175, 
181,182, 194, 221. 

Louis VIIL, king of France, iv. 258, 
259. 

Louis IX. (Saint), king of France, 
iv. 259, 260; his' relics translated, 
269. 

Louis X., king of France, iv. 262-264. 



Louis XL, king of France, iv. 268. 
Louis IV., king of Germany, son of 

Arnulf, the emperor, i. 136. 
Louis of Bavaria, king of Germany, 

son of Louis le Debonnau'e, i. 135; 

ii. 155; iii. 335. 
Louis, count d'Evreux, iv. 265. 
Louis, son of Charles duke of Lor- 
raine, i. 142; ii. 343. 
Louis, a monk of St. E\Toult, ii. 523 ; 

abbot of St. George, at Kosher- 

ville, 524. 
Louis de Senlis, lord of ChantiUy 

and butler of France, iv. 67, and 

note. 
Louis-Theobald, see Louis VI., king 

of France. 
Louvain, ii. 270. 

Louvet, son of Fredenlind, i. 398. 
Lourigni, church of, 390. 
Lovel, see WilHam, Ealph. 
Lucan, the poet, iii. 257. 
Luce-le Grand, castle of, iii. 223, 

236, 243. 
Lucca, Pope Alexander n.,bishop of. 
Lucian, a priest, discovers the body 

of St. Stephen, i. 107; ii. 141, 142. 
Lucian, saint and martjT, I 100, 

101; ii. 138. 
Lucienne, daughter of Guy count 

de Rochfort, betrothed to Philip 

le Gros, married to Guiscard de 

Beaujeu, iii. 425, 426. 
Lucina, St., a Christian matron, i. 

96,311. 
Lucius, king of Britain, i. 90. 
Lucius of Cyi'ene, i. 181. 
Lucius, host of St. Taurinus, i. 132, 

133. 
Lucius, Saint, Pope, i. 321. 
Lucius IL, Pope, iv, 255. 
Lucius IIL, Pope, iv. 256. 
Lucius Verus, Emperor, i. 89. 
Lucy, married to Roger son of Ge- 

rold, and after to Ranulf de Bri- 

quessart, iv. 44. 
Luc}', wife of Robert de Grente- 

mensil, ii. 505, 
Ludolf, son of the Emperor Otho L, 

ii. 159. 



GEXER.VL INDEX. 



363 



Luke, Saint, i. 15 — 81; passim; his 
Gospel, 161 — 295; his Acts of the 
Apostles, ibid. ; miracles and death, 
296. 

Luke de la Barre, his gallantry at 
the siege of Breteiiil, iii. 489; be- 
sieged and taken prisoner at Pont- 
audemer, iv. 67, 68; condemned 
to lose his sight by Henry L, be- 
cause he had made satirical bal- 
lads on him, 45, 75; Baldwin 
count of Flanders intercedes for 
him in vain, 75,76; he dashes out 
his brains against the wall of his 
dungeon, 76. 

Luke, bishop of E\Teux, iv. 1 64, 1 65. 

Lupus, priest of Bari, ii. 387, 388, 
389. 

Lupus, bishop of Troyes, i. 110. 

Lupus, see Hugh earl of Chester. 

Lurson, castle of, iii. 226,453, andnote 

Lutetia, see Paris. 

Luxeuil, monastery of, ii. 146. 

Luxovia, daughter of Fulcher de 
Chaudri, i. 471. 

Lybia, i. 291; iv. 124. 

Lycaonia, i. 182, 265; the people of, 
"198. 

Lycia, ii, 385. 

Lycus, a river in Syria, now called 
Nahr-el-Kelb, iii." 167. 

Lydda, confounded by Ordericus 
with Ramla, iii. 168, 169. 

Lydia, i. 184. 

Lyons, i. 92, 105;ii. 336. See Hum- 
bert, archbishop; Ireneus, Saint. 

Lysanias, i. 11, 175. 

Lysias, centui-ion, i. 17. 

Lysimachus, i. 221. 

Lystra in Lycaonia, i. 182, 183, 198, 
287. 

Mabel, daughter of Robert Guiscard, 
mamed to Vfilliam de Grente- 
mesnil, iii. 464, 506 ; iv. 56. 

Mabel de Belesme, wife of William 
Talvas, ami afterwards married 
to Roger de Montgomeri, i. 405, 
409, 431; ii. 197; iv. Ill; her 
talents and cruelty, i. 405, 406 ; 



oppression of the monks of St. 
E^TOult, 409, 410 ; attempts to 
poison Arnold d'Echaufour, 450, 
452 ; she is assassinated, ii. 193, 
194, 210, 453 ; iii. 170 ; her 
epitaph, 195. 

Mabel, daughter of Roger de Mont- 
gomeri, and wife of Hugh de 
Chateau-Neuf, ii. 109, 195 ; gives 
the monks of St. E\Toult a pen- 
sion from tithes, for lights of the 
church, ii. 255. 

Macharius, Saint, iii. 41. 

Macharius, patriarch of Antioch, 
a heretic, 1. 122, 354; ii. 148. 

Macharius, patriarch of Jerusalem; 
i. 89. 

Macedonia, i. 97, 112, 184, 185, 
199, 226,227,229,234,270,438; 
iii. 86, 90, 290, 389. 

Macedonians, i. 12 ; ii. 55, 366. 

Macedonius, heresy of, condemned, 
i. 103, 123 ; ii. 142. 

Macon, the bishop of, at the council 
of Rheims, complains of the 
monks of Cluni, iv. 12 ; perse- 
cutes them, 45. 

]\Lacrinus, Emperor, i. 93, 320. 

Magneville, family of, iii. 280, note. 

Magneville, Stephen de, William de. 

Magnificent, the, Robert H. duke of 
Normandy. 

Magnus, Saint, i. 323. 

Magnus Barfod, king of Norway, 
marries the daughter of an Irish 
king, iii. 216 ; his children 213, 
and note ; expeditions to the 
Orkney islands, Hebrides, and 
Ireland, 212, 217, and notes ; 349, 
350 ; his descent on the coast of 
Wales, in which Hugh de Mont- 
gomeri is slain, 203, 218—220 ; 
the king's lament, 219 ; his death, 

350 ; Henry I. rejoices at it, and 
confiscates his effects at Lincoln, 

351 ; his character and power, 
213. 

Maheru, church (in forest of), ii. 

192. 
jNIahomet, the religion of, iii. 135, 



334 



GENERAL INDEX. 



136; called the God of the Sara- 
cens, ii, 317 ,• hymn of the women 
of Jerusalem to, 175, 176. 

Maiet, a castle of Elias de la 
n che, near Mans, iii. 222, 236, 
241. 

Maieul, abbot of Cuni, iv, 133. 

Maine, turbulence of the inhabitants 
of,ii. 377, 378; iii. 31 ; claims to, 
and expeditions of the Norman 
kings and dukes in, i. 448, 449; 
ii. 377, 378, 454 ; iii. 223 ; iv. 
167, 249; Hugh, son of the duke 
of Liguria is invited to accept 
the county, 481, 482; sells it to 
Elias de^la Fleche, 482—484; 
Henry I. gives it to Fulk count 
of Anjou, 403 ; Fulk confers it 
on William of Normandy, 432, 
438 ; iv. 60 ; the right of Henry 
I. to Maine acknowledged by 
Louis VI., iii. 444. 

Mainier, a monk, son of Fulcher 
de Chaudri, i. 471. 

Mainier, abbot of St. Evroult, i. 405, 
423,436, 437, 442, 448,458, 466, 
&c.;ii. 101,175,249,263,413; iii. 
244, 245; his administration, i. 
467—472; ii. 184, 189, &c.; in 
1081, he goes to the court of King 
WilUam in England and obtains 
a charter, ii. 253, 254 ; receives 
the profession of Ordericus, 113; 
iv. 223, 224 ; visits the court of 
Philip I., ii. 236 ; his death, iv. 
159 ; tomb, iii. 55 ; character, i, 
467 ; appears to the priest of 
Bonneval, ii. 514. 

Maison - Dieu, afterwards called 
Noirlac, iii. 48. 

Makry, gulf of, ii. 391. 

Mala-Corona, see Ralph. 

Malassis, between Gani and Ver- 
non, a fort built there by Henry I., 
iii. 447. 

Mala-Terra, see Geoffrey. 

Malchus, a companion of St. Evroult, 
ii. 287. 

Malcolm II., king of Scots, iii. 9 — 
12, 14, 271. 



Malcolm, natural son of Alexander 
I., king of Scots, iii, 15. 

Maleffre, woods of, on the left bank 
of the Sarthe, iv. 170. 

Malet, family of, iii. 329, note. 

Malfred, daughter of the king of 
Russia, married to Sigurd of 
Norway, iii. 214. 

Malger, WiUiam, chanter, after- 
wards bishop, of Seez, iv. 265. 

Malines, William de. 

Malmistra, Bohemond takes it, iii. 
104, 256. 

Malpas, Robert de. 

Maison, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 
142 ; iv. 236. 

Mamers, a castle of Robert de 
Belesme, iii, 454 [insert in text 
before Vignats], 226, iv. 147. 

Mamers, archbisho]) of Vienna, i. 
113 ; ii. 143. 

Mamertine prison, i. 213. 

Maminot, family of, iii. 287 ; Gilbert 
de, Walkelin de. 

Mammgea, mother of the Emperor 
Alexander, i. 94. 

Man, Isle of, colonised by Magnus 
king of Norway, about 1092, 
iii. 217. 

Manceaux. i. 484 ; ii. 30, 74, 75, 
475—477, 480—483 ; iii. 31, 379, 
441; iv. 153. 5'ee Maine, Mans, 
Mancel, Geoffrey. 

Manche, the (British Sea), iv. 226. 

Maniaces assumes the purple, as 
emperor, ii. 162, note. 

Manichean heretics, i. 98, 336, 
338. 

Manors in England granted to St. 
Evroult, ii. 256. 

Mans,le, city of, ii. 449; iii. 70,71, 75, 
231,233,236,239—243,273,275; 
iv. 141; cathedral of St. Gervase, 
at Mans ; the relics of St. Julian, 
St. Thuribus, and St. Victor de- 
posited there, ii. 72 : iii. 228, 234; 
William Rufus solemnly received 
there, 234 ; consecration of the 
church, ii. 72 ; iii. 228 ; burnt 
down, iii. 228 ; the monks of 



ge2;eral index. 



Mar.s persecuted by Kobert de 

Belesme, iii. 29. 
Mantes, ii. 227, 236, 263, 398, 

400, 401 ; iii. 4, 6, 208, 476 ; 

iv. 87 ; in July 1087, William 

the Conqiieror's last illness is 

brouglit on by heat and fatigue, 

in storming and burning the 

place, ii. 400, 401 ; he bequeaths 

a donation to the clergy of 

Mantes for rebuilding the 

churches, 402 ; Philip Augustus 

dies at INIantes (not Mans), iv. 

259 ; monks of Fecamp, settled 

at St. George, in Mantes, ii. 

227. 
Mantes, Guy de ; Kalph count de 

Crepi, called count of; Ralph 

Mauvoisin castellan of. 
Manuscripts, copied by the monks 

of St. Evroult, i. 406*, 407. 
Marcellus, Pope, i. 324. 
Marcellus, Saint, i. 206, 208, 215. 
Marcellus, father of St. Martial, a 

Jew of rank, i. 296. 
Marcellus, father of Gregory II., i, 

359. 
Marcellus, a Roman consul at An- 

tioch, i. 296. 
Marcellinus, Saint, pope, i. 323, 

324; church of, at Rome, i. 101. 
Marcellinus, archbishop of Rouen, 

ii. 141 ; iv. 234. 
Marcheville, ii. 205, 206. 
Marcian, Emperor, i. 1 10, 1 1 1, 123— 

335 ; ii. 142. 
Marciban, son of Solyman, iii. 313, 
Marcian of Antioch, refutes the 

errors of Paul of Samosata, i. 

97. 
Marcigni, Adela countess of Blois 

enters the convent of, ii. 347. 
Marcus Aurelius, Emperor, i. 89. 
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (Eliaga- 

balus), i. 93. 
Marcus Aurelius, a prefect, i. 207. 
Margaret, sister of Edgar Atheling, 

wife of Malcolm king of Scots, i. 

147; iii. 10—13, 271. 
Margaret, daughter of Herbert II. 



count of Maine, betrothed to Ro- 
bert Curthose, i. 448, 449 ; ii. 74, 
77, 107, 481; her death, i. 449; 
buried at Fecamp, ibid. 

Margaret, daughter of Geoffrey II, 
count of Perche, wife of Henry 
earl of Warwick, ii. 459; iii. 
34. 

Marianus Scotus, monk of St. Al- 
ban's at Mayence; his Chronicle, 
i. 493. 

Marinus I., or Martin II., pope, i. 
371; ii. 157. 

Marinus H., or Martin III., pope, i. 
371; ii. 159. 

Marinus, father of Stephen IV., 
pope, i. 368 ; cousin of St. Tauri- 
nus, ii. 134. 

Mariswcyn, an Anglo-Danish noble, 
ii. 22,25. 

Mark, Saint, i. 135; his life and 
martyrdom fi-om the legends, 
290 — 294; his relics translated to 
Venice, 295. 

Mark Bohemond, iii. 366. 

Mark, first Gentile bishop of Jeru- 
salem, i. 89. 

Mark, Pope, i. 330; ii. 141. 

Market, the, at Gisors, iv. 68, 69. 

Marks, gold, i. 468 ; ii. 358. 

Marks, silver,ii. 201, 208, 211, 397; 
iii. 74; iv. 80, 176, 199, 205, 368. 

Marmoiitier, abbey of, i. 424; monks 
of, established atEpernon, ii. 495; 
rules of, introduced at Thorney- 
abbey, 423. 

Marne, the, ii. 28. 

Maro, a citizen of Tripoli in Syria, 
i. 190, 191. 

Maromme, the, ii. 131; iii. 368. 

Marquis, William the. 

Marrah, in Syria, iii. 152, 156, 157, 
159, 160 ; taken by Bohemond, 
256. 

Marrigni, Enguerran de. 

Marston St. Lawrence, Northamp- 
tonshire, the church there given 
to the abbey of St. Evroult, iii. 
257. 

Marston, near Stafford, the manor 



3G6 



GENERAL INDEX. 



and chapel given to St. Evroult, 
ii. 196, 254. 

Martel, Cliarles. 

Martel, Geoffrey, II. and IV., counts 
of An j on, i. 195; ii. 241. 

Martial, Saint, his life and martyr- 
dom from the legends, i. 296 — • 
312. 

Martin, abbot, agent of John FV. in 
collecting money to ransom pri- 
soners, i. 350, 351. 

Martin, abbot of Jumieges, ii. 158, 
166. 

Martin, Pope, see Marinus. 

Martin, Saint, pope, i. 121, 351, 352; 
ii. 147. 

Martin IV., pope, iv. 261. 

Martin, Saint, archbishop of Tours, 
ii. 1, 141, 241 ; iii. 50; patron saint 
of the abbeys of Troarn and Seez, 
ii. 462. 

Martin de Vertou, Saint, founder of 
the abbey of that name near 
Nantes, ii. 274. 

Martina, mother of Heraclionas, i. 
120. 

Martinian, Saint, i. 214, 221. 

Martorano, Arnulf, bishop of. 

Martyrs ; an altar dedicated to all 
the martyrs in the abbey chui'ch 
of St. E^Toult, iii. 247. 

Mary, the Blessed Virgin, i. 6 — 8, 
12, 13, 25, 72 ; Saint, the principal 
altar in the abbey church of 
St. Evroult dedicated to her, iii. 
246; she appears in a dream, 
130; relic of a lock of her hair, 
179. 

Mary, the mother of Cleophas, i. 72, 
248. 

Mary Magdalene, i. 72, 73, 77. 

Mary, mother of John, i. 73, 180. 

Mary, daughter of Malcolm III. 
king of Scots, iii. 12, 13; marries 
Eustace coimt of Boulogne, 13, 
346. 

Mary, queen of France, wife of 
Charles IV., iv. 264, 265. 

Mary, a woman of Lisieux, her es- 
cape, ii. 118. 



ISIary, daughter of Ansold de 
Maule, ii. 223. 

Mary, Avife of John of St. Denys, a 
benefactor to St, E-\Toult, ii. 233. 

Marzabanes, a Persian judge, i. 118. 

Mate-Putain, Henry I. fortities tliis 
castle at Old Rouen, iv. 20, and 
note. 

Matera, in the Basilicata, iv. 137. 

Matthew, Saint, i. 15 — 18, passim; 
writes his gospel in Hebrew, 175, 
271; publishes it to the Myrmi- 
dons, 223; imprisoned, ibid.; set 
free, 224 ; his acts and martyr- 
dom according to the legends, 
270—276. 

Matthew, a mariner of Bari, ii. 388, 
389. 

Matthew, count de Beaumont, ii. 
506; iii, 426; Louis le Gros be- 
sieges his castle of Chambli, 427; 
he is at the battle of Bremule, 
482. 

Matthew, monk of Cluni, iv. 103; 
bishop of Albano, and papal 
legate in a synod at Rouen, 103 
—105. 

Matthew, son of Robert Giroie, iii. 
29. 

Matthew, com.panion of Peter the 
Hermit, iii. 76. 

Matthias, Saint, elected an apostle, 
i. 186, 284; preaches and sutFers 
in Judea, 284; called Parvus Dei, 
God's little one, iv. 55, and note. 

Matthias, patriarch of Jerusalem, 
i. 89. 

Matthias, of Mount - St. - Michael, 
abbot of Peterborough, iv. 49. 

Matthias, or Mathiel, dies on his 
way to Jerusalem, ii. 213. 

Matilda, daughter of Fulk V,, count 
of Anjou, marries William, eldest 
son of Henry I., iii. 223, 474; iv. 
38; Henry's kind treatment of, 
after her husband's death, 59 ; she 
returns to Angers, and aftenvards 
takes the veil at Fontevrault, 59, 
60. 

Matilda, daughter of Stephen count 



GENERAL INDEX. 



367 



de Blois, marries Richard earl of 
Chester, iii. 283; she perishes in 
the shipwreck of the ^lancAe-iVe/^, 
iii. 283; iv. 40. 

Matilda, daughter of Eustace count 
de Boulogne, marries Stephen 
count deMortain, afterwards king 
of England, iii. 13, 346; she be- 
sieges Dover, with the aid of a 
fleet from Boulogne, iv. 203. 

Matilda, sister (iiot daughter) of 
William Tete Hardie, wife of 
Eudes Eorel, duke of Burgimdj, 
iv. 136. 

Matilda, first abbess of Caen, ii. 115, 
377. 

Matilda, daughter of Engelbert 
duke of Carinthia, marries Theo- 
bald count de Blois, iii. 346. 

Matilda, sister of Hugh earl of 
Chester, mother of Ranulf de Bri- 
quesart, iv. 44. 

Matilda of Chateau- du-Loire, mar- 
ries Elias de la Fleche, iii. 222; 
he has four castles in her right, 
222, 236; her death, 276. 

Matilda, " the countess," an ally of 
popes Gregory VII., Urban II., 
and Paschal II., iii. 198. 

Matilda, or Edith, daughter of Mal- 
colm III., king of Scots, rejecting 
Alan, count of Brittany, and 
William deWarrenne, married to 
Hemy I., ii. 329; iii. 12, 13, 270, 
271; her death and burial, 448, 
449. 

Matilda, daughter of Baldwin V., 
count of riander.=,v.'ife of William 
the Conqueror, i. 441 ; ii, 59, 268, 
347; iii. 80; married about 1047, 
348; founds the abbey of the 
Trinity at Caen, i. 455; governs 
I^^ormandy during her husband's 
expedition to England, ii. 14 ; 
comes to England, and is crowned, 
17; returns to Noi-mandy, 22; her 
devotion to religion, and govern- 
ment of the duchy, with the aid 
of William Eitz-Osberne, 22, 59 ; 
sends money to her son when in re- 



bellion against the king, 174; con- 
sults a holy man, 175 — 177; visits 
the abbey of St. Evi'oult, 258; her 
benefactions to it, i. 468; ii. 258, 
259; her death, ii. 376; iv. 251; 
burial, ii. 2, 168, 376; her beauty 
and virtues, 22, 23; epitaph, 376, 
377. 

j\Iatilda, daughter of Hugh de Gren- 
temcsuil, wife of Hugh de Mont- 
pen9ou, ii. 212, 213; iii. 505; 
dies at Jaffii, ii. 213. 

Matilda, daughter of Henry L, king 
of England, m^arried first to Henry 
v., emperor, and afterwards to 
Geoffrey count of Anjou, iii. 13, 
108, 109, 434 ; iv. 81, 105 ; her son, 
Henry II., born, iii. 199 ; after 
the death of Henry L, she enters 
Normandy, 156; in October 1136, 
joins her forces to her husband's 
near Sap, 169 ; lands at Arundel 
in 1139, 212 ; joins her brother, 
the earl of Gloucester, 212, 213; 
supports the revolt of the earl of 
Chester, 215, 216; King Stephen 
delivered to her, 217, 218; royally 
received at Winchester, 219. 

Matilda, or Constance, natural 
daughter of Henry I., married to 
Eoscelin de Beaumont, iv. 146. 

Matilda, natural daughter of Henry 
I., wife of Conan HI., duke of 
Brittany, ii. 105. 

Matilda, natural daughter of Henry 
I., wife of Rotron, count of Perche, 
iii. 345; iv. 110, 111; perishes in 
the shipwreck of the Blanche-Nef, 
iv. 40. 

Matilda, daughter of Richer de 
Laigle, wife of Robert de Mou- 
brai, ii. 380; iii. 18; marries, by 
papal dispensation, Nigel D'Au- 
bigne, and is divorced, 20, 21. 

Matilda, daughter of Philip de Mont- 
gomeri, abbess of Almeneches, 
iii. 342. 

Matilda, daughter of Roger de Mont- 
gomeri, marries Robert count de 
Mortain, ii. 195. 



3G8 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Matilda (Maud) of Ramsbuiy, con- 
cubine of Roger bishop of Salis- 
bury, holds the keep of Devizes 
castle, iv. 211; surrenders it to 
save her son's life, ibid. 

Matilda, daughter of Richard I., duke 
of Normandy, wife of Eudes count 
of Chartres. and sister of Emma 
queen of England, iv. 248. 

Matilda, daughter of Robert Fitz- 
Hamon, marries Robert, earl of 
Gloucester, bastard son of Henry 
I., ii. 473. 

Matilda, daughter of earl Waltheof, 
wife of Simon de Senlis, and af- 
terwards of David king of Scots, 
iii. 14, 15. 

Matonville, Thierri de. 

Maubeg (Hierapolis) besieged twice 
by Balak, iii. 394, 402, 403. 

Maubergeon, wife of the viscount de 
Chatelleraud, mistress of William 
count de Poitou, iv. 7. 

Mauger, archbishop of Rouen, son 
of Duke Richard IL, i. 152, 400; 
ii. 162 ; iv. 248, 249 ; revolts 
against Duke William, and is 
deposed, i. 152; ii. 165, 405 ; iv. 
249 ; his character, ii. 162 ; his 
son Michael, ibid. 

Mauldre, the river, ii. 236. 

Maule, ii. 224, 261; the place de- 
fended against the English in 
1098, iii. 212; churches there, ii. 
216, 217; iii. 179; history of the 
priory of, ii. 214—238. 

Maule, Ansold de, Peter de, &c. 

Maur, St., priest and martyr about 
257, i. 322. 

Maur, Saint, i. 119; iii. 43, 53, 54; 
prior of Glanfeuil, 543. 

Mauregard, a mountain near An- 
tioch, iii. 110. 

Maurice, Emperor, i. 116, 117; ii. 
145, 284. 

Maurice, father of Pope Douus. i. 353. 

Maurice, bishop of London, crowns 
Henry I., iii. 267 ; rebuilds St. 
Paul's cathedral, 417, 418; his 
death, 417. 



Maitrice, archbishop of Rouen, be- 
fore bishop of Mans, iv. 260. 

Maurice, Saint, chief of the Thcbaa 
legion, ii. 243. 

Maurice, abbot of St. Laumer, iii. 
36. 

Maurice, monk of St.Ouen at Rouen, 
iii. 37. 

Maurienne, Humbert count of. 

Maurilius, Saint, bishop of Angers, 
ii. 141. 

Maurilius, archbishop of Rouen, ii 
6, 43, 164—167, 316, 406, 432 
— 462; his death and epitaph, 
ii. 7. 

Maurision, duke of the Lombards, i. 
347. 

Mausoleum of Constantine, i. 101. 

Mauvoisin, Gilbert, Guy, Ralph. 

Mauvoisins, the, taken into the pay 
of Roger de Toeni, iv, 162. 

Maxentius, Emperor, i. 101, 324 ; ii. 
359. 

Maximian, emperor, i. 100, 101. 

Maximiau Hercules, emperor, i. 99, 
101, 323; ii. 138. 

Maximilla, 1, 233, 234, 236. 

Maximin, Saint, bishop of Treves, i. 
102 ; ii. 141. 

Maximin, Emperor, i. 94, 324. '^ 

Maximin Daza, emperor, i. 100. 

Maximus, emperor in Britain, i. 105, 
106. 

Maximus ? Galerius, proconsul in 
Africa, called emperor, i. 322. 

Maximus^ bishop of Tours, ii. 
141. 

Maximus, Saint, i. 320. 

Maximus L, patriarch of Jerusalem, 
i. 89. 

Maximus II., patriarch of Jerusa- 
lem, i. 89. 

Mayence, ii, 164, 354. -See the arch- 
bishops Albert, Boniface, Sige- 
fred. 

Mayenne, besieged and burnt by 
Duke William, i. 449. 

Mayenne, Geoffrey de. 

Mazabanes, patriarch of Jerusaleic, 
i. 89. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



369 



Meaux, iii. 429. 

]M6tlai-d, bishop of Soissons, ii. 143, 

144. 
Lledavi, Hugh de, Eobert de. 
Medicine, see Physic. 
Modes, the, i. 253, 265; ii. 55. 
Medeshamsted, abbey of, afterwards 

called Peterborough, ii. 36. 
Megista, island of, now called Cas- 

telorizo, ii. 391. 
Mcginhard, see Meinard. 
jMeilocon, father of Brude or Brute, 

king of the Picts, iii. 12. 
Meinard, ai-chbishop of Rouen, ii. 

152, 154 ; iv.241. 
Melantius, archbishop of Koucn, ii. 

Ii5, 284; iv. 237. 
Melaz, daughter of Danisman, her 

history, iii. 310 — 317. 
Melboiirne, Cambridgeshu'e, lands 
there granted to the abbey of St. 
EvToult, ii. 196. 
Meichiadcs, see Miltiades, pope. 
Mclgueil, count of, father of Pons 

abbot of Cluni, iv. 13. 
Melisende, daughter of Baldwin II. 
king of Jerusalem, wife of Pulk 
of Anjou, iii. 149; iv. 106. 
Melito, bishop of Sardis, his Apo- 
logy, i. 90. 
Meliio, monastery of, i. 439. 
Mellent, earl of, see count de Meulan. 
Mellitus, bishop of Laodicea, i. 238. 
Mellitus, bishop of London, arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, i. 117, 348; 
ii. 145, 147. 
Mellon, Saint, archbishop of Rouen, 

ii. 139, 140. 
Melun, abbey of, restored ; the castle 
besieged and taken by Robert 
king of France, ii. 345. 
Menas, bishop of Constantinople, i. 

341. 
Meole, the, flowing into the Severn 
near Shrewsbm-v, ii. 197, 200 ; iii. 
33;iv. 223. 
Mequinenza, in Spain, iv. 131. 
Meraclia, now Merakia, iii. 163. 
Mercia, ii. 31, 112, 436; iii. 218, 
332, 334. 



Mercurius, Saint, apparition of, iii. 

139. 
Meredith, a Welsh chief, iv. 2 1 6. 
Meredith-ap-Owen, prince of South 

Wales, ii. 47. 
Merlerault, quarries of, the abbey of 

St. Evroult built of stones from, i. 

468; Ordericus goes there, iv. 

141. 
Merlerault, William, Ralph, Roger 

de. 
Merlin, his prophecies, iv. 97 — 103. 
Merovee, king of the Pi'anks, i. 11 ' ; 

ii. 142. 
Merston Butler, near Kineton, War- 
wickshire, possessions of St. Ev- 
roult there, ii. 255. 
Merion, Sun-ey, priory of, Ouen 

bishop of Evreux, dies there, iv. 

209. 
Mesdeus, an Indian king, i. 253, 

260—262. 
Mesenus, legate of Pope Felix, i. 

336. 
Mesidon, siege of, iv. 175. 
Mesidon, Stigand de. 
Mesnil, Gilbert de, &c. 
Mesnil-Bernard, now la Goulafriere, 

i. 396, 398. 
Mesnil-Dode, i. 397, 401. 
Mesnil Rousset, i. 450. 
Mesopotamia, i. 276; iii. 397. 
Mesopotamia, Archelaus bishop of; 

Sarcis de. 
Metz, i. 115; ii. 155; Drogo, or 

Dreux, archbishop of. 
Meulan, the county inherited by 

Robert de Beaumont, iii. 34; by 

his son Waleran, iv. 58. See 

counts of Meulan and earls of 

Mellent. 
Meules, ii. 490; Baldwin de, &c. 
Micah, the prophet, his relics found, 

i. 106. 
Micah, a disciple of St. Peter, i. 190. 
Michael I. (Cm-opalates), emperor, 

i. 134; ii. 15. 
Michael le Bcgue, emperor, ii. 154. 
Michael III., emperor, i. 135; ii. 

155. 



B 13 



370 



GENERAL INDEX. 



ilichael Parapinaccs, emperor, ii. 

10, 167, 354, 357; an impostor 

under this name, 355, 358, 369. 
Michael, bishop of Avranchcs, ii. 8, 

61, 65, 121, 420; iv. 158. 
Michael, son of Mauger archbishop 

of Rouen, in the service of Henry 

L, ii. 162. 
]VIichael Philip, prior of Noyon, 

abbot of St. Evroult, iv. 267. 
Milan, i. 100, 104, 221; ii. 148, 197; 

iii. 290, 
Mileharcl, bishop of Seez, ii. 456. 
Millai, Hugh, Roger, de. 
Milli, near Beauvais, i. 455. 
Milo, count of Bar- sur- Seine, iii. 

47. 
Milo de Brai, a crusader, iii. 78; 

289, 302. 
Miltiades, Pope, i. 324; ii. 140. 
Milvian bridge, the, i. 91. 
Mirebeau. Arthur of Brittany seized 

at, iv. 258. 
Miasal, a, executed at St. Evroult, i. 

406; endowment by delivery of, 

ii. 224. 
Mitylene, island of, i. 204. 
Mithridates, iii. 295. 
Moira, Almeric de. 
Moleme, abbey of, iii. 40 — 47 ; Ro- 
bert abbot of, William d' Arques 

monk of. 
Money, of Angers, iv. 44 ; of Char- 

tres, ii. 204; of Dreux, ii. 190, 

238, 487; of INLans, ii. 196, 484; 

iii. 232; of Mantes, ii. 235, 238; 

of Pontoise, i. 479; of Rouen, i. 

401, 468; ii. 207, 264; Sterling, i. 

448, ii. 50, 104, 200, 225. See 

Marks, Bezants. 
Monothelite heresy, i. 120, and note. 
Monster, a, born in England, iii. 

447, 448. 
Montacute, Somersetshire, i. 343; ii. 

26. 
Montaigu, Monte Acuta, a castle 

near St. Ceneri, i. 393; iii. 28, 

note. 
Montbizot, iii, 230. 
Monte-Cassino, abbey of, i. 346, 363, 



372; ii. 34, 146, 150, 207. See 

Bonitus, &c., abbots of. 
Monte-Cassino, Paul of ; See Paul 

the Deacon. 
Montchauvet, i. 396; iii. 248, 249. 
Montdidier, Ralph count de Crepi, 

called count of. 
Mont-Doubleau, Paganus dc. 
Montebourg, iii. 418. 
Monte-Scaglioso, i. 398. See Geof- 
frey, Humphrey de. 
Montserrat, Boniface marquis of. 
Montfort I'Amauri, ii. 225; iii. 212. 
Montfort la Canne, ii. 82; iv. 32. 
Montfort-sur-Risle, forest and castle 

of, iv. 62, 87; siege of the castle, 

i. 155; iv. 253. 
Montfort, Saint- de-Evroult of, near 

Gace, ii. 275, 312, 313. See 

Amauri de, Robert de, Simon de, 

&c. 
Montgomeri, besieged by Alan 

count of Brittany, ii. 400. See 

Arnulf de, Hugh de, Philip le 

Clerc de, Roger de. 
I\Iont-Saint-Michel. See Mount- 

St.-Michael. 
Moutigni, ii. 238. 
Montjai, the lords of, iii. 482, 483, 

note. 
Montjoie, French war-cry, iii. 469. 
Montleri, besieged by Louis le Gro3, 

iii. 425. 
Montmel, Achard de. 
Montmirail, AVilliam Gouet de. 
Montmorenci, besieged by Louis le 

Gros, iii. 426. 
Montpin^on, ii. 212; iii. 468. See 

William de, Ralph de. 
Montreuil I'Argillier, i. 390—392, 

394, 397, 398, 425,475; iv. 197. 
Montreuil-au-Haulme, seat of the 

English family of Basset, iv, 165, 

note. 
Montreuil-sur-Mer, iv. 89. See Eu- 

des de, Herbert, Herluin de, &c. 
Montre vault, Norman de. 
Moray, in Scotland, iii. 16; Angus 

earl of. 
Morel, nephew of Robert de ]\Iow 



TxENERAL INDEX. 



371 



bray, murdered by Malcolm king 
ot Scots, iii. 11, 18, 21 
Morcar earl of Northumberland, son 
of Algar, i. 461, 488; ii. 4, 5, 17 
18, 44, 45, 47; iii. 392. ' 

Jlorimont, Hugh, de, ii. 267. 
florin, monk of St. Evroult'and St. 

Martin de Seez, i. 405. 
florin du Pin, steward and casteUan 
of the count de Meulan,iv. 77, 78 
Morocco, Ali king of, iv. 123. ' 
Montague, counts of. See Perche 
counts of. ' 

Montagne sur Gironde, i, 308, 309 
Mortam, Henry I. gives the county 
to Stephen de Blois, ii. 183; iii 
•346; many lords of this county 
are lost m the Blanche -Mf, iv 42 
Mortahty great, in 1042, i. 152- iv 



249; in 1095, i. 154; ii. 168-^ 
63;iv. 251. 
Mortemer, battle of, i. 152- ii 167 
349, 408 ;iv. 249; Duke William' 
takes the castle from Roger de 
Mortemer, and gives it to William 
de Warrenne, iii. 408. -^ee Ralph, 
Roger de. 
Mosarabians, the, iv. 118,119, and 

notes. 
Mossoul, Kerboga, prince of. 
Motte-de-Balon, iii. 231. 
Motte-Gautices-de-Clenchamp a 
castle belonging to Robert Talvas 
111. 226, 454. 
Moiilins-la-Marche, ii. 486; castle 

of, 192, 486; iii. 458; iv. 177 
Mount-St.-Michael, i. 381; ii. 161 
431, 519, 520; iii. 35, 283;* iv! 
183, 184; Roger abbot of Ecou- 
land, monk of. 
Moutiers Hubert, iv. 165. 
Mouzon, the emperor, meets Pope 

Calixtus II. there, iv. 9. 
Mmvbray, see Geoffrey, Robert, and 

Roger de. 
Muid of wheat (translated bushel) 

11.268; of wine, 234. 
Mule, archbishop of Rouen thrown 
from, ii. 121, 122: a monk's, 260 
261. ' 

BB 



IVxummuIus, abbot of Benevento 

II. 34. ' 

Musched of Mans, a crusader, iii. 

Muschi, the emir, iii. 403 
Musgros, Roger de. 
Music, church, the monks studied 
and were skilled in, i. 388 424 
^429, 436, 439, 443 ;' ii. 69 ' 

Mygdonia, 1, 260, 261 
Myra in Lycia, ii. 384, 386-389, 

Myrmidons, St. Matthew preaches 

to, 1. 223, 224. 
Mysia, i. 184. 



Nadaber in Ethiopia, i 270 
Nahr-el-Kelb, see Lycus 
Namur, Herman ccnnt of. 
I Nantes, count of. See Brittany. 
Naples,i.ioi, 115, 331 341,349. 
Naplouse, in Palestine, aI 18'> 
Narbonnaise, the, ii. 151 
Narbonne, i. 205; Amauri vis- 

count of, Paul bishop of. 
Narciscus, patriarch of Jerusalem i 

89, 92, 93. 
Narni, a territory of the popes, i. 

0I3. 

Narses, king of Persia, i. 99. 
I -N arses the patrician, i. 115 349 

345;ii. 145. ' 

Natalis (Noel) abbot of Rebais, ii 

318, 320. 
Natalis, monk of St. E\Toult ii 

289. ' • 

Navarrese, iv. 127. 
Nazarius, Saint, a martyi- at Milan, 

Nazarius, abbot of St. Nicholas at 
Angers, ii. 395. 

Neaufle, near Montfort, iii. 212. 

Neaufle, Simon de. 

Nectard of Noyon, father of St 
Godard, ii. 143. 

Nectarius,' patriarch of Constanti- 
nople, i. 123. 

Neocesarea, Theodore, bishop of. 

Neot, St., his body deposited si 
Eynesbury, ii. 99, and tiote. 



872 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Nepi, Toto duke of. 

Nereus, saint and martyr, i. 207. 

Nero, Emperor, i. 86, 87, 88, 205, 
211, 213, 214, 217—222. 

Nerra, Fulk. 

Nerva, Emperor, i. 88, 315, 317. 

Nerva, cousin of Nero, i. 298. 

Nesle, the commons of, join the 
levy en masse, under Louis le 
Gros, iii. 488. 

Nesta, daughter of Gryffith-ap- 
Llewellyn king of North Wales, 
mother of Walter Stewart by 
Eleance, and afterwards married 
to Trahern-ap-Caradoc, i. 461, 
and note. 

Nestorius, the heretic, i. 123, 335, 
336. 

Nettleham, Lincolnshire, church and 
lands granted to St. Evroult, ii. 
254. 

Newbourg stormed and burnt by 
Henry L, iii. 458 ; meeting of 
Norman lords there, iv. 154, 
155. 

Neufchatel, see Lurson. 

Neufmarche-en-Lions, 1397, ii. 264, 
350,455—457; iii. 454; iv. 61, 
96. See Bernard du, Dreux du, 
Geoffrey, Turkytel. 

Neuilli, Kobert de Belesme confined 
there, ii. 451. 

Neustria, according to Ordericus, 
was the ancient name of Nor- 
mandy, i. 377, and notes ; he uses 
the two names indiscriminately, 
ii. 180, 181 ; iii. 259; send passim. 

Nevers, William and Landri, counts 
de. 

Newbury, Berks. See Sheen. 

New Forest, formed, iii. 260 ; Rich- 
ard, son of William the Con- 
queror, killed in it, ii. 182 ; 
iii. 260 ; William Rufus there 
Avhen he received intelligence of 
the revolt of Elias count of Maine, 
240 ; Richard, son of Robert 
Curthose, killed there, 259, 260 ; 
William Rufus killed there ; iii. 
260, 263, 264, 267. 



Newton, a hamlet in the parish of 
Blythe, Staffordshire, given to the 
abbey of St. Evroult, ii, 255. 

Nicasius, St., archbishop of Rouen, 
ii. 123, 131. 

Nicanor, a deacon, i. 166. 

Nicanor, Seleucus. 

Nice, i. 150, 225, 226, 400 ; ii. 66, 
79, 85, 93 ; councils of, i. 101, 
123, 329, 335, 366 ; ii. 62, 140 ; 
Duke Robert dies there, i. 148, 
382 ; it is taken by the Turks, ii. 
355; besieged by the crusaders, 
iii. 93—97. 

Nicephorus L, i. 134 ; ii. 154. 

Nicephorus Botoniates, ii. 354, 355, 
357. 

Nicephorus Phocas, i. 138 ; ii. 159. 

Nicetas. brother of Clemens, i. 191, 
192. ' 

Nicholas, i. 229. 

Nicholas, a deacon of Antioch, i. 
167. 

Nicholas d'Auteuil, bishop of Ev- 
reux, iv. 261. 

Nicholas Herbert, abbot of St. Ev- 
roult, iv. 265 — 267. 

Nicholas, Saint, bishop of Myra, ii. 
241 ; is at the council of Nice, 
441 ; history of the removal of his 
remains to Bari, 384 — 394; elegy 
on their loss, 390, 391; an arm 
purloinedand conveyed toVenosa, 
395, 396; some of the relics car- 
ried to Noron, ii. 211; iii. 396, 
397; reverence for this saint, ii. 
14;^ the saint appears to Arnold 
d'^^chaufour, i. 452. 

Nicholas L. Pope, i. 371; ii. 156. 

Nicholas II, Pope, i. 372, 431, 
432, 434, 436; ii. 165,348; before 
called Gerard, i. 431. 

Nicholas IH., Pope, iv. 261. 

Nicholas de Ductu, or de Ponte Car- 
donis, abbot of St. Evroult, iv. 
263, 264. 

Nicholas, abbot of St. Evroult, joins 
the Carthusians, iv, 260. 

Nicholas, abbot of St, Ouen, son of 
Duke Richard HI., ii. 69; iii. 37; 



GEXECAL IKDEX. 



attends the funer?J of William the 

Conqueror, ii. 420; his pilgrimage 

to Jerusalem, death, and charac- 
ter, iii. 37; his e\)itaph, ibid, 
Nicholas de Villers, abbot of St. 

E\Toult, before prior of Moulins, 

iv. 261. 
Nicomedia, i. 99, 226; iii. 79, 93. 
Nicomedia, Eusebius of. 
Nicopolis built on the site of Em- 

maus, i. 93. 
Nicostrata Carmenta, iv. 223. 
Nigel d' Aubigni, iii. 440 ; his wives, 

iii. 21, 452; is loyal to Henry I., 

474; at the battle of Bremule, 

482;sat the siege of Montfoi't, iv. 

62. 
Nigel of the Cotentin, in rebellion 

against Duke William, ii. 404. 
Nigel U., viscount of the Cotentin, 

a partisan of King Stephen, iv. 

198. 
Nigel, bishop of Ely, iv. 185 ; revolts 

against I^ng Stephen, and flies to 

Devizes, 210 ; is proclaimed a 

traitor, 211. 
Nisiba, St. James, bishop of. 
Nivard de Hargeville, his brother 

and sons, ii. 226. 
Nivard de Septeuil, a partisan of 

William Rufus, iii. 212. 
Noblac, see St. Leonard. 
Nocera, Lawrence bishop of. 
Noel, see Natalis. 
Nogent-le-Rotrou, burnt in 1134, 

iv. 141. 
Noirraoutier, abbey of, ii. 147, 

155. 
Nonancourt, iii. 441, 473; iv. 221. 
Nonant, family of, iii. 340, note. 
Nonant, see Hugh de. 
Norfolk, county of, ii. 189, 257. 
Norman, son of Guy BuUein, i. 

428. 
Norman, dean of Lisieux, father of 

John the bishop, iii. 416. 
Norman de Montrevault besieged in 

Cande by Geoflfrey Martel, iii. 

369. 
Norman conquests in the south of 



Italy, i. 396, 412, &c.; the princes 
support Pascal IL, iii. 146. 

Normandy, i. 136, 146; una passim. 

Normans, passim; origin of the 
name, iii. 73; their national cha- 
racter, 72. 

Noron, churches there given to the 
abbey of St. Evroult by William 
Pantulf, ii. 207 ; relics of St. 
Nicholas brought there, i. 210, 
211, 396, 397; he builds anew 
church at the priory there, 397. 

Norrei, near Falaise, i. 384, 389, 
396, 401. 

Northampton, county of, the abbey 
of St. Evroult had lands in, ii. 
257. See Waltheof, and Simon 
de Senlis, carls of. 

Northmen, invasion, of, i. 379; ii. 
155. 

Northumbria, called by Ordericus, 
the country beyond the Humber, 
ii. 18, 28, 413 ; insmTCCtion 
there quelled by William the 
Conqueror, and the country ra- 
vaged, 18, 28, 411,413 ; HemyL 
makes a progress there, iv. 50 ; 
earls of, see Alberic, Siward, Cos- 
patric, Morcar. 

Northumbrians, ii. 19, 411. 

Nonvay, ii. 96 ; iii. 18, 212 ; de- 
scription of, 214, 215. 

Nonvegians, i. 480 ; ii. 25. 

Norwich, ii, 25 ; the earldom of, 
given to Ralph de Guader, son of 
William Fitz-Osberne, ii. 519 ; 
the city besieged in 1074, 81, 82; 
bishop of, 31. 

Nosley, Leicestershire, the church, 
tithes and lands granted to St. 
Evroult, ii. 256. 

Notre-Dame-du-Bois, near St. Ev- 
roult, church of, i. 399; ii. 285 — 
287, 315; iii. 247, 7iote. 

Notre-Dame-du-Hamel. Ses Pont 
Echaufre. 

Nottingham, the castle erected and 
intrusted to William Peverel, ii. 
1 9 ; William the Conqueror there, 
27. 



374 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Noyon, burnt by the Northmen, i. 
296, 379; the bishop and people 
en masse march with Louis le 
Gros, iii. 488 ; Saint Eloi, Nec- 
tard, bishops of. 

Noyon-sur-Andelle, now called 
Charleval, ii. 476 ; priory of, 
iii. 419, 423; ii. 448 ; the castle 
fortified and garrisoned by King 
Henry L, iii. 474; he quarters his 
army there, before the battle of 
Breuiule, 480, 481 ; hears mass 
in the church, ibid.; the French 
march upon it, 480, 481 ; the 
English conduct their prisoners 
there, 484. 

Numerian, Coesar, i. 99. 

O, near Argentan, written Oth by 
Ordericus, i. 396. 

Oakington, a manor in Cambridge- 
shire, belonging to Croyland 
abbey, ii. 98 

Octavian, see John XII., pope. 

Octavian, antipope, iv. 256. 

Odelerius of Orleans, son of Con- 
stantius, father of Ordericus, ii. 
198 — 204 ; iv. 223. 

Odeline, daughter of Peter de 
Maule, ii. 220, 227. 

Odeline, daughter of Ralph Mauvoi- 
sin, the excellent wife of Ansold 
de Maule, ii. 222, 224, 225, 230, 
231. 

Odeasee, St. Canute assassinated 
there, ii. 382, note. 

Odilo, abbot of CJuni, iv. 133. 

Odilo, abbot of la-Croix-Saint- 
Leufroi, ii. 518. 

Odin, see Woden. 

Odo, bishop of Bayeux, i. 400, 450, 
462 ; ii. 416 ; is at the battle of 
Hastings, i, 483 ; the county of 
Kent given him, as eai'l palatine, 
ii. 5, 416, 434 ; his tyranny and 
exactions, 19 ; his power and do- 
mains in England, 49, 50, 376, 
415; has the custody of Dover 
castle, 11 ; attends synods at 
Rouen, 61, 65 ; iv. 250 ; intrigues 



for the papacy, 373 ; an-estedby the 
king, and imprisoned at Rouen, 
374—376,416; iii. 35; reluctantly 
liberated by his brother "William 
on his death-bed, 414 — 417 ; he 
assists at the king's funeral, 420 ; 
is counsellor of Duke Robert, 
428; organises a revolt against 
William" Rufus, 433 ; iii. 205 ; 
besieged in Rochester, ii. 436 — 
440 ; capitulates and is ba- 
nished from England, 441 ; 
>ii. 205 ; returns to Bayeux, 
441 ; becomes an active par- 
tisan of Robert Curthose, and 
aspires to the governmeiit of 
'Normandy, ii. 451 — 456; iii. 
203 ; solemnizes the marriage of 
Philip I. and Bertrade, 33, 34 ; 
is at the council of Clermont, 69; 
at the synod of Rouen, 72 ; builds 
the cathedral of Bayeux, ii. 429 ; 
settles monks at St. Vigor, 429, 
430 ; iii 35 ; departs for the cru- 
sade, ii. 430; iii. 80, 205 ; has 
an interview with Urban II. at 
Rome, 206 ; passes the winter in 
Apulia, ibid.; dies at Palmero, ii. 
430 ; iii. 206 ; his character, ii. 
428, 429 ; has a son named John, 
429 ; iv. 94. 

Odo, son of Bernard the Blind, ii. 
235. 

Odo Borleng, in garrison at Bemai 
under Henry I., iv. 71 ; at the 
battle of Bourge-Teronde, 72. 

Odo, archbishop of Canterbury, iv. 
51. 

Odo the Red, i. 395. 

Odo, canon of Rheims, monk and 
prior of Cluni, and bishop of 
Ostia, pope by the name of Urban 
IL, i. 372 ; ii. 70, 463 ; iii. 193, 
194. 

Odo, archbishop of Rouen, before 
abbot of St, Denys, iv. 260. 

Odo Rigaud, archbishop of Rouen 
iv. 260, 291. 

Odoaccr, king of the Goths, takes 
Rome, i. 112, 336 ; ii. 143. 



GENERAL IKDEX. 



375 



Offa, king of Mercia, ii. 32,4G8. 

OiFa, son of Sigebert, king of Essex, 
ii. 15. 

Ogive, wife of Charles the Simple, 
ii. 339. 

Oise, tlie river, ii. 399. 

Olaf II., king of Norway, i. 146; 
ii. 30. 

Olaf III., king of Norway, iii. 212. 

Olaf IV., king of Noi'way, iii. 
213, and note. 

Olaf IV., king of Denmark, ii. 383, 
note. 

Oldegaire, Saint, bishop of Barcelo- 
na, and archbishop of Tarragona, 
iv. 114, 117, diwd notes; his por- 
trait and character, 16, 17 ; his 
sermon, closing the council of 
Itheims, 17. 

Olivier, father of Pope Stephen 
III., i. 364. 

Olybrius, consul. 

Olympus, a martyr, i. 322. 

Omcr, Saint, bishop of Terouanne, 
founder of the abbey of St. Bertin 
at St. Omer, iii. 53. 

Onesimus, Saint, i. 206. 

Onne, a manor in Church-Eaton,, 
Staffordshire, belonging to the* 
abbey of St. Evroult, ii. 196. 

Opslo, an ancient city iu Norway, 
now a suburb of Christiana, iii. 
215, note. 

Orange, on the Ehone, taken by 
count William Court-nez, ii. 244. 

Orange William, bishop of. 

Orbec, garrisoned by Henry I., iii. 
472 ; the governor makes terms 
with the rebel Iwds, iv. 78. 

Oreades, see Orkney islands. 

Ordericus, a priest of Atcham, god- 
father of Ordericus Vitalis, ii. 
113; iv. 222. 

Ordericus Vitalis, see Vitalis. 

Orders of the clergy, the seven ; 
intervals betv/een, i. 329 ; decrees 
of a synod at Rouen respecting 
ordination, ii, 62, 63. 

Orestes, his consulship, i. 340. 

Orgeres, Osberne d', Serlo d' 



Orielde, wife or mistress of Fulk, 
dean of Evreux, ii. 185. 

Origen, i. 94, 95,96 : ii, 240. 

Orkney islands, conquered by Clau- 
dius, i, 86; expeditions of Magnus 
king of Norway to, iii. 212, 217, 
and yiotes. 

Orleans, i. 141, 142; ii. 198, 307, 
343, 344, 347 ; iii. 191 ; the city 
burjit by Duke Robert, ii. 399 ; 
Louis le Gros enthroned there, 
424. See Geoffrey de, &c. 

Orne, the, ii. 504 ; iv. 200. 

Orontes, the, iii. 154, IGO. 

Orosius, i. 83, 107 ; ii. 141,407. 

Osberne, abbot of Bernai, ii. 420. 

Osberne de Crepon, steward of Nor- 
mandy, i. 149, 399; ii. 163, 403; 
William Fitz-Osberne, his son. 

Osberne,archdeacon of Lisieux.i. 387. 

Osberne, a monk of Maule, ii. 229. 

Osberne, a priest of Notre-Damc-du- 
Hamel, i. 398. 

Osberne d'Orgeres, of St. Evroult, 
ii. 444 ; man-at-arms with Robert 
de Rhuddlan, 446. 

Osberne,son of Richard Scroop,ii.434. 

Osberne, abbot of St. Evroult; his 
birth, i, 442; canon of Lisicux, 
ibid. ; monk of Rouen and prior of 
Conneilles, i, 432, 442 ; iv. 249 ; 
abbot of St. Evroult, i. 432—436, 
441—448, 453, 457; his letter to 
Pope Alexander II., 444 — 446, 
457; his death, 457, 458, 466; his 
tomb, iv. 57, 179. 

Osberne, brother of Sweyn II., king 
of Denmark, ii. 24. 

Osberne, abbot of Treport, iii. 460. 

Oskytel, abbot of Croyland, ii. 98, 99. 

Oskytel, a Danish king, ii. 34. 

Oskytel, archbishop of York, ii. 97. 

Osmond Basset, i. 395. 
Osmond Drengo, i. 410; ii. 162. 

j Osmond de Gapree, a gallant soldier, 
buried at St. Evroult, ii. 455, 
Osmond, governor of the young duk'j 

Richard I., ii. 154. 
Osmond, bishop of Salisbury, ii. 446 ; 
iii. 200. 



376 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Osred, king of Northumbria, ii. 151. 
Ostia, i. 101, 368; bishops of Ostia, 

Lambert; Odo, &c. 
Oswald, St., monk of Fleuri, bishop 

of Vv^orcester, archbishop of York, 

i. 137; ii. 34, 35, 98, 160. 
Oswald, king of Northumbria, ii. 

33, 146, 375; iv. 102. 
Oswiu, king of Deira, ii. 146. 
Osv.y, king of Bernicia, ii. 146, 147; 

iv. 102. 
Othere, son of Hugh, earl of Chester, 

governor of the children of Henry 

i., perished in the Blanche-Nef, 

iv. 40. 
Otho the Great, emperor, i. 137, 138, 

140; ii. 159, 340. 
Otho n., emperor, i. 138, 139, 140, 

145; ii. 159, 160, 342,344. 
Otho, son of Hugh the Great, duke 

of Burgundy, i. 139. 
Otho of Saxony, elected emperor, 

iv., 258. 
Otmond de Chaumont, i. 472; iii. 

210, 447; is at the battle of Bre- 

mule, 452; made i^risoner, 483, 

484; sent to Ai-ques, 485. 
Otmond, son of William de Chau- 
mont, iv. 1 82. 
Otranto, port of, ii. 358. 
Ouclie, abbey of. See St. Evroult. 
Ouche, bourg of, i. 416; forest of, i. 

378; ii.276and?io^e,279; fountain 

of, ii. 277, 280 and note, 315; 

territory of, i. 385, 386. See St. 

Evroult. 
Oudard du Pin blinded by order 

of Henry I., iv. 75. 
Ouen, Saint, archbishop of Rouen, 

i. 119, 137; ii. 146, 148; iii. 54; 

his verses on St. Godard, ii. 144; 

his relics, ii. 69, 155. 
Oundle, ii. 151 
Ounce of gold, ii. 187, 237. 
Outille, castle of, iii. 223, 236, 241. 
Over (Church-Over), Wanvickshire ; 

the church and one hide of land 

given to St. Evroult, ii. 250. 
Overton, a castle on the borders of 

Wales, held !>y William Peverel 



in the wars of King Stephen, iv. 

201, and note. 
Ovid, ii. Ill, 112; iii. 280. 
Owen, prince of North Wales, iii. 

449. 
Oxford, the bishops assembled there 

in Stephen's reign, iv. 210. 
Oxhill, near Kinetou,Warwickshire ; 

possessions of St. Evroult there, 

ii. 255. 

Paci-sur-Eure, ii. 260; the lordship 

inherited by William Fitz-Os- 

berne, ii. 60 ; events there when 

held by Eustace de Breteuil, ii. 

398,466,467,478, 479; iii. 22; 

iv. 19; Eustace de Breteuil dies 

there, 157; adventure of Ralph, 

archdeacon of Evreux, returning 

thence, 163. 
Pacomus, Saint, iii. 41. 
Pagan temples closed, i. 95, 102. 
Paganel [William ?], defeated by 

Geoffrey Plantagenet, iv. 165. 
Paganel of Moutiers-Hubert, ii. 459. 
Paganel, family of. See William 

Paganel, note. 
fli'aganus de Beauchamp, iv. 195, 

note. 
Paganus, Bolotin, canon of Chartres, 

■wrote a poem, iii. 40. 
Paganus de St. Ceneri, ii. 450. 
Paganns de Chasse, a knight, his 

daughter outraged by Stephen de 

Blois, iii. 462. 
Paganus Fitz-John, his castle of 

Caux burnt, iv. 143, 144, and note ; 

holds Ludlow castle, 202, note. 
Paganus de Gisors, see Theobald 

jPaganus, 
Paganus the Lombard scales the 

walls of Antioch, iii. 123. 
Paganus de Mont-Doubleau, ii. 455; 

iii. 27, 231. 
Paganus de Montjai, taken by the 

English, iii. 211. 
Paganus de St. Calais, bishop of 

Mans, iv. 172. 
Painters employed at the abbey of 

Tiron, iii. 51. 



GENEKAL INDEX. 



377 



Paintings on the tomb of Robert de 
Rhuddlan, by Eeynold Bartholo- 
mi, ii. 448; on the tomb of Nicho- 
las abbot of St. Ouen, iii. 37; on 
a psalter, i. 401. See Illumina- 
ting. 

Palamedes at the siege of Troy, ii. 
55. 

Palfrey, Ansold de Maule be- 
queathes his best, to the monks, 
ii. 233. 

Palermo, i. 356, 412; ii. 371; Odo, 
bishop of Bayeux, dies there, ii. 
430; iii. 206. 

Palestine, i. 93, 189; iii. 59, 66, 175; 
iv. 108. 

Palladius, missionary to the Scots, 
i. 108; ii. 142. 

Palmers, the Knights-, in Spain, iv. 
112, 113. 

Pampeluna taken by Charlemagne, 
i. 132; ii. 154; the French quar- 
tered there by Alfonso VI., iv. 
111. 

Pamphilia, i. 181, 183, 288. 

Pamphilus, priest and martyr, i. 100. 

Pannonia, i. 115, 344; ii. 153. 

Pantainus, the Stoic philosopher, i. 
92. 

Pantheon, the, struck by lightning, 
i. 88 ; converted- into a church, 117. 

Pantoul, see Pantulf. 

Pantulf ; Arnold, William, Ives, 
Philip. 

Paphos, i. 181, 197, 206—288. 

Paplagonia, ii. 355; iii. 295. 

Papia, wife of Duke Richard II., ii. 
162. 

Papinius, i. 492. 

Paris, i. 115, 131, 140, 142, 363; iv. 
129; besieged by the Northmen, 
i. 3S0;ii. 166; visit of the emperor 
Otho, 342; floods there in 1118, 
1119; the Seine dry in the sum- 
mer, iii. 475, 470; Louis le Gros 
returns there after the battle of 
Bremule, 487; his son Philip dies 
there of a fall from his horse, iv. 
105; Louis is residing there in 
1136, 171; a synod held there in 



1238, 262; great floods in 1296, 
263; Edward III. ravages the 
environs before the battle of 
Crt'ci, 266, and note; abbey of 
St. Denys near, i. 434. 

Parisians, the, form part of the levy 
en masse under Louis le Gros, iii. 
488. 

Parmenas the deacon, i. 166. 

Parnes, a cell of the abbey of St. 
Evroidt, i. 470—472 ; Philip 
I. makes a pilgrimage there, 479; 
relics of St. Judoc preserved there, 
478; cures wrought by tliem, 479. 

Parthenius, i. 219,220. 

Parthians, the, i. 90, 253. 

Partridge supposed to have demoni- 
acal or magical qualities, iii, 324, 
and note. 

Paschal, archdeacon of Palermo, 
aspires to the papacy, i. 356. 

Paschal L, Pope, i. 134, 367, 368. 

Paschal, II., Pope, i. 373 ; ii. 1 68, 1 69 ; 
iii. 289; iv. 13, 172, 251, 252; 
holds a council at Rome in 1102, 
iii. 50 ; St. Anselm meets him 
there, ii. 202, 203; the pope's visit 
to France, iii. 195, 306 — 346; 
made prisoner at Rome by Henry 
v., 196, 199, 438; censured for 
the terms on which he obtained 
his release, 147 ; his death, 446; 
iv, 252 ; his persecutions by 
the emperor, recounted at the 
council of Rheims, iii. 460; iv. 11. 

Paschasinus, bishop of Libya, i. 10. 

Paschasius restored to life by St. 
Taurinus, ii. 135. 

Pasnage, right of pasture of swine 
in forests, ii. 189, 196, 205. 

Passibus, brother of the anti-pope 
Constantine, i. 364. 

Pastor, father of St. Sixtus, i. 317. 

Patara, i. 200. 

Patmos, i. 339. 

Patras, i. 223, 233, 234. 

Patroclus, Nero's cupbearer, 216, 
217. 

Paul, Saint, his conversion and life, 
from the Acts, i. 170 — 181, 186, 



;78 



GENERAL INDEX. 



196__205; nistory continued to 
his martyrdom, from legends, 208 
221 222, 223. 

Paul the deacon, i. 2, 130; ii. 150. 

Paul, bishop of Constantinople, i. 
120, 121, 122. 

Paul, heretical bishop of Constanti- 
nople, i. 350, 351. j 

Paul, father of Pope Leo II., i. 
354. 

Paul, the hermit, iii. 143. 

Paul, bishop of Narbonne, i. 205. 

Paul, an officer of Xero, i. 217. 

Paul, proconsul at Paphos, i, 197. 

PaulL, pope, i. 364; ii. 152. 

Paul, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 155, 
156; iv. 241. 

Paul of Samosata, i. 97. 

Paulinus, a patrician, has the cus- 
tody of SS. Peter and Paul, i. 
213. 

Paulinus, his consulship, i. 337. 

Paulinus, bishop of York, i. 119. 

Pavia, i. 130, 132, 363, 365; ii. 148, 
152; Lanfranc born thei-e, 38. 

Pearling (Magna), Leicestershire; 
the church and lands there 
granted to St. E^TOult, i. 257. 

Pega, the sister of St. Guthlac, ii. 
94, 95, 99. 

Pegeland (Peykirk), Northampton- 
shire; a monastery founded there, 
ii. 99. See Wuifgate, abbot. 

Palagius, Pope, i. li5, 344; ii. 154, 
284. 

Palagius II., Pope, i. 346; ii. 145, 
284. 

Pelagius, heretic, i. 106, 110, 119. 

Pelagonia, iii. 88. 

Pembroke, Gilbert de Clare, earl of. 

Pemmon, duke of Priuli, i. 362; ii. 
154. 

Penda, king of Mercia, ii. 145. 

Pencadel, a city in Spain, perhaps 
Benicarlo. 

Penitents, public, wore long hair 
and beards, ii. 478; iii. 363;. ab- 
solved on taking the cross, 67. 

Pentapolis, the, i. 291, 292, 357. 

PenthicATc Eudes, count of. 



Pepin d'Heristal, mayor of the 
palace, i. 124, 129; ii. 148; king, 
133. 

Pepin le Bref, mayor of the palace, 
131, 133; king, i. 44, 364,378; 
ii. 1 52, 333, 334. 

Pepin, grandson of Louis le Debon- 
naire, ii. 335. 

Perai, ii. 210; iii. 226; iv. 147. 

Perche, le, iv. 108. Counts of, Geof- 
frey, William (bishop- of Cha- 
lons), Rotrou, Thomas. 

Pergamos, i. 242. 

Pcrga in Pamphilia, i. 181. 

Perinthus in Thrace, i. 227. 

Peronne, i. 136; Charles the Simple 
imprisoned there, ii. 338; the 
people join the levy en masse 
under Louis le Gros, iii. 488. 

Peronne, Herbert, count ofVerman- 
dois, called also count of. 

Persia, i. 99, 118, 263, 277, 281. 

Persians, or Parthians, the, i. 12, 
117, 253,273, 276, 286,322, 494; 
ii. 55; iii. 66, 99, 127,298. 

Persius, the poet, ii. 479. 

Pertinax, Helvius, emperor, i. 91. 

Pertinax, Severus, emperor, i. 92; 
dies at York, ibid, and note. 

Perugium, i. 347; John, bishop of, 

Peter, Saint, i. 15, ^\, passim; his 
histoiy from the Acts, 162, 164, 
168, 171, 172, 179, 180, 186, 189; 
from legends, 189—195; the same 
continued to his martyrdom, 207, 
—215, 222; first pope, 312, 313 : 
the high altar at St. E^TOult 
dedicated to, iii. 247; the saint 
appears in a vision, 130. 

Peter Abraham, a Provencal clerk; 
the holy lance revealed to, at 
Antioch, iii. 130, 136, 255. 

Peter d'Acheres, or the Hermit; his 
crusade, iii. 75, 77; his cowardice 
at Antioch, 112; he heitds pro- 
cessions at Jerusalem, 181. 

Peter, bishop of Alexandria, i. 100. 

Peter, a heretic bishop, 336, 338. 

Peter, bishop of Altino, i. 337. 

Peter Auaclete, see Anaclete. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



79 



Peter, father of Pope Anastasius, i. 
336. 

Peter, king of Aragon, iv, 262. 

Peter, archpriest at Rome, candidate 
for the papacy, i. 355. 

Peter, son of Herbert the Butler, ii. 
470. 

Peter, viscount de Castillon, recon- 
noitres Antioch, iii. 106. 

Pster. abbot of Cluni, iv. 46, 47, 132. 

Peter, bishop of Constantinople, i. 
122, 352. 

Peter the Frenchman, at the death 
of Robert Guiscard, ii. 370. 

Peter Leo II. writes an epitaph on 
Urban IL, iii. 193, 194; his verses 
on the anti-pope Clement III., 
194, 195; father of the anti-pope 
Anaclete, iv. 194; father-in-law 
of Roger king of Sicily, 138. 

Peter Leo III., liberated by the 
archbishop of Cologne, iv. 12; 
\dsits Seez as papal legate, 65; 
anti-pope. See Anaclete. 

Peter de Maule, ii. 204, 216, 223, 
225, 228, 229; defends his fortified 
mansion, iii. 212; in the French 
array at the battle of Bremule, 
482 ; throws away his cognisance in 
flight, 486; joins Waleran count 
de Meulan against Henry I., iv. 
68 ; auxiliary to Roger de Toeni, 
206; a charter of his, ii. 216, 219; 
his epitaph, 220, 221. 

Peter, son of Ansold de Maule and 
Odeline, ii. 223, 228, 232, 236. 

Peter Raymond (d'Hautpoul) re- 
connoitres Antioch, iii. 106. 

Peter de Roaix accompanies Peter 
Raymond, iii. 106; he defeats the 
Turks, ibid. 

Peter, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 141; 
iv. 235. 

Peter Roger, archbishop of Rouen, 
before abbot of Fecamp, archbi- 
shop of Sens(no< Soissons), iv. 265. 

Peter Romanus, archbishop of Rouen, 
iv. 200. 

Peter, an eminent orator at Sara- 
gossa, ii. 141. 



Peter de Serrans, commands troops 

in the Vexin, iii, 210. 
Peter, the subdeacon to whom 

Gregory the Great addressed his 

dialogues, ii. 34. 
Peter, father of Pope Valentine, i. 

368. 
Peterborough, abbey of Ulfkytel; 

abbot of Croyland retires there, 

ii. 100; abbots of; Henry, abbot 

of St. Jean d'xVngili ; John, a 

monk of Seez ; Matthias, of Mount 

St. Michael; Thorold. 
Petronax, Saint, abbot of Monte- 

Cassino, ii. 34. 
Petronilla, Saint, i. 195. 
Petronilla, daughter of Arnold. 

d'Echaufour, i. 453 ; takes the veiL 

at Angers, 455. 
Petronilla, wife of Grimold, nephew 

of Stephen de Maule, ii. 233. 
Petronius, consul, father of Pope 

Honorius, i. 349. 
Petscheneyes, the Turkish, iii. 87. 
Pevensey castle fortified by Harold, 

i. 480; occupied by William the 

Conqueror, 481 ; he quarters there 

on his return to Normandy, ii. 

5; besieged by William Rufus, 

205. 
Peverel, William. 
Pharamond, king of the Franks, i 

111; ii. 142. 
Philetus, a disciple of Hermogenes, 

i. 176, 177. 
Philibert, Saint, abl)Ot of Juraieges, 

i. 119, 134,378; iv. 239; his relics 

carried to Mormoutier, ii. 155; 

iv. 244. 
Philip, Saint, his history from the 

Acts, i. 168, 169, 187; legend of, 

250—252. 
Philip, count de Boulogne, iv. 260. 
Philip Berenger, bishop of Seez, be- 
fore prior of St. Gervase there, iv. 

262, 264. 
Philip the Breton, abbot of St. Ev- 

roult, iv. 172. 
Philip de Braiouse supports William 

Rufus in Normandy, iii. 74. 



GENERAL IXDEX. 



Philip de Caliors,hi5liopof Errciix, 
iv. 168. 

Philip, a clerk, or the Grammarian, 
son of Roger de Moatgomeri, ii. 
195, 197; iii. 33, 342; joins the 
crusade, 80; dies at Antioch, 33. 

Philip the Deacon, i. 167, 200, 271. 

Philip, emperor,!. 95, 96. 

Philip his son, Ci^sar, ibid. 

Philip I, king of France, i., 143, 
153, 430, 453, 456; ii. 60, 167, 
168, 398; iii. 6, 23, 24, 208, 290, 
352, 353, 354, 364, 370, 371; his 
maiTiage with Bertha of Holland, 
ii. 348; iii. 3; marries Bertrade, 3, 
53; is excommunicated, 4, 5, 63; 
his contumacy, 6; entertains Bo- 
hemond, and marries his daughter 
Constance to him at Chartres, ii. 
341 ; confirms the gifts of posses- 
sions in France to St. Evroult, 
236 ; goes in pilgrimage to Panics, 
i. 479; falls sick in 1108, iii. 424; 
his death, 154, 355, 424; iv. 252; 
is buried at the abbey of Fleuri, 
iii. 424; his portrait, 208 ; his chil- 
dren, Louis le Gros, Philip, Flo- 
rus, Constance, Cecilia, ii. 223, 
348 ; iii. 5. 

Philip, son of Philip I. and Bertrade, 
iii. 5 ; his mother intrigues for his 
succession to the throne, 254; his 
defence of the citadel of Evi-eux, 
478. 

Philip, son of Louis le Gros, iii. 424 ; 
crowned at Rheims, iv. 105, 129; 
dies two years afterwards, iv. 105, 
129, 130. 

Philip Augustus, king of France, iv. 
258—259. 

Philip le Hardi, king of France, iv. 
262. 

Philip le Bel, king of France, iv. 
262—264. 

Philip le Long, king of France, iv. 
264. 

Piiilip de Valois, king of France, iv. 
266, 267. 

Philin, son of Robert the Frisian, ii. 
59! 



Philip de Harcourt, archdeacon of 
Evreux. proposed for the bishopric 
of Salisbury, iv. 213. 

Philip, superior of the convent at 
Jerusalem, i. 103. 

Philip, bishop of Jerusalem, i. 89. 

Philip, son of William Pantulf, ii. 
211,397. 

Philip, abbot of St. Taurinus, iv. 105. 

Philip the Tetrarch, i. 11, 175. 

Philippi, i. 184, 198, 200, 206, 227, 
228. 

Philippicus, emperor, i. 127, 128; ii. 
148. 

Philipolis, in Bulgaria, iiL 77. 

Philo Judeeus, i. 175. 

Philomelium, near Antioch, iii. 134. 

Philopator, i. 233. 

Philosophers, the monks of Bee 
worthy of the name of, ii. 68. 

Phirouz betrays Antioch to the cru- 
saders, iii. 120 — 124. 

Phocas, emperor, i. 117, 347, 348; 
ii. 145, 284. 

Phoebus, a disciple of St. Clement, 
i. 716. 

Phoenicia,!. 110, 173, 183. 

Phrygia, i. 102, 184, 186. 

Phylacteries, reliquaries so called, 
iii. 245, 246, 300, 311. 

Physic, studied and practised by the 
clergy and monks ; Ralph Mal- 
Coronna studied at Salerno, his 
skill, 1 ; 394, 423, 424, 426; 
Goisbert of Chartres, physician 
to Ralph de Toeai, i. 471; ii. 185, 
189,204,236, 237; Gilbert Ma- 
minot, bishop of Lisieux, skilled 
in medicine, ii. 121; iii. 63; with 
Gontard, abbot of Jumieges, and 
other physicians, he attends Wil- 
liam the Conqueror in his last ill- 
ness, ii. 401 ; skill of the Arabs in, 
iii. 354. 

Picard, William. 

Picot, or Pigot, de Sai, ii. 48, 201. 

Picts and Scots, inroads of. 106, 107. 

Pierius of Alexandria, i. 99. 

Pigace, the name giyen to the long 
peaks of shoes in fashion, ii. 477. 



GENERAL INLEX. 



381 



Pilate,Pontius, kills himself, i. 85,1 75. 

Pilet, see Raymond. 

Pilgrimage; — to Jerusalem, of iUex- 
ander, bishop of Cappadocia, be- 
fore A. d. 212, i. 93; of the bishops 
Sigefred of Mayence, and Guu- 
ter of Bamberg, in 1063, 431 ; of 
other pilgrims from the West, pas- 
sim; — to Rome, of CaedwalLi king 
of Essex, i. 125, Coenred of Mer- 
cia and Offa son of king Sighere, 
ii. 151 ; of St. Pega, sister of St. 
Guthlac, 99; — to the shrine of St. 
Gilles, near Nismes, i. 403 ; ii.207 ; 
— to St. James of Compostella, 
i. 179; iii. 30; iv. 175; — of Bohe- 
mond, to St. Leonard's at Noblac, 
iii. 156, 366. 

Pilgrims suffered their hair and 
beards to grow, i. 478. 

Pillerton, Little (or Nether), in War- 
wickshire; Warin viscount of 
Shrewsbury gives all his lands 
there to the abbey of St. Evroult, 
ii. 255; with the church and 
tithes, 256 ; Hugh earl of Ches- 
ter gives one hide of land there, 
257. 

Pin, Fulk du, Morin du, Oudard du. 

Pine, a remarkable one near the 
church of St. Peter, was the origin 
of the name of the village of Sap 
(Sapin), iv. 166, 167. 

Pionius, a martyr, i. 91. 

Pisa, Innocent II. retires there, iv. 
121; council held there, 145. 

Pisans, the, with the Venetians and 
Genoese, send their galleys loaded 
with arms and provisions for the 
crusade, iii. 77. 

Pisidia, i. 181, 183. 

Pithiviers ? tower of, iii. 25. 

Pitres, valley of, iii. 492. 

Pius L, St., pope, i. 90, 318, 319. 

Placentia, belongs to the coun- 
tess Matilda, iii. 198 ; council 
held there, 61. 

Placidia, the empress, i. 108, 111, 
120 ; chapel in her palace, at 
Constantmople, iii. 351. 



Placidus, monk, of Notre-Dame-du- 
Bois, i. 399. 

Plague, in 1137, iv. 181 ; in 1348, 
266 ; in 1460, 173. ^ee MortaUty. 

Planches-sur-Risle, a violent storm 
there, iv. 140 ; a fair held there, 
ii. 196. 

Plastencia ? a wealthy city, opens 
its gates to the crusaders, iii. 105. 

Plato, ii. 39. 

Plautilla, i. 219, 220. 

Plautus,ii. 479. 

Piessis taken by surprise, by Hugh 
de Gournai, and recovered by 
Hemy I., iii. 452 ; Hugh du, 
Robert du. 

Pliny, the younger, i. 88 ; iv. 281. 

Po, the, ii. 154, 373. 

Poems, see Epitaphs, Verses, 

Poetry, Warin des Essarts, abbot of 
St. Evi-oult, a writer of, ii. 324. 

Pointel, William, and family of, iii. 
449, and note. 

Pois, St., a castle belonging to 
Richard the Porester ; the vill 
burnt in the wars of Stephen, iv. 
182, 183, and note. 

Poissi ; William duke of Normandy 
goes there to implore the aid of 
Henry I. of Prance, i. 150 ; me- 
teoric light seen there, iii. 476 ; 
Edward III. crosses the bridge of 
Poissi, in retiring from the neigh- 
bourhood of Paris, before the 
battle of Creci ; iv. 266, and 
note. 

Poitevin, Roger, the. 

Poitiers, burnt by the Northmen, i. 
379; battle of, against the Sara- 
cens ; ii. 151 ; besieged by Hugh 
the Great, i. 139 ; ii. 340 ; Wil- 
liam of Poitiers, the historian, 
educated there, ii. 46 ; Louis 
VII. crowned there, iv. 182. 

Poitiers, Hilary and Portunatus, 
bishops of. 

Poitou, the people of, i. 311, 465. 
Counts of, Arcadius; Ebles; Wil- 
liam Otho of Saxony; countess, 
Hildegarde. 



382 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Poix, Walter Tirel .le; Hugh de. 
Poleraius, an Indian king, i. 267 

269. 
Poly carp, St., i. 90. 
PolycraLes {not Polycarp), bishop of 

Ephesus, i. 92. 
Pommeray, family of, iv. 71, note. 
Pompeius. .^ ee Trogus. 
Pomula, a courtesan, accompanies 

the priest Ansered on a pilgrim- 
age, i. 403. 
Pons, abbot of Cluni, iii. 436, 437 ; 

iv. 13, 45, 48, 252. 
Pons de Gavarret, viscount, taken 

prisoner with Baldwin, iii. 395. 
Pons, count of Tripoli, son of Ber- 

trand count of Tholouse, a crusa- 
der iii. 392, 393 ; iv. 136, 186. 
Pont-de r Ai-che, iv. 263. 
Pont-Audemer, i. 155 ; ii. 492 ; iii, 

34,474 ;iv. 63, 66, 67, 76, 152,178. 
Pont Autou, iv. 71. 
Pont Echaufre {now Notre-Dame- 

du-Hamel), i. 398 ; iii. 457, 472; 

iv. 78, 197, 212. 
Pontefract, Williiim the Conqueror 

stopped by a flood there for three 

weeks, ii. 27. Robert de. 
Ponthieu, i, 476; ii. 335, 458; iii, 31, 

326, 444. Counts of, Enguerran; 

Guy; William Talvas; Herluin. 
Pontian, pope, i. 94, 320. 
Pontian, St. Cyprian's deacon and 

biographer, i. 97. 
Pontius, Saint, i. 95. 
Pontius, see Pilate. 
Pontoise, ii, 140,374, 398 ; ii. 208, 

212, 355, 469 ; iv, 87, 88; Walter 

Tirel, castellan of, 
Pont-Saint- Pierre, ii. 476 ; iii. 466, 

475, 492 ; iv. 162. 
Poor, Hugh the; Lambert the; 

Roger the. 
Popa, daughter of Berenger count 

of Bayeux, married to RoUo, i. 

380; iv. 246. 
Portes, a castle near Conches, iii. 

487. 
Porto, Boson and Formosus bishops 

of. 



Port-Saint-Simeon, now Soueydva, 

116, 129, 153. 
Ports, the, opened to merchants by 

William the Conqueror, ii. 3. 
Portsmouth, Robert Curthose lands 

there in 1101, iii. 282, 
Pothinus, bishop of Lyons, i, 90, 
Poulton, Wiltshire, the tithes of 

cheese and wool in, given to St. 

EAToult, ii. 196, 255. 
Prat, John du. 
Preaux, near Pont- Audemer, momis- 

teries there, i. 283, 432 ; ii. 33, 

34 ; iii. 191, 449. Abbots of, 

Ansfred; Geoffrey; Richard de 

Furneaux. 
Pretextatus, archbishop of Rouen, 

ii. 145, 284; iv. 237. 
Primitius, priest and martyr, i. 322. 
Principality ; Reynold, Richard, 

Roger, of the. 
Priscian, the grammarian, i, 345 ; 

ii, 144; iv. 237, 
Priscilla, i, 186, 198 ; the cemeteiy 

of, a burial-place of popes, 330. 

332, 334. 
Priscus, a disciple of Simon Magus, 

i. 207. 
Priscus, father of Pope Celestine L. 

i. 334. 
Priscus, father of Mark, pope, i. 

330. 
Probus, emperor, i. 98. 
Processions on the feast of St. 

Romanus,ii. 124 ; at Whitsuntide, 

126. 
Processus, Saint, i. 214, 221. 
Procorus, the deacon, i. 166. 
Prophecies, among the Bretons, iii. 

265 ; of Merlin, \v. 97. 
Protasius, mart}T, i. 106, 221. 
Provence, Peter d'Acheres, or the 

Hermit, a native of. 
Prudentius, Aurelius Clemens, the 

poet, native of the province of 

Tarragona, iv. 114, note. 
Prunelai, ii. 524, and note. See 

Robert de, abbot of Thorney. 
Psalms, chanted in the choir service 

at St. Evroult, i. 454 ; the whole 



GENERAL INDEX. 



383 



150 sung daily by Earl Waltheof 

in prison, ii. 84. 
Psalter, an illuminated, the gift of 

Queen Emma, to the archbishop 

of Rouen, i. 401, 402. 
Publicans, a Manichean sect in the 

East, in arms with the Turks 

against the crusaders, iii. 121, 

127, 162. 
Publius, patriarch of Jernsalem, i. 88 
Publius Torqueanus, count of the 

sacred offices under Trajan i. 355. 
Puiset, besieged by Louis le Gros, 

iii. 428 ; relieved by Theobald de 

Blois, 441. Everard de, Waleran 

de, Hugh de. 
Pulcheria, the empress, i. 335. 
Puy, Aimar, bishop of. 
Pyrrhus, bishop of Constantinople, 

i. 120, 121, 122. 
Pyrrhus. a heretic, i. 120, 121 ; ii. 

351. 

Quadratus, his work, i, 88. 
QuaiTell, Anqueti, del Robert de. 
Quatford, near Bridgnorth ; the 

fortification removed by Robert 

de Belesme, iii. 220. 
Quentin, Saint, ii. 138. 
Quintal, abbey of, iii. 50. 
Quinquegentians, the, i. 99. 
Quintianus, father of St. Leo, i. 134. 
Quirillus, priest and martyr, i. 322. 
Quirinus, Saint, ii. 131. 
Quitri, in the Vexin, iv. 182. 

Rabel, the chamberlain, iv. 34, 175, 
177. 

Eadbert, archbishop of Rouen, i. 
150 ; iv. 240. 

Radbode, bishop of Seez, i. 419 ; 
ii. 43. 

Radegunde, wife of Robert Giroie; 
the castle of St. Ceneri surprised 
in his absence, iii. 27 ; her 
journey and death, 27, 28. 

Radepontc besieged by Philip Au- 
gustus, iv. 258. 

Radiland, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 
149 ; iv. 240. 



Radon, church of, i. 399; ii. 196. 

Rages, the ancient name of Edessa, 
iii. 142, 143, 144. 

Ragimbert, duke of Turin, king of 
the Lombards, i. 358 ; ii. 153 

Raimond the Fleming, keeper of 
the gates of Constantinople, ii. 
355. 

Raimond, count of Galicia, iv. 120, 
note. 

Raimond Pilet, his expedition after 
Antioch was taken, iii. 1 50 — 153; 
is at the seige of Jerusalem, 1 7 J , 
173. 

Raimond (? Reynold) de Dunstan- 
ville, natural son of Henry L, iv. 
195 ; takes the side of the Em- 
press Matilda, 195, 198. 

Raimond, son of William count of 
Poitou, iv. 191 ; marries Bohe- 
mond's heiress, and becomes prince 
of Antioch, 191 — 193; does ho- 
mage to the Emperor Alexius, 
194. 

Raimond de St. Gilles, count of 
Tholouse, takes the cross, iii. 68 ; 
marches through Illyria, 82 ; at 
Constantinople, 92, 93 ; at the siege 
of Nice, 94, 95 ; on his march, 
99 ; at the battle of Dorylneum, 
100, 101 ; at the siege of Antioch, 
116, 117, 122, 137 ; his standard 
planted on the citadel, 141, 142 ; 
takes Albara by storm, 152 ; 
claims possession of Antioch, 153, 
158, 159, 254 ; marches towards 
Jerusalem, 155, 164 ; besieges 
Jerusalem, 169, 174, 175, 179 ; 
is at the battle of Ascalon, 184 — • 
188 ; claims the city, 188, 189 ; 
returns from the crusade, 250 ; 
his reception by Alexius, 254 ; 
preserves the holy lance in his 
chapel, 255 ; refuses to return to 
the crusade, 291, 292 ; his deal- 
ings with the emperor and the 
crusaders, 294 — 297. 

Raimond, viscDunt of Turenne, a 
crusader, iii. 162 ; at the siege of 
Jerusalem, 171. 



384 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Rainard the Elder, count of Sens, 

i. 140 ; ii. 341, 345. 
Rainard II., count of Sens, ii. 346. 
Rainard the Teutonic (count de 

Toul ?) at the first crusade, iii. 

81, 136. 
Rainard, see Reynold. 
Rainfrid, archbishop of Rouen, i. 

131 ; ii. 151 ; iii. 241. 
Rainfrid, defeated by Charles Mar- 

tel, i. 129 ; iii. 151. 
Rainfrid, abbot of St. Ouen at 

Rouen, iii. 38 ; iv. 105. 
Rainier of Bath, one of the low per- 
sons elevated byHemyl., iii. 328. 
Rainier, a monk of Conches, and 

prior of St. Evroult, i. 432. 
Rainier, abbot of the Holy Trinity 

at Rouen, i. 433, 442. 
Rainier, monk of VaUombrosa, then 

of Chmi; pope as Paschal II., i. 

373; iii. 195, 244. See Paschal. 
Rainoward, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 

155; iv. 243. 
Rambold Creton, the first who scaled 

the walls of Jerusalem, iii. 177, 

and note, 427; is slain at the siege 

of Montmorenci, 427. 
Ramirus II., king of Aragon, sur- 

named the Monk, i. 158; iv. 127. 
Ramirus, see Garcia. 
Ramla, iii. 172; besieged and ruined 

by the Saracens, 301 ; rebuilt by 

the Christians, 304. 
Ramsey abbey, ii. 35. 
Ralph, canon of Aufay, ii. 265. 
Ralph, bishop of Auxerre, in 1132, 

iv. 132. 
Ralph Basset, ii. 325, 328, 329; owes 

his elevation to Henry I., iii. 328 ; 

sits as judge at Huntingdon, ii. 

326. 
Ralph, abbot of Battle, before monk 

of Caen and prior of Rochester, 

ii. 3. 
Ralph, Sire de Bauquenci, a crusa- 
der, iii, 78. 
Ralph, count of Bayeux and Ivri, 

half-brother of Duke Richard I., 

and father of John archbishop of 



Rouen, and Hugh bisliop of Bay- 
eux, i. 462; ii. 8, 168, 416; iii. 25. 

Ralph, viscount of Beaumont, ii. 382 ; 
iii. 30, 236. 

Ralph, duke of Burgundy, after- 
wards king of France, ii. 157, 338. 

Ralph, chaplain to William de Bre- 
teuil, ii. 191. 

Balph de Cierrei, bishop of Evreux, 
iv. 260. 

Ralph de Coldun, brother-in-law of 
Waher de Clare, iv. 167. 

Ralph de Conches, see Ralph de 
Toeni. 

Ralph, son of Herluin de Conteville, 
ii. 416. 

Ralph, bishop of Coutances, iii. 7, 
8, 72. 

Ral])h, son of Albert de Cravent, robs 
and ill-uses the prior of Maule, ii. 
260, 261 ; buried at St.Evroult,261. 

Ralph III., count de Crepi, sur- 
named the Great, called count de 
Mantes, i. 456; count de Mont- 
didier, ii. 350, 407, and note; at 
Fecamp in 1067, ii. 6. 

Ralph de Dracln, chamberlain to 
Hugh the Great, visits St. E\Toult 
with Herluin the chancellor,ii. 300; 
they carry off the relics, 304, 308. 

Ralph d'Escures, abbot of Seez, i. 
397, 464; iii. 245, 246, 249; driven 
out by the oppression of Robert 
de Belesme, he comes to England, 
349; discovers the relics of St. 
Cuthbert, ii. 1 49 ; is made bishop of 
Rochester, 251,465; iii. 349, 437; 
archbishop of Canterbury, ii. 465; 
iii. 349, 437; goes to Normandy 
in his way to Rome, iv. 50; falls 
sick, and lingering three years, is 
brought back in a litter to Can- 
terbury, where he dies, 50,51, 253. 

Ralph, archdeacon of E\Teux, at- 
tacked by freebooters, iv. 163. 

Ralph, bishop of Evreux, iv. 165. 

Ralph de Fourneaux, ii. 181. 

Ralph Fresnel,ii. 214, 215. 

Ralph de Guader {Gwydir, Gael), 
son-in-law of William Fitz-Os- 



GENERAL INDEX. 



385 



berue,ii. 49; made earl of Norfolk 
by the Conqueror, ibid.; repels 
the Danes, 25; revolts, 78 — 81; 
is banished, 82, 415; retkes to 
Brittany, 82; takes the cross, iii. 
80; is at the siege of Nice, 95; 
follows Bohemoud, 99; he and his 
wife perish in the crusade, ii. 82. 

Kalph II. de Guader, ii. 192; is re- 
stored to the honour of Breteuil, iii. 
486, 467; at the siege of Evreux, 
476, 477 ; repels the French from 
Breteuil, 489 ; Gloz and Lire re- 
stored to him, 491; offers his 
daughter, with the barony of Bre- 
teuil, to Richard, the king's son, 
iv. 32, 33. 

Ralph de Gand, besieged at Mont- 
fort, iv. 63. 

Ralph Grente, prior, and after- 
wards abbot, of Si. Evroult in 
1315, iv. 264, 265. 

Ralph, the preterided patriarch of 
Jerusalem in 1137, iv. 189, &c, 

Ralph (Rodolph, nephew of abbot 
Thierri, a novice and scholar at 
St. Evroult, i. 388,436; ii. 206; 
a chanter, i. 443. 

Ralph, bishop of Lisieux, iv. 257. 

Ralph Louvel, holds Castle Gary 
against King Stephen, iv. 202; is 
reconciled with the king, 203. 

Ralph LufFa, bishop of Chichester, 
iii. 201. 

Ralph, the Clerk, or Mal-Co- 
ronna, a scholar and physician; 
becomes a monk, i. 390, 394, 
397, 400, 415, 423, 424, 440. 

Ralph Mauvoisin, castellan of Man- 
tes, ii. 222, 224, 263, 398. 

Ralph de Merleraut, i. 395. 

Ralph de Montpingon, steward of 
William the Conqueror, a bene- 
factor to St. Evi-oult, ii. 212, 213. 

Ralph, his son, dies in the crusade, 
ii. 213. 

Ralph de Mortemer, a partisan of 
William Rufus, ii. 474; of Henry 
I., iii. 356. 

Ralph, sonofHughPag:anus,ii. 238, 

C 



Ralph, canon, and priest of Pare, 
a prebend of the church of Aufay, 
shipwrecked and drowned, when 
returning from England, ii. 265, 

Ralph de Peronne, see Ralph count 
de Vermandois. 

Ralph, son of Walkelin de Pont 
Echanfre, in the wars of Apulia, i. 
395. 

Ralph the Red, of Pont Echanfre, 
iii, 345; goes to the cnisade, 367, 
388, 390; adheres to Henry L, 
457 ; saves his son Richard, and is 
himself made prisoner, 471, 472; 
his services, 472, 473, 477, 478, 
489, 492; he perishes in the ship- 
wreck of the Blanrhe-Nef, iv, 38- 

Ralph, son of Robert I., archbishop 
of Rouen, ii. 160. 

Ralph de la Roussiere, a monk of 
St, E\Toult, i. 456. 

Ralph, abbot of St. Evroult in 1177, 
iv. 256. 

Rdph of St. Victor, a partisan of 
Henry I., iii. 473. 

Ralph Taisson, i. 400. 

Ralph T te-d' Ane, son of Archbishop 
Robert, i. 449, 476. 

Ralph II.de Toeni, or Conches, i. 401 , 
431 ; standard-bearer of Norman- 
dy, 462 ; is at the battle of Has- 
tings, 484; in exile with Robert 
Curthose, ii. 109; under William 
Rufus, 427, 455, 494, 495, 496, 
510; iii, 72 ; on his going to Spain, 
makes a benefaction to St. Evroult, 
ii. 188, 189; he also gave to the 
abbey two manors in England, ii. 
250; iii. 249; his death, ii. 190; 
iii. 342; his character, ii. 190. 

Ralph III. de Toeni, son of the 
preceding, ii. 190, 344, 348; goes 
to England and marries Adelaide, 
daughter of Earl Waltheof, 356; 
well received by Henry I., ibid.\ 
his services, 376, 473, 474; has a 
grant of the valley of Pitres, 492; 
his death, ii. 190, 

Ralph I,, count de Vermandois, iv. 
148; gOA^emor of Louis VII., 181; 

C 



386 



GENERAL INDEX, 



in Normandy in the cause of King 
Stephen, 199. 

Ralph le Vert, archbishop of Rheims, 
iii. 5 ; patron of John of Rheims, 
ii. 216; at the council there, iv. 
3; attends the pope to Mouzon, 9; 
his death and character, 79, 80. 

Ralph, son of Dreux, count of the 
Vexin, ii, 399. See Ranulf. 

Ranulf de Briquessart, viscount of 
Bayeux, ii. 404, 

Ranulf de Briquessart, earl of 
Chester, iv. 44 ; is at the battle of 
Tinchibrai; iii, 376, 379; remains 
faithful to Henry I., 473, 474; iv. 
61, 71; is at the battle Bourgte- 
roude, 72; revolts against King 
Stephen, iv. 214; surprises the 
castle of Lincoln, 215; repairs to 
the Empress Matilda and raises 
troops, 213, 216; is at the battle 
of Lincoln, and enters the city in 
triumph, 217 — ^219. 

Ranulf, chancellor of Henry L, iii. 
213. 

Ranulf Flambard, son of a country 
priest in the diocese of Bayeux, 
ii. 466 ; origin of his surname, 467 ; 
favourite of Wilham Rufus, his 
influence with him, and oppressive 
administration, 467 — 469; made 
bishop of Durham, ii. 301; iii. 
237, 279,280; his exactions, 237; 
thrown into prison by Henry I., 
280 ; escapes from the Tower and 
flies to Normandy, 281; endea- 
vours to rouse Robert Curthose 
against King Henry, 282; his 
brother Fulcher made bishop of 
Lisieux, 287; on Fulcher's death 
he gets possession of the bishopric 
for his son Thomas, 287, 288; 
makes peace with Henry L, and 
recovers his see of Durham, 416; 
his character, ii. 466, 467. 
Ralph, prior of Maule, ii. 236. 
Ralph, prior of Noyon, afterwards 
abbot of St. Evroult in 1140, iii. 
420; iv. 214, 2221, 224, 254. 
Ralph, brother of Richard of the I 



Principality, takes the cross, iii, 

13. 
Ratchis, duke of Friuli, i. 362. 
Ratchis, king of tbe Lombards, ii, 

154. 
Ravendinos, protospataire of the 

emperor Alexius, iii. 251, 406 — 

409. 
Ravenna, i. 108, 110, 114, 125, 195, 

339, 347, 349, 351, 357, 359,363, 

365; ii. 144. 
Reading; foundation of the aboey, 

iv. 149, and note; Henry L buried 

there, 151. Hugh of Amiens, 

abbot. 
Rebais, abbey of, ii. 308, 317; the 

relics of St. Evroult brought back 

from, 318—320. 
Recared, king of the Goths, i. 116. 
Rechin. Fulk the. 
Redwald, king of East Anglia (not 

of the " Gewissas"), ii. 145. 
Refectory, the, at St. EM-oult, built 

of squared stones, i. 468 ; ii. 259 
Reggio. in the Modenese, iii. 371. 
Reginald, abbot of Abmgdon, ii. 

466. 
Reginald de Baliol, ii. 196, 197; 

goes to Spain, iv, 113 ; revolts 

against Henry I., iii, 468. 
Reginald duke of Orleans, defeated 

by Rollo, i. 380. 
Reginald, abbot of Ramsey, ii. 326. 
Reginald de Sable, fathei- of Lisiard, 

a partisan of king Henry, i. 395. 
Reginald of Sap, a monk of St. 

E\Toult, i. 415. 
Reginald, abbot of, St.Evi'ouIt in 

1189, iv. 257. 
Reginald the Bald, a monk of St 

Evroult, and composer of musical 

services, ii. 96. 
Reginald, d'fichaufour, siirnamed 

Benedict on his becoming a monk 

at St. Evroult, i. 453 ; he goes twice 

to Apulia; his character, 454. 
Reginald, monk of St. E^Toult, a 

skilful grammarian, i. 388. 
Reginald de Roche, an eminent 
monk of St. Evroult, i. 467. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



387 



Reginald, see Eeynold. 

Kelics wrapped in deer-skins, ii. 
304; preserved at St. Evroult, i. 
430 ; those which Harold wore 
hung round the neck of William 
the Conqueror, i. 483. 

Reliquary of St. Romanus, at Rouen, 
ii. 124. 

Remalard, i. 451 ; ceded to Robert 
Curthose, ii. 109; besieged and 
taken by William the Conqueroi*, 
110. 

Remi, or Remigius (saint), i. 113; 
ii. 143, 273; his relics translated, 
i. 151 ; his feast day, ibid. 

Remi, a monk of Auxerre, i. 143. 

Remi, archbishop, of Rouen, i. 113, 
131, 144; ii. 151,152. 

Remi, bishop of Lincoln ; his journey 
to Rome, ii, 115; his death, 200, 
201. 

Rennes, John de Semes, or Samois, 
bishop of Gervase, abbot of, 

Renouard, the fortified mansion of 
Reginald Baliol, razed by Henry 
I., iii, 468. 

Reole, castle of, in Gascony, taken 
by Charles king of France, iv. 265. 

Repostel, William. 

Reptiles, none venomous atEvreux, 
ii. 126. 

Rcpton, Hepandun, monastery of, 
ii. 87, note. 

Restold, an aged priest found by 
Lanfranc living as a hermit in 
the niins of the old St. Evroult, 
ii. 385 ; sent there from the Bea- 
voisis; his visions, 312, 315. 

Reviers, see Richard de, &c. 

Revenue of William the Conquer- 
or computed, ii. 50. 

Reynold, abbot of Abingdon, ii. 
466. 

Reynold, bishop of Angers, after- 
wards archbishop of Rouen, iv. 
80, 105, 130. 

Reynold, count de Bar-sur-Seine, 
abbot of Citeaux, iii. 47. 

Reynold Bai'thelemi, a painter, de- 
corates the tomb of Robert de 



Rhuddlan in the abbey of St. 
Evi-oult, ii. 448. 

Reynold, count of Burgundy, i. 150 ; 
marries Adeliza, daughter of 
Duke Richard n., ii, 404; iii. 464. 

Reynold, leader of one of the bands 
of pilgrims in the crusade of Peter 
the Hermit, iii. 79, 84, 139. 

Reynold I., count de Clermont, ii. 
407, 408. 

Reynold de Grancei, iii. 344, 347, 
348, and note on the family, 

Rejmold, bishop of Langrcs; averse 
from a poem of his quoted, iii. 40. 

Reynold, a monk, by whom Orde- 
ricus was conducted from Shrews- 
buiy to Normandy, iv. 223 ; ii. 202. 

Rejoiold, bishop of Paris, ii. 346 ; 
uncle of Geoffrey, bishop of 
Chartres, 262, 

Reynold the Little, stevv^ard of the 
monks at Moulins, ii. 192. 

Reynold, archbishop of Rheims, iii. 5. 

Reynold, count of Rheims, ii, 345. 

Repiold deWarrenne, son of William 
and Gundrede, ii. 473; marches 
to quell the insurrection at Rouen, 
449; supports Robert Curthose, 
iii. 359, 374. 

Rheims, i. 415 ; ii. 7; archives of 
the archbishops, ii. 144; kings 
crowned and consecrated there; 
Lothaire, ii. 340; Hugh Capet, 
343; Philip son of Louis le Gros, 
iv. 105 ; peace concluded there be- 
tween Lothaire and the Emperor 
Otho, ii. 342 ; councils and synods 
held there; in 991, i. 143; ii. 343, 
344; in 1049, i. 151, 372; ii. 186; 
in 1119, i. 155; iv. 1—18, 253; 
Algar, Harold's brother, dies there, 
i. 487. Archbishops ; Arnulf, 
Gerbert, Gervase, Ralph le Vert, 
St. Remi, Reynold. Scholar, John 
of. 

Rhetoric, i. 467; ii. 40. 

Rhodes, i. 200; iii. 291. 
Rhone, the, i. 360; ii. 244. 
Rhuddlan, ii. 434; the castle built 
to curb the Welsh, 444, 445, and 



c c 2 



388 



GENERAL INDEX. 



note, 449. See Robert de, William 

de. 
Rhys-ap-Owen, a prince of South 

Wales, ii. 47 ; iii. 334. 
Rhys-ap-Tewdor, king of South 

Wales, ii. 267. 
Ribert, saint and monk, flourished 

at Rouen, ii. 147, 148. 
Richard d' Angerville, archdeacon 

of Lisieux, ii. 122; iii. 248. 
Richard Basset, a native of Mon- 

treuil-au-Houlme ; his elevation, 

iy. 165; his small patrimony, iv. 

165; his advancement and wealth ; 

chief justiciary of England, ibid. 

See Ralph Basset. 
Richard II., bishop of Bayeux, iii. 

206, 459; iv. 105, 134, 145. 
Richard III, bishop of Bayeux, son 

of Robert earl of Gloucester, iv. 

134, 135. 
Richard de Beaufou, i. 400. 
Richard de Beaufou, appointed 

bishop of Avranches, iv. 134, 

145. 
Richard de Beaumais, viscount of 

Shrewsbury, iii. 417 ; afterwards 

bishop of London, ibid.-, begins 

to rebuild St. Paul's after the fu-e, 

417,418. 
Richard, abbot of Bee. See Richard 

bishop of Evreux. 
Richard, a monk of Bee, abbot of St. 

Werburgh's at Chester, ii. 447. 
Richard de Bienfaite, lord of Bien- 

faite and Orbec, son of Gilbert, 

count de Brionne, i. 462; ii. 81, 

490, 493, 514,515. 
Richard de Bienfaite (son of the 

last), a monk of Bee, and after- 
wards abbot of Ely, ii, 493; 

iii. 268, 269, 
Richard, duke of Burgundy, i. 136, 

ii. 157, 338. 
Richard de Bourri, commands 

troops in the Vexin, iii. 210. 
Richard I., prince of Capua, son of 

Anquetil de Quarrel, i. 412, 437; 

ii. 464. 
Richard II., prince of Capua, suc- 



coured by Roger, count of Sicily, 
iii. 203, 238. 

Richard de Centilli, bishop of Seez 
in 1315, iv. 264. 

Richard, earl of Chester, son of Earl 
Hugh, ii. 49; iii. 282,356, 440; 
iv. 40 ; perishes in the wreck of 
the Blanche-Nef, ii. 4'^ ; iii 282; 
iv. 40 ; married Matilda de Blois, 
iii. 282, 356. 

Richard Coeur de Lion, iv. 257, 258. 

Richard de Coutances, a gi-eat bene- 
factor to St. E^Toult, brother of 
Roger de Warrenne, ii. 251 — 253. 

Richard de Courci takes arms 
against Robert de Belesme, ii. 
505; is in the ser^-ice of William 
Rufus, iii. 73; his son Robert, ii. 
505. 

Richard, bishop of Coutances, iv. 105. 

Richard, count d' Evreux, son of 
Archbishop Robert, i. 462; ii, 
160, 433; buried at St. Wandrille, 
448. 

Richard, bishop of Eatcux, before 
abbot of Bee, iv, 259, 

Richard d'E^Teux, son of Eulk the 
provost, defends the citadel of 
E\Teux against Henry I., iii, 478. 

Richard de Founieaux, monk of St, 
Vigor at Bayeux, and afterwards 
abbot of Preaux, iii. 35, 36, 460; 
his studies, character, and works, 
36. 

Richard Eresnel, builds a stronghold 
at Ancenis, iii. 471; in " arms 
against Henry I. ibid.; the place 
taken, Richard soon afterwards 
dies a monk of St. Eatcux, 473. 

Richard Goz, father of Hugh d' 
Avranches earl of Chester, i. 415, 
450; ii. 47, 242, 380. 

Richard, son of Henry I., surprised 
at Andeli, is suffered by Louis le 
Gros to go free from his sanc- 
tuary in a church, iii. 470, 471; 
saved by Ralph the Red fi-om 
being taken prisoner in the Vexin, 
471, 472; with his father at the 
siege of EM-eux, 476 ; at the battle 



GENERAL INDEX. 



389 



ofBremule, 482, 483; relieves the 
gaiTison of Breteuil, 489; inter- 
cedes with the king for his sister 
Juliana, wife of Eustace de Bre- 
teuil, iv. 19; his proposed mar- 
riage with the daughter of Ealph 
de Guader, 33, 59 ; embarks in the 
Blanche-Nef, 34; perishes in it, 
ii. 155; iv.40, 253; his body found, 
42. 

Eichard, son of Herluin, a canon of 
Eouen ; his epitaph on archbishop 
Maurilius, ii. 7. 

Eichard de Heudicourt, a noble 
knight, who, being wounded, be- 
comes a monk at St. Evroult, i. 
456, 469. 

Eichard de Heugleville, son of Ber- 
nard de St. Valeri, ii. 266; founds 
the bourg of Aufrai, ibid. ; is loyal 
to "William the Conqueror, 267. 

Eichard of Leicester, abbot of St. 
Evroult, iv. 180, 224, 254; jour- 
neys to a council at Eome, 208, 
213; dies in England from the 
fatigue, and is buiied at Thomey, 
213, 214. 

Eichard of Lewes, a crusader, falls 
at the siege of Montmorenci, iii. 
427, and note. 

Eichard de Luci, defends Falaise in 
1138, iv. 206. 

Eichard de Montfort, sonof Amauri, 
ii.485, 487, 495; iii. 23; his bro- 
ther Simon succeeds him, 426. 

Eichard I., duke of Normandy, i. 
137, 139, 381, 390, 458, 493; ii. 
158, 159, 299, 300, 490; iv. 73, 
240; half brother of Ealph, count 
of Bayeux, ii. 8 ; governs the duchy 
fifty-two years, 312 ; man-ies Gun- 
nor, 1 GO ; monasteries founded or 
restored by him, i. 381 ; ii. 66, 1 60, 
161. His sons, archbishop Kobert, 
Geoffrey count de Brionne. His 
daughter, Emma, queen of Eng- 
land. 

Eichard H., duke of Normandy, son 
of Eichard L, 145, 146 , 150, 375, 
382, 400; ii. 404; iii. 73, 412; iv. 



248 ; aids King Eobert at the siege 
of Melun,ii. 345 ; gi'ants the bishop- 
ric of Seez to William de Belesme 
iii. 24 ; rebuilds Fontenelles, i. 381 ; 
ii. 161; augments and endows Fe- 
camp, St. Ouen, and St. Mi- 
chael-on-the-Sea, 66, 160, 161, 
401, 412; his government and 
character, ii. 160, 161; marries 
Papa, 162; Dudo de St. Quentin 
dedicates his work to him, ii. 298. 
His sons, Dukes Eichard III., and 
Eobert the Magnificent. 

Eichard HL, duke of Normandy, i. 
381, 393; ii. 69, 161; iii. 37, 73, 
80; iv. 150; poisoned whileyoung, 
i. 381; ii. 161. 

Eichard of the Pi'incipality; in the 
first crusade, iii. 83, 93, 307, 316, 
320 ; is sent by Bohemond to 
France, 321. 

Eichard, son of count Eeginald of 
Apulia, a crusader, follows Bohe- 
mond, iii. 83. 

Eichard de Eeviers, a loyal partisan 
and counsellor of Henry L, ii. 
498; iii. 270, 282; his death, 
418. 

Eichard, natural son of Eobert Curt- 
hose, iii. 259 ; killed by accident 
in the New Forest, 260. 

Eichard H., abbot of St. Evroult in 
1188, iv. 257. 

Eichard, a novice and monk of St. 
E\TOult, i. 388; a good copyist, 
406; ii. 107. 

Eichard de St. Scholasse, i. 400. 

Eichard Scroop, father of Osberne; 
they held lands in Worcestershire, 
ii. 484, and note. 

Eichard Silvanus, or Forester, has 
a stronghold at St. Pois in 
the Avranches, iv. 182, 183, and 
note; ravages the country after 
the death of Henry L, 188; his 
vill burnt, and he is slain in a 
skii-mish, ibid. 

Eichard TesceUn, abbot of St. Ev- 
roult in 1320, iv. 264, 265. 

Eichard du Val Courjan, abbot of 



390 



GENERAL IXDEX. 



St. Evi'oult in 1247, iv. 260, 261. 

Richard, abbot of Verdun, i. 422. 

Eichard, second sou of William the 
Conqueror, i. 441 ; ii. 22, 348; 
his death young, by an accident 
in the Kew Forest, ii. 182. 

Richer I. de Laigle, son of Enge- 
nulf, ii. 108, 187, 258 ; killed by 
an accident, 379, 380 ; his hu- 
mauitj, 379 ; his other virtues, 
and portrait, 380. 

Richer II. de Laigle, son of Gilbert 
iii. 380, 486 ; baptized at St. Ev- 
roult, iv. 160 ; his acts, iii. 450, 
445, 456, 472, 491 ; iv. 86, 158, 
162,220,221. 

Richer, the monk, relates a mi- 
racle of St, Judoc, i. 475. 

Riculfus, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 
156; iv. 245. 

Riculfus, an old country priest, be- 
comes a monk of St. Evroult, i. 
388. 

Richer, the priest of Laigle, prays 
for the soul of Robert Bouet, iv. 

Rimini, i. 863. 

Riquier, Saint, i. 142. 

Risle, the, ii. 60,322; iii. 34, 191; 
iv. 68. 

Robec, a rivulet running into the 
Seine, ii. 139. 

Robert, son of Amam-i, governor of 
Plessis, iii. 453. 

Robert Andrew, an excellent scribe, 
ii. 204. 

Robert d'Anzi, a crusader, iii. 83. 

Robert I'Apostole, abbot of St. 
Evroult in 1438, iv. 267. 

Robert de Beauchamp, viscount of 
Arques, attempts to seize the 
young heir of Normandy, by 
order of Henry I., iii. 430; se- 
questers the castle of Saint-Saens, 
belonging to his governor Elias, 
431; in 1137, the sons of Robert 
Beauchamp refuse to surrender 
Bedford castle to King Stephen, 
iv., 195, 196. 

Robert de Beaumont, ii. 163; iii. 
33. 



Robert de Beauvais, i. 472. 

Robert I. de Belesme, i. 393, 405; 
murdered by the sous of Walter 
Sor, iv. 110. 

Robert II. de Belesme (sumamed 
Talvas,) iii 30; i. 406; ii. 75, 109, 
173, 195, 197, 203, 427,433,436, 
452, 457, 476, 485, 499, 505, 506, 
510; iii. 1, 24, 26, 27, 29, 30, 208, 
209, 220, 221,228, 229,240, 269, 
277, 278, 282, 325, 331, 334, 337, 
340,341,349,356, 357,360, 376— 
382, 442; iv. 5, 6, 109, 110; his 
character, ii. 458; iii. 30, 31. 

Robert de Belesme, surnamedPoard, 
iv. 162, 171, 220. 

Robert Bertram, iv. 200. 

Robert Bloet, chaplain of William 
the Conqueror, made bishop of 
Lincoln, iii. 201. 

Robert de Bostare, preferred from 
low estate by Hem-y I., iii. 328. 

Robert Bouet, archer of Richer de 
Laigle, pillages the lands of St. 
Evroult, iv. 158 ; is hanged by 
the burghers, 159 ; the priest of 
Laigle prays for his soul, 160. 

Robert I., duke of Burgundy, son 
of Robert king of France, i. 148; 
ii. 347, 399 ; iv. 134, 135. 

Robert, son of Robert I., duke of 
Burgundy, ii. 347 ; iv. 134, 135, 
136. 

Robert, son of Henry duke of Bur- 
gundy, bishop of Langres, iv. 135. 

Robert, the Burgundian, ii. 379; iii. 
236. 

Robert Brochard, brother of Ger- 
vase, archbishop of Rheims, iii, 
222. 

Robert Burdet, or de Culie, goes to 
Spain, iv. 114, and note; obtains 
the principality of Tarragona, 
115, 116, and notes; heroic de- 
fence by his wife Sibylla during 
his absence, 117, 118 ; he rein- 
forces Alfonso, king of Aragon, 
122. 

Robert de Caen ; see Robert earl of 
Gloucester, so called. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



391 



Robert de Caen, a crusader, made 
prisoner by Balak, iii. 401, 402, 
403. 
Robert, abbot of Caen, iii. 412. 
Robert Champart, archbishop of 

Canterbury, i, 459. 
Robert II. (^not Richard), prince of 

Capua, iv. 138. 
Robert de Chandos, governor of 
Gisors for Henry I. in 1123, i v. 
69 ; escapes an ambush laid for 
him, and burns the bourg, 70. 
Robert, bishop of Chartres, ii. 206. 
Robert, son of Hugh earl of Ches- 
ter, monk of St. Ervoult, ii. 257; 
abbot of St. Edmond's, iii. 269. 
Robert de Cordai goes to Apulia, ii. 

209. 
Robert Cornard, jester in the court 

of William Rufus, ii. 477. 
Robert de Courbepine, father of 
Gilbert Maminot, bishop of Lisi- 
eux, ii. 128. 
Robert de Courci, son of Baudri 

the Teutonic i. 427. 
Robert de Courci, son of Richard, 
ii. 505 ; wounded in an expedition 
against the Munceaux, iii. 221 ; 
resists the bands of freebooters, 
333. 
Robert de Courci, the younger; his 
gallantry at the battle of Bre- 
mule, 486 ; is made prisoner, 
486; takes the side of King Ste- 
phen, iv. 199. 
lobert Curthose, duke of Nor- 
mandy, son of William the Con- 
queror, i.441; ii. 8, 22, 107, 168, 
348; an alliance for him pro- 
posed with Margaret, the heiress 
of Maine, i. 448; ii. 74, 77, 481; 
in 1067, joined with Matilda in 
the government of Normandy 
during his father's absence, 14 — 
22; about 1077, is present at the 
consecration of several Norman 
churches, 116; does homage for 
Maine to the count of Anjou, 77; 
his quarrels and hostilities with 
his father, 107, 190, 182 ; iii 



259 ; was at the court of France 
at the Conqueror's death, ii. 402; 
succeeds to the duchy of Nor- 
mandy, 414 ; cedes the Cotentin 
to his brother Henry, 43 1 ; pro- 
posal for making him king of 
England, 432 — 434 ; his admin- 
stration of the duehy and rela- 
tions with his brothers William 
Rufus and Henry, 450 — 456, 
460, 462, 474—476, 484, 485, 
488—492, 494, 495, 498—502, 
510, 520, 521 ; iii. 9, 10, 24, 28; in 
1096, he mortgages the duchy to 
William Rufus, 73, 80, 205 ; 
goes to the crusade; his ex- 
ploits, 73, 82, 90, 95, 99, 101, 
122, 136, 139, 159, 160, 166, 184 
—186, 190, 205, 206, 251; re- 
turns from the crusade, 251 ; iv. 
108, 109 ; iii. 252, 255, 256; 
marries Sibylla de Conversana, 
256 ; her dowry enables him to 
redeem his duchy, 257 ; returns 
to Noi-mandy in 1100 (the month 
after the death of William Ru- 
fus), 272 ; his relations with 
Henry I., and events during his 
government, 254, 265, 274 — 279, 
282—286, 333, 340—344, 347, 
349, 356—358, 361, 373 ; he is 
defeated and made prisoner at 
Tinchibrai, i. 154, 260, 380, 381; 
iv. 26, 86, 252 ; conducted to 
Rouen, iii, 282 ; sent to England 
and imprisoned, 386, 430 ; iv. 
26 ; complaints made of his 
treatment by Louis le Gros at 
the council of Rheims, 5; Henry 
I. justifies his conduct to the pope 
at Gisors, 23—26 ; while in 
prison at Devizes, Robert learns 
in a dream his son's death, 96 ; 
he dies in Cardiff castle, and is 
buried at Gloucester, 96, 122, 
123, 254 ; a prophecy of Merlin 
applied to him, 102 ; his person 
described, iL 108 ; his character, 
ii. 108, 412, 413, 427, 428 ; iii 
272 ; his profuse liberality, 428; 



392 



GENERAL INDEX. 



iii. 278 ; his bad admiuistration, 
360, &c., 384, 385 ; his amours, 
■with the daughter of an old 
priest, iii. 259 ; with Agnes, 
widow of Walter Giffard, 343; 
his surname of Gambaron, or 
Curthose, ii. 108, 428; iii. 205. 
Robert de Comines? {de Cuminis') 
has the county of Durham from 
William the Conqueror, ii. 21; 
is slain by the people, 21,413. 
Robert, castellan of Dangu, which 

he burns, iii. 479. 
Robert le Despenser, ii. 476, and 

note. 
Robert, count de Dreux, who died 

in 1233, iv. 260. 
Robert the Eloquent, of Chaumont, 

lord of Parnes, i. 472. 
Robert I. d'Estoteville, ii. 187. 
Robert II. d'Estoteville, a story of, 
iii. 367, 368; in the army of duke 
Robert, 376; is made prisoner at 
Tinchibrai, and condemned to 
perpetual imprisonment, 383. 
Robert III. d'Estoteville, is made 
prisoner at Dive, iii. 374; his 
release, 379. 
Robert, chaplain of Robert XL d'Es- 
toteville, relates the story of his 
lord to Ordericus, iii. 368, 
Robert, count d'Eu, one of the Con- 
queror's followers, i. 462; ii. 121, 
474; iii. 72; is at the battle of 
Mortemer, i. 152; ii. 408; his 
large domains in England, 50; 
defeats the Danes in Lindsey, 27. 
Robert de Ferrers, earl of Derby, 
iv. 203, 204, and note; called 
Robert de Tutbury, 203. Cf. i. 
508; ii. 376. 
Robert, earl of Flanders, snrnamed 
the Frisian, i. 430; ii. 59, 61, 
347, 410; iv. 94. 
Robert II., earl of Flanders, sur- 
named the Jerusalemite, his cru- 
sade, iii. 81, 82, 90, 95, 99, 101, 
110, 122, 136, 140, 159,163,166, 
189, 183, 185, 186; returns from 
tho Holy Land, 250, 255, 256; 



fortifies Arras, 429, 430 ; is 
thrown from his horse and 
killed, 429. 
Robert, duke, and afterwards king, 
of France, i. 389; ii. 157, 303, 
337. 
Robert II., king of France, i. 142, 
143, 148, 390, 476; ii. 160, 344, 
347; iv. 135. 
Robert Fresnel sells to the abbey of 
St. Evroult the church of Notre- 
Dame-du-Bois, i. 399. 
Robert de Gace, i. 449, 476. 
Robert Gamaliel, monk of St. 
Evroult, an excellent chanter, i. 
435. 
Robert Giffard goes to Apulia, iii. 
56; is at the siege of Durazzo, 
ii. 358. 
Robert Fitz-Girard, Bohemond's 

standard-bearer, iii. 114. 
Robert, son of Giroie, i. 390, 393, 
394, 395; restoi;es the monastery 
of St. Evroult, 386—400; his 
death by poison, 424, 425. 
Robert Giroie, son of the pre- 
ceding, lord of St. Ceneri, i. 394, 
456, 459; iii. 26—29, 340, 475, 
454, 475; his death, about 1124, 
ii. 456. 
Robert, son of Giroie, allows 
William Rufus to garrison his 
castle of Lchoufour, iv. 197. 
Robert, earl of Gloucester, called 
Robert de Caen, natural son of 
Henry I., iii. 440; is at the battle 
of Bremule, 482 ; at the siege of 
Montfort, iv. 61; Henry leaves 
him 60,000 livres, 149; present 
at the king's death, 150 ; sus- 
pected of favouring the count of 
Anjou, 176; comes to England 
with Eang Stephen, 184; inclines 
to the earl of Anjou, and in- 
fluences Bayeux and Caen to 
acknowledge him, 191 ; holds 
the castle of Caen, 199, 200; his 
castles and power in England, 
200, 201; William Fitz-Alan, 
viscount of Shrewsbury, married 



GENER.iL INDEX. 



393 



his niece, 204; comes to England 
•with his sister, the countess of 
Anjou, 212; receives her at his 
castle, and espouses her cause, 
212; enlists 10,000 Welshmen, 
their cruelties, 213; marches to 
Lincoln, 215; draws up his army, 
216; commands in the battle, 
217; King Stephen surrenders to 
him, his cousin, 217; he conducts 
the king to the Countess Matilda 
a prisoner, 218; i, 157. Married 
Matilda, daughter of Robert 
Fitz-Hamon, ii. 473. His son 
Richard, bishop of Bayeux. 

Robert de Grentemesnil, i. 386, 395, 
396; dies of wounds received in 
an engagement with Robert de 
Beaumont, 150, 401. 

Robert de Grentemesnil, son of the 
preceding, i. 186; restores the 
abbey of St. Evroult, i. 151,384— 
395; becomes a monk there, 400; 
his benefactions, 401 ; prior, 
413, 416, 417, 418; abbot, 422, 
423; his administration,425 — 436, 
443 ; returns from the abbey, 432 ; 
goes to Apulia, 434, 444—446; 
ii. 372; founds the abbeys of St. 
Euphemia, Venosa, and Melito, i. 
438, 439; returns to Normandy, 
ii. 209; Philip I. names him for 
the see of Chartres, 209; his 
death, ii. 362. 

Robert de Grentemesnil, son of 
Hugh, iii. 56, 248, 333, 376. 

Robert, son of William de Grente- 
mesnil, iii. 56. 

Robert, father of Warin abbot of 
St. Evroult, iv. 179. 

Robert Guiscard, son of Tancred de 
Hauteville; his conquests in Apu- 
lia, i. 209,395,412,437,438,446; 
ii. 162, 163; wars with the em- 
peror Alexius on behalf of Mi- 
chael Parapinaces,ii. 10,222,354, 
356 ; siege of Durazzo, 358—360; 
expedition to Rome in support of 
Gregory, vii. 360 — 364; returns 
to Illy ria, 365; occupies Durazzo, 



366; he is poisoned (Ordericus 
states) by his wife Sichelgade, 
366—371. 

Robert Hatchet, a freebooter, iii. 453. 

Robert de la Haie ; Henry I. ad- 
dresses letters patent to him and 
others, iv. 56. 

Robert Fitz-Hamon is loyal to 
William Rufus, ii. 437 ; the king 
grants him the domains of the 
late Queen Matilda, 498 ; he founds 
Tewksbury abbey, 250; serves 
in Normandy under Henry I., 
iii. 356; is taken prisoner, 359, 
and note; released, 371; his wife 
Sibylla de Montgomeri, ii. 195. 

Robert de Harcourt, see William 
de. 

Robert de Harcourt, bishop of 
Coutances, iv. 262. 

Robert, bishop of Hereford, ii. 466. 

Robert the Heretic, ii. 208. 

Robert, abbot of Jumieges, i. 387, 
388; ii. 66. 

Robert, the son of Albert de Laci, 
joins the eaguefor raising Robert 
Curthose to the throne, iii. 277, 
278. 

Robert earl of Leicester, son of 
Robert earl of Mellent (count de 
Meulan), ii, 192; iii. 331, 348; 
brought up in the court of Henry 
L, iv. 58 ; continues loyal to him, 
iii. 474: is at his death, iv. 150; 
in arms against Roger de Toeni, 
157, 158, 162; his lands ravaged, 
197; peace with Roger restored, 
206 ; assaults the bishops at Ox- 
ford, 210; concludes a truce for 
his estates in Normandy, 220,221; 
his wife Amicia, daughter of 
Ralph de Guader, ii. 192; iii. 32, 
33; iv. 59. 

Robert de Limesi, bishop of Lich- 
field, ii. 447; iv. 49. 

Robert, son of Aubrey de Lincoln, 
holds Wareham Castle against 
King Stephen, iv. 201. 

Robert the Magnificent, duke of 
Normandy, i. 381, 383, 391, 393, 



394 



GENERAL INDEX. 



394, 411, 419, 448; ii. 129, 130; j 
iii. 73, 443; his pilgrimage to 
Jerusalem, i. 14S, 322; ii. 161, 
382 ; supports Henry I. of France, 
i. 148; ii. 399; who cedes the 
Vexin to him, 399; he founds the 
abbey of Cerisi, 382 ; dies at Nice, 
i. 148, 382; ii. 400; is surnamed 
the Jerusalemite, iii. 73. 

Robert Malet, proceedings of Henry 
T. against, to forfeiture and ban- 
ishment, iii. 325, 329. 

Robert of Malpas ; his severities on 
the Welsh, ii. 47. 

Robert, Mauconduit, lost in the 
Blanche-Nef, iv. 41. 

Robert de Maule goes to the cru- 
sade, iii. 367. 

Robert de Medavi, iv. 169. 

Robert, count de Mortain, earl of 
Leicester (called also earl of 
Mellent in England), i. 489; ii. 
34; is at the battle of Hastings, 
i. 484; in the reign of William 
Rufus, and in his councils, 488 — 
491; iii. 72, 209, 234, 235; after 
the death of William Rufus at- 
tends Henry I. to London, 267; 
is one of his ministers of state, 
270 ; his acts and counsels in 
Henry's reign, 272, 279, 283, 284, 
329, 330, 347, 348, 356,362, 376, 
379, 420, 440; his death, 443, 
448. 

Robert, son of Baldwin de Meules, 
ii. 488, 490—492. 

Robert, son of Murdac, ii. 258, and 
note. 

Robert, abbot of Moleme, iii. 40, &c ; 
he founds the abbey of Citeaux, 
45, &c. 

Robert de Mowbrai, earl of North- 
umberland, nephew of Geoffrey, 
bishop of Coutances, ii. 50; in- 
herits of the bishop 280 manors, 
ii. 50; iii. 17; takes the side of 
Robert Curthose, ii. 173; of Wil- 
liam Rufus, 436, 498; disloyally 
kills Malcolm, king of Scots, iii. 
11; plunders some Norwegian 



merchants, iii. 18; revolts against 
William Rufus, ii. 380; iii. 18; 
he is imprisoned during thirty- 
four years, 20 ; his person and 
character described, iii. 17, 18. 

Robert de Montfort, iii 334, 241, 
331, 356; at the battle of Tinchi- 
brai, 376; charged with treason 
against Henry I., he joins the 
crusade, 387 ; serves with Bohe- 
mond, betrays him, 388, 389; his 
death, 390; called yormceps militice, 
241, and strator Normannici exer- 
citus hereditario jure, 388. 

Robert, count de Mortain (called in 
England earl of Morton), i. 462; 
ii. 416; has large domains in 
England, 50; repels the Danes in 
Lindsey, 27; is with AYilliam the 
Conqueror in his last hours, 415, 
416; holds Pevensey castle, iii. 
205; surrenders it to William 
Rufus, ibid. ; his chaplain, Vitalis, 
founder of Savigni; his wife Ma- 
tilda de Montgomeri. 

Robert du Neuborg, earl of War- 
wick, iii. 34; revolts against 
Henry L, 450, 458; makes his 
peace, iv. 20; espouses the cause 
of Geoffrey Plantagenet, iv. 165. 

Robert de Neuville garrisons Bridg- 
north, iii. 334; surrenders it to 
Henry I, 336. 

Robert Nicholas, monk of St. Ev- 
roult, superintends the new build- 
ings, ii. 259. 

Robert, son of William Pantulf, 
ii. 211, 397. 

Robert de Paris censures Paschal 
IL, iii. 197. 

Robert, son of Hugh Paganus, ii. 
233. 

Robert Pecceth, bishop of Coventry, 
iv. 49. 

Robert de Pontefract, son of Ilbert 
de Laci, iii. 325,329. 

Robert de Prunelai, his history and 
character, iii. 421, 422; monk of 
St. Evroult, ii. 523; iv. 50; prior 
of Noyon, iv. 421 ; abbot of Thor- 



GENERAL INDEX. 



895 



ney, ii. 323, 326, 523; iii. 421, 
423; iv. 50, 214. 

Robert Quarrel, castellan of St. 
Ceneri, ii. 456, 459. 

Robert de Rhuddlan, ii. 257, 258; 
son of Umfrid,an Anglo-Dane, by 
the sister of Hugh de Grentemes- 
nil, 443; an esquire in the house- 
hold of, and knighted by, Ed- 
ward the Confessor, ii. 443, 444 ; 
visits his kindred in Normandy, 
444; returns to England Avith 
Hugh d'Avranches, and has un- 
der him the government of his 
earldom of Chester, 444; builds 
the castle of Rhuddlan, and curbs 
the Welsh, 444, 445 ; builds the 
castle of Diganwy, 44 5; joins the 
league against William Rufus in 
1088, 434; his cruelties to the 
Welsh, 445; I'eturns to Wales 
from the siege of Rochester, 442 : 
account of the descent of Gryf- 
fyth-ap-Conan, in resisting which 
Robert fell, 445 — 447, and notes; 
he is buried in St. Werburgh's, 
at Chester, 447; his remains 
removed to St. Evroult by his 
brother, a monk of that house, 
447; his benefactions to it, 258, 
443, 444; his person and cha- 
racter, 443, 445 ; his epitaph, 
composed by Ordericus, 448, 
449. 

Robert Fitz-Richard, governor of 
York, massacred, ii. 21, 22, 

Robert de Iloia, bishop of Evreux 
in 1200, iv. 258. 

Robert de Romilli, witness of a 
charter of Ralph de Conches, ii. 
189. 

Robert I., archbishop of Rouen, son 
of Richard I. duke of Normandy, 
i. 146; ii. 160; iii. 433; count of 
Evreux, ii. 160; iii. 433; receives 
the present of an illuminated 
psalter from Queen Emma, i. 
401, 402; rebuilds Rouen cathe- 
dral, ii. 160, 167; his wife Har- 
leva and sons, 160. 



Robert II., archbishop of Rouen in 
i. 123, iv. 259. 

Robert de Sable, son of Lisaird 
lord of Gace, iv. 156. 

Robert de St. Ceneri, see Robert 
Giroie. 

Robert II., abbot of St. Evroult, be- 
fore a monk of Bee, iv. 256. 

Robert, abbot of Dive, before a 
monk of St. Deuys, gives the 
duke 140 marks for the prefer- 
ment, iii. 368 ; the monks disperse, 
he fortifies the abbey, 309 ; lays a 
plot to capture Henry I., 373, 
374; he is disgraced and banished, 
375; becomes prior of Argen- 
teuil, and is killed by a peasant, 
375. 

Robert, son of Herbran de Sauque- 
ville, ii. 268; leaves the Blanche- 
Nef, and escapes the shipwreck, 
iv. 42. 

Robert of the Seal, a clerk in the 
chancery of Henry I., iv. 151. 

Robert, abbot of Seez, ii. 208 ; is at 
the Conqueror's funeral, 420; his 
death, 464. 

Robert, bishop of Seez, in the sixth 
century, ii. 244. 

Robert,bishop of Seez (1070 — 1082), 
ii. 43,61, 157, 208, 211, 416; iv. 
250. 

Robert, monk of Seez, a superior 
copyist, iii. 245. 

Robert de Sourdeval, a crusader, iii. 
83. 

Robert le Tellier, monk of Bee, 
prior of St. Imer, abbot of St. 
Evroult, iv. 267. 

Robert de Tombelaine, an able 
writer, made abbot of St. Victor, 
ii. 429; iii. 35; retires to Rome 
36; ii. 429. 

Robert, count de Troyes, ii. 341. 

Robert, son of Turstan, a crusader, 
iii. 83. 

Robert d'Ussi killed at the siege of 
Saint-Suzanne, ii. 379. 

Robert de Vaux, a benefactor to 
St. Evroult, ii. 190. 



396 



GENERAL IXDEX. 



Robert de Vieux-Pont, sent to rein- 
force John de la Fleche, ii. 76 ; 
killed at the siege of Saint- Su- 
zanne, ii. 379. 

Robert de Vieux-Pont, at the cru- 
sade, iii. 392. 

Robert the Viscount, ii. 270. 

Robert de Vere, a clerk of the seal 
to Henry I., iv. 151. 

Robert de Vermandois, count of 
Chalons and Beaune, i. 139. 

Robert de Vitot, banished for assassi- 
nating count Gilbert, i. 449 ; re- 
stored, and dies of a wound, 450. 

Rochefort, Guy the Red, count of 

Rochefort, Beatrix, wife of Geoffrey 
count of Perche, said by mistake 
to be a daughter. 

Roche - Guion, la, Guy de Roche, 
lord of, is bribed to deliver it to 
the English, iii. 209. 

Roche-d'Ige, la, i. 425 ; ii. 453 ; 
seized by Mabel de Montgomeri, 
ii. 144 ; held in, 1 18, by Stephen 
de Blois, iii. 455. 

Rochester, siege of, ii. 436 — 440 ; 
the capitulation, 441 ; iii. 205. 

Rodelinde, queen of the Lombards, 
ii. 148, 153. 

Rodoald, king of the Lombards, ii. 
146, 153. 

Rodrigues, count of the Asturias, 
iv. 125, 143. 

Roduan (mispri. Rodnan), king of 
Aleppo, iii. 393, 398. 

Rodolf, see Ralph. 

Rogations first instituted, i. 113. 

Roger de Barneville, a crusader at 
the siege of Nice, iii. 95; scales 
the walls of Antioch, 123; his 
death, 131. 

Roger of Bayeux, or Argences. ab- 
bot of Fecamp, iii. 414, 415, 459 ; 
iv. 105. 

Roger de Beaumont, i. 384, 401, 
462; ii. 45, 178, 182, 488—492; 
becomes a monk at Preaux, iii. 
33; his death, 34. His sons, Robert 
earl of Mellent, and Henry earl 
of Warwick. i 



Roger le Begue, iv. 170, 171 ; lord 
of Grossoeuvre, 182. 

Roger de Bienfaite, or Fitz-Richard, 
ii. 173, 493; iii. 205; is at the 
battle of Bremule, 481, 4^82; his 
gallantry, 484 ; attends the Em- 
press Matilda to Germany, 
485. 

Roger Bigod, one of the chief coun- 
sellors of Henry L, iii. 270; his 
death, and burial in the church at 
Thetford which he founded, 418; 
his epitaph, ibid. 

Roger la Bourse, duke of Apulia, 
son of Robert Griscard. ii. 356, 
464; iii. 82,256. 

Roger de Breteuil, earl of Here- 
ford, son of William Fitz-Osberne, 
ii. 60, 78, 82, 190, 415. 

Roger de ]3ulli has the castle of 
Blyth, iii. 34, 220, 221, 232. 

Roger de Clare, see Roger de Bien- 
faite. 

Roger de Clinton, bishop of Coven- 
try, iv. 44. 

Roger, son of Corbet, garrisons 
Bridgnorth, iii. 334 ; surrenders it 
to the king, 386. 

Roger, bishop of Coutances, iii. 459, 
iv. 36. 

Roger de Ferrers, ii. 486. 

Roger de Glos, ii. 228, 517; iii. 
491. 

Roger of Gloucester, falls in a joust 
at Falaise, iii. 372. 

Roger de Hauterive, monk of St. 
Evroult, prior of Parnes, i. 469, 
470, 472. 

Roger d'lvri, butler to the king, is 
governor of Rouen castle, ii. 109; 
his lands ravaged, 398; founds 
the abbey of Ivri, iii. 23; mar- 
ries Adeline de Grentemesnil, ii. 
506. 

Roger de Jumieges, a skilful 
copyist, and monk of St. Evroult, 
i. 413. 

Roger de Laci is banished from 
England, iii. 21, and note; in 
the councils of Robert Curthose, 



GENERAL INDEX. 



39: 



iv, 25; commands his troops, ii. 
340. 

Eoger de Laigle, son of Engenulf, 
buried at St. Evroult, i. 427. 

Roger, abbot of Lessai, i. 453. 

Roger, bishop of Lisieux, i. 392. 

Roger, brother of Herbert de Li- 
sieux, defends_the tower ofVatte- 
ville, iv. 72. 

Roger, prior of Maule, ii. 219. 

Roger de Merleraut, i. 395. 

Roger de Moubrai, i. 462. 

Roger de Moubrai, lord of Bas- 
soches, iv. 176; has a chief com- 
mand in the battle of the Stand- 
ard, 205. 

Roger de Montgomeri, father of 
Roger earl of Montgomeri and of 
Gilbert, i. 389, 451. 

Roger de Montgomeri, i. 400, 450, 
455, 462 ; ii. 1 63,207, 209, 2 10 ; son 
of Roger, i. 389 ; viscount of the 
Hiemois, 389,405; lordof Echau- 
four and Montreuil, ii. 193, 194 ; is 
a favourite of William the Con- 
queror, when duke, i. 431 ; had 
the government of Normandy 
during his expedition to England, 
ii. 15 ; comes over and has Chi- 
chester, Arundel, and the earldom 
of Shrewsbury, 14, 48 ; his ser- 
vices, 77, 178, 258 ; after the 
Conqueror's death, inclines se- 
cretly to Robert Curthose, 434, 
436; returns to Normandy, and 
opposes the duke, 451, 453 ; 
makes terms with him, 457; his 
death, ii. 203 ; iii. 32 ; his cha- 
racter, ii. 48; he founds the abbey 
of Troarn, i. 389 ; ii. 197,462; 
restores the abbey of Seez, i. 405, 
413 ; ii. 197, 462 ; is a benefac- 
tor and protector of St. Evroult, 
1409, 410 ; ii. 196, 197,254,444 ; 
benefactor to the abbeys of Cluni 
and Caen, ii. 197 ; iii. 338 ; he 
founds Shrewsbury abbey at the 
instance of the father of Orderi- 
cus, ii. 197, 202. His wives, see 
Mabel; Adelaide du Puiset. 



Roger, abbot of Mount-St.-Michael, 
ii. 420. 

Roger de Mortemer conquers at the 
battle of Mortemer, i. 150 ; ii. 
349, 408 ; banished and recalled, 
408. 

Roger, prior of Noyon-sur-Andelle, 
iii. 420; his buildings there, 423; 
his epitaph, ibid. 

Roger the Poor, son of Roger bishop 
of Salisbury by Maud of Rams- 
bury, iv. 211. 

Roger le Poitevln, son of Roger de 
Mongomeri, ii. 195, 203, 506 ; 
iii. 33, 277, 308, 309. 

Roger of the Principality governs 
Antioch, iii. 322, 391 ; marches 
against Ylgazi, 391; his death, 
322, 391. 

Roger, an old priest, becomes a 
monk of St. Evroult, i. 388 ; is re- 
moved to St. Martin of Seez, 405. 

Roger de St. John, iii, 455. 

Roger, bishop of Salisbury, minister 
of Henry L, iv. 161, 209, 210; 
favours the party of Anjou, 210 ; 
is arrested by King Stephen, 
210; his death, 211. 

Roger du Sap, abbot of St. Evroult ; 
his family, ii. 185,259, 357; monk 
of St. Evroult, i. 443, 468, 470; 
ii. 185, 191, 259; elected abbot, 
260, 522, 523 ; consecration, 244, 
245 ; his acts and administration, 
ii. 214, 265, 397, 419, 429, 448 ; 
523 ; iii. 29, 55 ; iv. 224 ; directs 
Ordericus to take priest's orders, 
iii. 415 ; encourages him to write 
his history, i. 2, 3 ; ii. 112, 
114; his letter to Henry I. resign- 
ing his office, iv. 53, 54 ; is pre- 
sent at the election of his succes- 
sor, 56; his life afterwards, ibid.; 
his death, 57, 254 ; verses to his 
memory composed by Ordericus, 
57. 

Roger, abbot of St. Evroult in 1218, 
before prior of Preaux, iv. 259. 

Roger I., or the Elder, count of 
Sicily, son of Taucred, i. 412, 



398 



GENERAL INDEX. 



428 ; ii. 438 ; iii. 82, 203, 238 ; 
iv. 85 ; his death, iv. 134. 

Roger II., or the Yoimger, count, 
and afterwards king of Sicily, son 
of the preceding, iv. 85, 128, 134 ; 
becomes king, i. 158 ; iv. 194. 

Roger, son of Roger king of Sicily, 
duke of Apulia, i. 158 ; iv. 254. 

Roger Suisnar, a farmer, whose 
child sucks the nipple of Mabel 
de Belesme, i. 410. 

Roger I. de Toeni, surnamed the 
Spaniard, i. 149, 419 ; ii. 489 ; 
standard - bearer of Normandy, 
188 ; founder of the abbey of 
Conches, i. 382 ; perished in the 
lawless times of Duke William's 
minority, i. 382, 401 ; ii. 163, 489. 

Roger II. de Toeni, ii. 190, 496 ; 
his death, 498. 

Roger III. de Toeni, iii. 355 ; iv. 
146, 147, 157, 158, 162, 163, 170, 
171, 174, 176, 198, 199, 206. 

Roger de Warrenne, nephew of 
William de Warrenne earl of 
Surrey, becomes a monk of St. 
Evroult, ii. 185, 249, 447 ; his 
person, habits, character, and skill 
in works of art, 251, 252 ; attends 
Abbot Mainier to England, 253. 

Roger, viscount of the Cotentia, son 
of Nigel,iv. 198; governs Norman- 
dy for King Stephen as justiciary, 
184, 185;heismurdered, 195, 198. 

Roger, son of Henry earl of War- 
wick, iii. 34. 

Rohais, daughter of Hugh de 
Grentemesnil, wife of Robert de 
Courci, ii. 505, 506. 

Roland, standard-bearer of the 
Franks, killed by RoUo, i. 379, 
380. 

Roll of the benefactors to St. Evroult 
used in the office for the dead, i. 
447 ; obituary roll of William, 
abbot of Fecamp, ii. 413, 414. 

Rollo, i. 136, 380 ; ii. 50, 104, 156, 
179, 296, 310, 432, 452; iii. 73; 
iv. 244, 245, 246 ; his tomb and 
epitaph, 165, 166. 



Romania, iii, 79, 93, 127. 

Romans, the, ii. 360, 447. 

Romanus II., the Armenian, i. 136, 
137 ; ii. 157. 

Romanus II., emperor, i. 137 ; ii. 159. 

Romanus Diogenes, emperor, ii. 
162, 167 ; iii. 366. 

Romanus, patrician and exarch of 
Ravenna, i. 347. 

Romanus, Saint, archbishop of 
Rouen, i. 119 ; ii. 146, 284 ; iv. 
238. 

Romanus, a thievish monk of St. 
Evroult, i, 402 ; goes a pilgrim to 
Jerusalem, 403. 

Romanus, see Clement. 

Rome, i. 85, and passim to the end ; 
ii. 8, 144, etc.; — councils at (1059), 
ii. 41 ; (1 102), iii. 50 ; (1112), 147 ; 
(1139), 208, 209, 213; iv. 254; 
(1179), 256; (1215), 258; jour- 
nevs and pilgrimages to ; of Cead- 
waU and Offa, i. 125 ; ii. 151, 
Lanfranc, ii. 8, of Robert Curt- 
hose and other crusaders, iii. 81, of 
Odo, bishop ef Bayeux, 206, of 
Anselm,237 ; — assaults and sieges; 
by Odoacer, ii. 143, by the em- 
peror Henry IV., 350, 353, 360, 
by Robert Guiscard, 363, by 
Henry V., iii. 196; iv. 11, by 
the emperor Lothaire, iv. 133, 
2 54 ; — coronations there ; of Char- 
lemagne, i. 133, 367, of the Em- 
peror Otho, iv. 258. 

Romney, Sussex, taken by assault 
after the battle of Hastings, i. 488. 

Romoald, of Bari, ii. 392. 

Romoald, king of the Lombards, i. 
352. 

Ros, William de. 

Roscelin, viscount de Beaumont, 
son-in-law of Henry I., iv. 146. 

Roscelin of Stainton, see Stainton. 

Roscignolo, the count of, in the 
crusade, iii. 83, 89. 

Rosamond, wife of Alboin, king of 
the Lombards, ii. 146, 153. 

Rotarith, king of the Lombards, ii. 
146, 153. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



899 



Eotarith. duke of Bergamo, ii. 153. 

Rotrou L, count duPerche, ii. 110; 
iv. 109. 

Rotrou II., count du Perche, in the 
crusade with Robert Curthose, 
iii. 79; iv. 109; in arms against 
Robert de Belcsme, ii. 522 ; iii. 
31, 340 ; serves Henry I., iii. 
356, 445, 456, 491; is present at 
his death, iv. 150; in 1105, he 
goes to Spain in aid of his cousin 
Alfonso I., iv. 109 ; again in 1114, 
111, 112, 118; takes service un- 
der King Stephen, 177,212; joins 
the party of the countess of Anjou, 
219, 221. Matilda, daughter of 
Henry I., his wife, iii. 345; iv. 
40, 110, 111. 

Rotrou, son of Henry earl of War- 
wick, archdeacon of Rouen, 
bishop of Evreux, iv. 209 ; at- 
tends the funeral of John bishop 
of Lisieux, 221; archbishop of 
Rouen, 256. 

Rouen, description of, ii. 131 ; ety- 
mology of the name, ii. 131; iv. 
20, 21; its foundation attributed 
to Julius Caesar, ibid.; Chris- 
tianity introduced by St. Niga- 
sius, ii. 123 ; pillaged by the 
Northmen, i. 135, 377, 379; ii. 
155; iv. 244; various events at, — 
duke Richard I. installed, ii. 299; 
Louis d'Outremer imprisoned 
there, 159, 301; in the reign of 
William the Conqueror, i. 459; 
ii. 102, 120, 210, 376 ; his 
last hours and death there, 400, 
etc. ; — in the time of Robert 
Curthose and William Rufus, 
451, 488, 499 — 503 ; an in- 
surrection, 510; iii. 223, 229, 
234, 257, 361; Robert Curthose, 
brought there a prisoner, 382; — 
occurrences under Henry I., 440, 
450, 453, 473, 475, 485; iv. 50, 
62, 75; the corpse of Henry I. 
brought there, and lies in state, 
150 ; William de Warrenne has 
the custody of the place, 151; — 



under King Stephen, 157, 163, 
164 (the great fire) ; — later oc- 
currences, 255 — 257, 268. 

Rouen, archbishops of, from Mellon 
to Geoffrey, ii. 189—169. 

Rouen cathedral founded, ii. 123; 
rebuilt, by archbishop Robert, 
160 ; consecrated by Maurilius, 
165, 167; tombs of Rollo and 
William Longue-Epee, 11, 165, 
166. 

Rouen, synods held there, i. 432, 
61 — 65; iii. 69 — 72, 459; iv. 29, 
31, 103—105, 262. 

Rougemontiers, the place where the 
battle, generally called of Bourg- 
Teronde, was fought, vi, 78. 

Roumare, William de. 

Rualed, a vassal of the abbey of St, 
Evroult, his escape from a dun- 
geon, iv. 1, 2. 

Rualon d' A v ranches, in the service 
of Henry I., iii. 489. 

Rualon of Dinan, at the crusade, 
iii. 401—403. 

Rufinian, father of Pope St. Eu- 
genius, i. 352. 

Rufinus, of Aquilca, a Christian 
writer, i. 313. 

Rufinus, father of Pope St. Sil- 
vester, i. 324. 

Rufinus, Saint, a martyr in Gaul, 
ii. 138. 

Rugni, near Tonnerre, ii. 318. 

Rugia, valley of, iii. 106, 156, 159. 

Russia crossed by Sigurd on his 
return from the crusade, iii. 2, 14; 
Anne of ; Jarislaw duke of ; 
Malfride, daughter of the king of. 

Rusticus,fatherofPope Juliu^s,i. 330. 

Rutubus, a tyrant, of Rouen, fabu- 
lous account of, iv. 23. 

Rutubi portus, iv. 22. 

Saone, the, iv. 22. 

Sabeilian heretics, i. 98, 99. 

Sabinian, Pope, i. 348; ii. 145,284. 

Sable, Lisiard de, &c. 

Saens, Saint (Sidonius), ii. 147. 

Saens, Elias count of. 



400 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Sai, Enguerran de ; Picot de. 

Saint Alban, at Mayence, Marianus 
Scotus, monk of. 

St. Amand at Rouen, abbey of, des- 
troyed by fire, iv. 164. 

St. Angelo, castle of, at Rome, 
called by Ordericus the Tower 
of Crescens, ii. 360, 363, 365. 

St. Bartholomew, church of, at 
Beneventum, ii. 462. 

St. Berlin, abbey of, i. 142 ; Wil- 
liam of Normandy, count of 
Flanders, buried there, iv. 93, 
94 ; his epitaph calls him a monk 
of that house, 93. 

St. Ceneri on the Sarthe, descrip- 
tion of, i. 399, 425—427; ii. 453, 
456 ; the castle built, i. 393 ; 
besieged by Duke William, ibid.; 
again, 455, 456 ; Robert de 
Bel'sme entei's it by surprise, 
iii. 26 — 28; Robert Giroie holds 
it against Henry I., 454 ; the 
abbey of, ii. 456, 457. 

St. Clair-suv-Epte (on the French 
bank) attacked by Henry I., ii 
226 ; he takes it by surprise, 446. 

St. Columba, virgin, monastery and 
church of, at Sens, ii. 337, 338, 
345. 

St. Cyrus, monastery of, in the 
East, iii. 356. 

St. Denys, abbey of, the burial- 
place of Charles Martel, ii. 334 ; 
of Charles the Bald, 337 ; of 
Hugh the Great, 340, 341 ; of 
Hugh Capet, 345 ; of Phillip 
I., iii. 424 ; of Louis le Gros, iv. 
182 ; Pope Stephen II. conse- 
crates an altar there, and crowns 
Pepin, i. 132, 364; its territories 
ravaged, iii. 426. 

St. Denys-en-Lions, i. 400. See 
Lions. 

St. Elmo, or Erasmus, buried at 
Gaieta, i. 414, and Jiotes. 

St. Euphemia, abbey of, ii. 438, 439. 

St. Eusebius, church of, at Vercelli, 
Charles the Bald buried there, ii. 
326, and note. 



St. Evroult en Ouche, the abbey 
founded under the Merovins-ian 
kings, i. 378; ii. 277, 282; visit 
of Childebert and his queen, 285, 
286; she builds a church, 286, 
287; the abbey laid in ruins and 
deserted, ii. 303, 304, 309 — 311, 
312, 313; the church repaired, 
313 ; given to the abbey of Bee, 
i. 385; Lanfranc sent there, ibid.-, 
the abbey restored, i. 151, 385, 
386 ; the community increases, 
i. 429, 469; foundation of a new 
church, 430, 457 ; it is carried 
on and completed, 467, 468 (cf 
?wte in iii. 246, 247) ; architects 
or overseers of the works, ii. 
259; the bourg burnt about 1061 
by Arnold d'Echaufour, i. 433; 
ii. 189; of Queen Matilda, 258, 
259; consecration of the abbey- 
church, 168, 191; iii. 247, 248; 
dedication of the seven altars, iii. 
247, 248 ; after the fire at Alrae- 
neches the abbess Emma retires 
to St. Evroult, iii. 342 ; in 1113, 
Henry I. celebrates the feast of 
the Purification there, 439; 
grants a charter to the monks. 
440; in 1124, John bishop of 
Lisieux blesses the new crucifix, 
iv. 66; in 1136, Robert Bouet 
is hung by the burghers of St. 
Evroult, 158, 159; the garrison 
of Laigle burn the bourg in re- 
venge, 159, 160; the monk Bald- 
win lays the foundation of a new 
church in 1231, iv. 259; the new 
tower blown down in 1284, iv. 
262; abbot William Selleys re- 
pairs the building in the 15th 
century, iv. 268 ; benefactions 
and donations made to this abbey, 
books iii. v. and vi. passim ; the 
countess of Leicester, who died 
in 1112, a great benefactress to 
it, iv. 258. 

St. Fursi, at Peronne, Charles the 
Simple buried in this church, ii. 
339. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



401 



St. George de Boslierville, the 
monks of, i. 448 ; Louis, a monk 
of St. Evroult, abbot of. 

St. Gervase, a priory near Rouen, 
given by Richard IT. to the abbey 
of Fecamp, ii. 140, 401, 402; 
William the Conqueror dies 
there, 401, 424, 

St, Gilles, see pilgrimage to ; Ray- 
mond de. 

St., Helier, near Breval, ii. 238. 

St, James of Compostella, see pil- 
grimage to, 

St,' Jean d'Acre, i, 190, 200; iii. 
168; iv. 262. 

St. Jean d' Angeli, Henry abbot 
of. 

St. John Baptist, church of, at 
Ostia, i. 101; at Albano, 102 ; at 
Naples, z6«J. ; at Alexandria, 103, 
115. 

St. John Lateran, church of, at 
Rome, i. 101. 

St, Judoc (or St, Josse), abbey of, 
i. 473—478. 

St. Laumer at Blois, Maurice, 
abbot of, 

St, I^awrence the Martyr, church 
of, near Rome, i, 101 — 109. 

St. Leonard, at Noblac, Bohemond's 
pilgrimage to, iii. 366. 

St. Mainboeaf, at Angers, relics 
of St. Evroult carried there, ii. 
309 

St. Martin, oratory of in the abbey 
of St. Evroult, ii. 288 ; It. 56, and 
notes. 

St. Martin of Seez, endowed by 
Roger de Montgomeri and given 
to Thierri, abb^t of St. Evroult, 
i. 405, 410; ii. 147, 462; he 
often retires there, i. 417, 418; a 
relic of St. Ceneri deposited 
there, iii. 28; the monks of, op- 
pressed by Robert de Belesme 
and protected by Henry I., iii. 
29, 349, 444. 

St. Martin of Tours, abbey of, i. 
424. Alcuin, abbot of. 

St. Mary (Sta. Maria Maggiore) at 



Rome, i. 558; founded by Pope 
Liberius, 109. 

St. Mary (or Notre Dame), churches 
of, in Normandy, pa^sm. 

St. Nicholas, abbey of, at Angers, 
founded by Fulk Nerra, ii. 395; 
consecrated by Pope Urban IL. 
iii. 74; Geoffrey Martel buried 
there, 370. 

St. Ouen, abbeyof, at Rouen, founded 
i. 377; burnt by the Northmen, 
135; restored, 381; ii. 161; iv. 
248 ; Abbot Nicholas begins build- 
ing the church, ii, 69; iii. 37,38; 
its consecration, 38; iv. 85,253; 
destroyed by fire, 163, 164; the 
priory of Gani dependent on the 
abbey, iii. 446. 

St. Pancras, see Lewes. 

St. Paul's, London, burnt, rebuilt, iii. 
418. 

St, Paul, see Rome, Shrewsbury, 
Verneuces, &c. 

St. Peter and St, Paul, church of 

(fuori muri), at Rome, i. 101; near 
Ostia, ibid. 

St. Peter, abbey of, at Gloucester, 
vision of a monk there, iii. 261 ; 
Fulchered abbot of Shrewsbury 
preaches there, 262 ; Robert Curt- 
hose buried there, iv. 95, 123, 
254. 

St. Peter, altar of, in the church at 
St. Evroult, ii. 187, 192; iii. 247. 

St. Peter's, see Canterbury, Chester, 
Shrewsbury, Westminster, AVin- 
ch ester. 

St. Pierre, castle of, near Antioch, 
iii. 137. 

St. Pierre, at Coutances, prodigies in 
this church, iii. 7, 8. 

St. Pierre- sur-Dive, abbey of, ii. 
509 ; founded, i. 382 ; fortified by 
Abbot Robert, 369; burnt by- 
Henry L, 374; he makes a vow 
to rebuild it, 379; the monks 
ransom their possessions with 
Geoffrey of Anjou, iv. 176. 

St. Pierre at Melun, monastery of, 
ii. 345. 



D D 



402 



GENERAL INDEX. 



St. Pois, castle and vill of Richard 
Forester there. See Richard. 

St. Pol, Hugh count of. 

St. Quentin, Dudo dean of. 

St. Remi, cathedral of, at Rheims, i. 
138, 139, 141; consecrated, 151; 
ii. 186; Louis d'Outremer and 
Lothaire buried there, 340, 342, 
343. 

St. Riquier, abbey of, i. 474, 

St. Saens, castle of, ii. 430, 431; iv. 
2G. See Elias de. 

St. Saviour, the abbey church at 
Tiron, dedicated to, iii. 5. 

St. Saviour, altar of in the church 
of St. Evi-oult, iii. 246. 

St. Scholasse, castle of, i. 394, 485._ 

St. Simeon, castle and port of, 1. 
420. 

St. Sophia, church of, at Constanti- 
nople, i. 123. 

St. Sulpice, near Laigle, priory of, 
ii. 380, 486. 

Sainte Suzanne, the castle of Her- 
bert viscount of Maine, i. 378; 
blockade of, 378—381. 

St. Syniphorian, oratory of, in the 
church of St. Columba at Sens, 
i. 339. 

St. Taurinus, Philip, abbot of. 

St. Valeri-sur-Somme, the Norman 
fleet assemble there for the con- 
quest of England, i. 480, 481; 
abbey of, 142. See Bernard de, 
Walter de. 

St. Vedast, at Arras, abbey founded, 
iii. 430; Robert count of Flan- 
ders buried tlure, ibid. 

St. Victor, abbey of, iii. 479. 

St. Vigor, at Bayeux, bishop Odo 
settles monks in this church, ii. 
429; makes it a cell to the abbey 
of Dijon, 420; its history, iii. 35, 
36; Richard de Fourneaux the 
superior. 

St. Vincent, abbey of, at Mans, iv. 
141 ; Robert de Belesme builds a 
castle on its territories, iii. 221. 

St. Wandrille {or Fontenelles), ab- 
bey of, founded, i. 378; ii. 147; 



the relics removed from it to 
secure them from the Northmen, 
297; the abbey restored by Duke 
Richard II., i. 381 ; Baudri. arch- 
bishop of Dol, frequently retires 
there, iii. 191; William count of 
Evreux, and his father, buried 
there, 420, 488. 

St. Werburgh, abbey of, at Chester, 
restored by Earl Hugh, ii. 447 ; 
Robert de Rhuddlan buried there, 
ibid. 

Salamis,i. 181, 289. 

Salerno, taken by the Normans, i. 
411, 412 ; schools of, 423 ; re- 
putation of the physicians of, 
ii. 367 ; princes of, Gaimard, 
Gisulf. 

Salarii, the inhabitants of the dis- 
trict of Seez, ii. 139. 

Salisbury, Wulfnoth son of Earl 
Godwin, diis there, i. 487; the 
men of join a levy en masse under 
Geoffrey bishop of Coutances, 
ii. 25 ; King Stephen visits Bishop 
Roger there, iv. 161. Edward of; 
Osmond and Roger, bishops of. 

Salt used in embalming corpses in- 
stead of spices, iii. 55 ; iv. 150, 
and 7iote ; reserved as rent to the 
monks of Fecamp, ii. 228; sixty 
salted hogs given by Henry I. to 
the monks of St. Evroult at his 
visit, iii. 440. 

Sallust, ii. 46. 

Saltzburg, Arnon bishop of. 

Samaria,i.l4,168, 170, 176,183,299. 

Samaritans, the, i. 169, 249. 

Samnite, Pope Felix a, i. 340. 

Samosata, Paul of, 

Samson, Saint, i. 134 ; iii. 191. 

Samson of Bayeux, educated by 
Bishop Odo, ii. 430 ; chaplain to 
William the Conqueror, 70 ; he 
recommends Hoel for the see of 
Mans, 71 ; is made bishop of 
Worcester, 250, 430. 

Samson, a Breton, courier of Queen 
3Iatilda, becomes a monk, ii. 174, 
175. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



403 



Sancho defends the castle of Laigle 
against Henry I., 456, 457. 

Sandwich, the Danes attempt to land 
there in 1069, ii. 24, 25. 

San-Giorgio, port of an anchorage 
to the E.S.E. of Bari, ii. 392. 

Sans-Avoir; Walter, William, Hugh, 
Simon. 

Saonois, territory of the, ii. 221. 

Sap, a -village near St. Evroult, i. 
391, 396, 397, 403, 404, 490 
etymology of, iv. 166, 167 
churches there, i. 404 ; iv. 167 
the castle garrisoned by Heni-y I., 
iii. 473 ; the governor makes a 
truce with the enemy, iv. 78 ; the 
place burned, 166. 

Sapor kiog of Persia, i. 96. 

Saracens, the, their universal ra- 
vages, i. 368 ; ii. 162 ; in Sicily, 
122, 353 ; in Africa, 124 ; in 
Sardinia, 130 ; in Apulia, 411 ; 
besiege Constantinople, 129, 353, 
360 ; pillage Rome, 369 ; hum- 
bled by Charlemagne, 122 ; 
defeated by Eudes duke of Aqui- 
taine, 360; by St. William, count 
of Thoulouse, ii. 244, 245; by 
Charles Martel, 333, 334, and 
note ; opposed by the crusaders, 
iii. 66,89, 110, 127, 128, 308 ; 
combated in Spain, iv. 109 ; 111, 
115, 118, 119, 126 ; called by 
Ordericus, AUophili, iii. 58, 67, 
178, and Tiote ; called also Haga- 
renes, ii. 308; iii. 58, and pas- 
sim ; Ishmaelites, iii. 128 ; Pa- 
gans, iii. 308 ; iv. 109, and pas- 
sim ; a Saracen was baker at 
the abbey of St. Eiiphemia, ii. 
362. 

Saragossa, taken by Charlemagne, 
i. 132 ; ii. 154 ; stands on the Ebro, 
iv.l24; bishop of, iii. HI, 112; 
the people, allies of Alfonso, king 
of Aragon, against the Infidels, 
126. Peter of. 

Sarcis of Mesopotamia, in captivity 
with Bohemond, iii. 317, 318. 

Sardana, near Antioch, a fortified 
DD 



camp there besieged by Ylgazy, 
iii. 391 ; by Balak,395. 

Sardanapalus, ii. 57. 

Sardinia, ravaged by the Saracens, 
i. 130 ; ii, 149 ; catholic bishops 
banished to, i. 113, 220, 230; 
pope Symmachus sends them 
money and clothes, 113, 338 ; ii. 
144 ; St. Augustine's relics carried 
there, i. 130; translated thence, ii. 
149. 

Sarepta, now Sarphen, in Syria, iii. 
167, 299. (Erroneously con- 
founded by Ordericus with Si- 
don.) 

Sarmata, field of, near Antioch, the 
crusaders defeated there by Yl- 
gazy, iii. 322; Roger of the Priu- 
cipality encamps there, 391. 

Sarpsborg, in Norway, called Burgus 
by Ordericus, iii. 215, and 7iote. 

Sarthe, the, i. 399, 448, 456 ; iii. 
231, 463; iv. 164; right of fish- 
ing in granted to the monks, i. 
399. 

Sauqueville, Herbran de ; Jourdain 
de ; Robert de. 

Savari, son of Cana, ii. 505 ; Henry 
I. grants him a knight's fee out 
of the lands of the abbey of Al- 
meniches, iii. 338. 

Savigni, the abbey founded, iii. 
51. 

Saxons, the, i. 131. 

Saxons, the Anglo-, in Britain, i. 
110, 112; ii. 142; iv. 96—102; 
West-Saxons, the people of Dor- 
set and Somerset so called after 
the Conquest, ii. 26. 

Saxony, i. 136, 140; ii. 24, 154, 
341. Otho duke of; Lothaire II., 
afterwards emperor, duke of. 

Scandinavia, the island of, ii. 55, 
152. 

Schems-el-Dauli, called Sensadoles, 
a chief at Antioch, iii. 126. 

Scholastica, relics of Saint, iv. 141. 
See Saint Scholasse. 

Schools of Bee, ii. 40, 68; of 
France, i. 423; ii. 518; of Italy, 

2 



404 



GENERAL INDEX. 



423; of Liege, 7; of Salerno, i. 
423. See St. Evroult, abbey of. 

Scipio Africanus, i. 181; ii. 452, 

Sclaves, expeditions of Charlemagne 
against, i. 131 ; ii. 154. 

ScoUandas, a learned monk of 
Mount-St.-Michael, abbot of St. 
Peter's at Canterbury, ii. 39, 40. 

Scot (David). 

Scotland, called Albany in Merlin's 
prophecies, iv. 100 ; Magnus 
Barfod, king of Norway, sails 
round it, iii. 2 1 7. See the names 
of the Scottish kings. 

Scots, i. 108—109, 119, 128. 

Scots, their character, ii. 19, 20; 
they league with the English and 
Welsh against King Stephen, iv. 
186. 

Scotus (Marianus). 

Scroop (Richard). 

Scubiculus, deacon and martyr, ii. 
131. 

Sculptors employed at the abbey of 
Tiron, iii. 52. 

Scythia, i. 223, 251. 

Scythians, the, i. 105, 251; iii. 72. 

Sebaste, in Palestine, i. 103. 

Sebastian, Saint, ii. 243, 364 ; iv. 1 88. 

Secundus, a companion of St. Paul, 
i. 200. 

Seez, iii. 339, 510; iv. 140; the 
bishop of, a suffragan to Rouen, 
ii. 139 ; the bishopi'ic granted 
by Richard II, to William de 
Bel sme, and held by his son, iii, 
29,30, 100; restored by Robert 
Curthose to Robert de Bel sme, 
278, 326, 349 ; the cathedral 
dedicated to St. Gervase, 510; 
consecrated, iv. 84, 253; in 1118, 
Henry I. gave Seez to Theobald 
de Blois, 455 ; he afterwards 
placed a garrison there, 473 ; 
marches there himself, iv. 147; 
Geoffrey Plantagenet received 
there, 156 ; it is attacked by the 
garrison of Laigle, 160 ; the 
diocese laid under an interdict, 
173, 174. 



Seguin, archbishop of Sens, i. 143; 
ii. 343 — 345, 

Seine, the, i, 152; ii, 131, 349, 407, 
408, 409, 419, 498, 501, 502 ; iv. 
22 1 ; inundations of, in the begin- 
ning of 1119, 457; the river dries 
up in tLe Lent following, ibid. ; 
inundations in 1296, iv. 263 ; the 
river crossed by Edward in., on 
his retreat before the battle of 
Crecy, 266. 

Seleucia, i. 181, 287. 

Seleucus Nicanor, iii. 144, 154. 

Selleys (William). 

Sem, valley of, in Syria, iii. 165. 

Seneca, the philosophei', said to 
have had familar intercourse with 
St. Paul, i, 210. 

Seneca, patriarch of Jerusalem, i. 
89. 

Senlac, see Hastings. (The battle of 
Hastings always so called by 
Ordericus.) 

Senlis, Bernard count de ; Louis 
de ; Simon de. 

Sens, attacked by the Saracens, ii. 
334; by the Saxons, i. 139, 140; ii. 
341; the people join the levy en 
masse under Louis le Gros, iii. 
488. 

Sensadolus, see Schems-el-Daule. 

Septimania, ii. 244. 

Septimius Severus, emperor, i. 91, 
92, 319; ii. 452. 

Sepulchre, church of the Holy. See 
Jerusalem. 

Serans, Geoffrey de ; Herbert de ; 
Peter de. 

Serapis, tomb of, i. 103. 

Serenus Gratianus, proconsul of 
Asia, i. 89. 

Sergius, bishop of Constantinople, 
i, 120—122, 

Sergius L, Pope, i. 124—126, 356, 
357 ; ii, 148. 

Sergius II., Pope, i. 368, 369; ii. 
155, 156. 

Serifontaine, i. 397. 

Serlo, abbot of St. Peter's at Glou- 
cester (before canon of Av- 



GENERAL INDEX. 



405 



ranches and monk of Mount-St.- 
Michael), iii, 261, 262, and note. 

Serlo d'Orgeres, a monk of St. 
Evroult, ii. 185. 

Serlo, abbot of St. Evroult, 1 448 ; 
ii. 214, 244, 486 ; iv. 224 ; bishop 
of Scez, ii. 211, 521 ; iii. 7, 30, 
69, 72, 246, 247, 416, 460 ; iv. 
67, 224,251 (Seez, not Lisieux) ; 
in 1 1 03, he takes refuge in Eng- 
land from the oppressions of 
Robert de Bel sme, iii. 349, 417 ; 
his sermon before Henry I. in 
the church at Carentan, 360 — 
364 ; his last hours, iv. 63 — 66 ; 
his death, 66, 253; his character, 
65. 

Sermons, of Urban II, at Clermont, 
preaching the crusade ; of Ful- 
chered, abbot of Shrewsbury, at 
Gloucester, prophetic of the death 
of William Rufus, 262 ; of Serlo, 
bishop of Seez, before Henry I. at 
Carentan, denouncing the fash- 
ions and vices of the age, 360 — 
363 ; of St. Oldegaire, archbishop 
of Tarragona, at the council of 
Clermont, on the royal and sacer- 
dotal authorities, iv. 16, 17. 

Service, of the choir, i. 454 ; 
military, of the people in the West 
of England against William the 
Conqueror, ii. 26, 27 ; of the 
English in support of William 
Rufus, 435, and 7iote ; of the 
French communes under Louis le 
Gros, iii. 488. 

Severinus, Pope, i. 119, 350 ; ii. 
146. 

Severn, the, ii. 48, 113, 197, 250 ; 
iii. 32, 220, 332, 336 ; iv. 222. 

Severus, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 
140, 141; iv. 233. 

Severus, created Csesar, i. 100. See 
Alexander Septimus. 

Seville, Isidore of; Leauder, bishop 
of. 

Sewin, see Seguin. 

Sexburga, Saint, ii. 327, 328. 

Sexwulf, bishop of Litchfield, ii. 36. 



Shelton, a hamlet in Xirby-Malory, 
Leicestershire, a farm there be- 
belonging to St. Evroult, ii. 255. 

Shengay, Cambridgeshire, the tithes 
of granted to St. Evroult, iii. 255. 

Shenley,Buckinghamshire, the tithes 
of, granted to St. Evroult, iii. 
257. 

Sherriff-hales, Staffordshire, the 
tithes granted to St. Evroult, iii. 
255. 

Shoes of Cordovan leather, gifts 
from the monks, ii. 226, 238 ; 
shoes -vrorth six deniers each pair, 
given to sons of benefactors, 226 ; 
fashion of wearing them vvith long 
peaks introduced by Fulk of 
Anjnu, ii. 478 ; inveighed against 
by the clergy, 363, 494. 

Shrewsbury, the earldom of, given 
to Roger de Montgomeri, ii. 14, 
48 ; the city burnt by the rebels 
of the West, 26 ; Robert de Be- 
lesme besieged there by Henry 
I., iii. 334—337 ; William Fitz- 
alan, viscount and governor of, 
when King Stephen storms it, iv. 
204 ; the foundation of the abbey 
of SS. Peter and Paul by Roger 
de Montgomeri, ii. 197 — 202 ; iii. 
32 ; Ordericus brought up there, 
iv. 222 ; Earl Roger, and Hugh 
his son (the second earl), buried 
there, ii. 203 ; iii. 33. 

Shire, of Lincoln, called Nicholas- 
scire, ii. 257. 

Sibylla, daughter of Fulk of Anjou, 
iii. 223, 432; betrothed to William 
of Normandy, 223 ; iv. 60 ; mar- 
ries Thierri of Alsace, 95. 

Sibylla, daughter of William la 
Ch vre, wife of Robert Burdet, 
iv. 117 ; keeps watch and ward 
at Tarragona in his absence, 118. 

Sibylla, daughter of Geoffrey de 
Conversana, iii. 256 ; sister of 
William, a crusader, 341 ; marries 
Robert Curthose, 66, 256,272 ; goes 
in pilgrimage with him to Mount- 

! S!;.-Michael, 272 ; her death and 



400 



GENERAL INDEX. 



epitaph, 343 ; is said to have been 
poisoued, 343 ; iv. 86 ; her cha- 
racter, iii. 256. 

Sibylla, natural daughter of Henry 
I., married to Alexander I., king 
of Scots, iii. 14. 

Sibylla, daughter of Hugh de Mont- 
gomeri, wife of Robert Fitz- 
Hamon, ii. 195, 473. 

Sidon, i. 190. 

Sichelgade,daughter of Gaimard IV., 
prince of Salerno, wife of Robert 
Guiscard, ii. 366 ; iii. 435 ; her 
intrigues against her step-son, 
Bohemond, 366—368. 

Sicily, i. 108, 122, 156, 158, 343, 
3.^3, 356, 435 ; ii. 162, 163 ; iii. 
170 ; iv. 134. 

Sidonius, see Saint-Saens. 

Sie, the river, ii. 263, 266, 406 ; 
iv. 22. 

Sigebert, a count of Bourdeaux 
mentioned in the legend of St. 
Martial, i. 307, 308. 

Sigebert, king of the Franks (Metz), 
i. 115 ; ii. 283. 

Sigebert, monk of Gemblours, his 
Chronicle, i. 494. 

Sigebrand, abbot of St. Judoc, i. 
474. 

Sigefred, archbishop of Mayence, 
his pilgrimage to Jerusalem, i. 
431. 

Sighere, king of Essex, ii. 151. 

Sigisbrand, son of a Lombard chief, 
ii. 154. 

Sigismond, a pretended son of 
Clovis, ii. 144. 

Sigurd, son of Magnus Barfod, 
founds bishoprics and monas- 
teries in Norway, iii. 213 ; his 
naval expedition to the Holy Land, 
213; returns through Russia and 
marries Malfride, the Russian 
king's daughter, 214. See Si- 
ward. 

Silvanus. See Richard Forester. 

Silverius, Pope, i. 341, 342; ii. 145. 

Silvester, Pope, i. 324—329 ; ii. 
140, 341, 365, 387. 



Silvester II., Pope, i. 371; ii 160, 

348. See Gerbert. 
Silvester, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 

142; iv. 236. 
Silvester of Saint-Calais, goes to 

Spain in Rotrou's expedition, iv. 

113. 
Silvester, bishop of Seez, iv. 253, 

259. 
Simeon, a crusader, iii. 105. 
Simeon, abbot of Ely, iii. 201. 
Simeon, bishop of Jerusalem, i. 89. 
Simon, St., and Jude, i. 187, 188; 

their acts and martyrdom, from 

the legends, 276—284. 
Simon, d'Anet, a crusader, iii. 367, 

388. 
Simon de Beauchamp ; his daughter 

married to Hugh the Poor, iv. 

194, 195. 
Simon, son of Robert I., duke of 

Burgundy, ii. 347; iv. 135, 136. 
Simon Magus, his history from the 

Acts, i. 169; from legends, 189— 

194, 206—212, 222. 
Simon de Montfort, i. 441 ; ii. 426; 

his death, 427; he is buried at 

Epernon, 495. 
Simon de Montfort, the elder, de- 
fends Neauffle, iii. 212. 
Simon de Zvlontfort, the younger, 

visits y/illiam Rufus, iii. 212; 

is at the siege of Montmorenci, 

426. 
Simon, earl of Montfort, defeats 

Henry III. in the battle of 

Lewes, iv. 261 ; is slain (at 

Evesham), ibid. 
Simon de Neauffle joins a league 

against Henry I., iv. 68. 
Simon de Peronne leagues with 

Waleran, count de Meulan, 

against Henry I., iv. 68. 
Simon the Red, his enterprises, 

iv. 196, 197, 206, 212. 
Simon Sans- Avoir, a companion of 

Peter the Hermit, iii. 76, 302, 

363. 
Simon de Senlis, earl of Northamp- 
ton, marries Matilda daughter of 



GENERAL INDE: 



407 



Earl Waltheof, iii., 14; liis rights 
at Leicester, 330. 

Simon de Senlis IL, earl of North- 
ampton, is on the side of King 
Stephen at the battle of Lincoln, 
iv. 219. 

Simon Trainel, of Poissy, besieged 
in Pont-Audemer, iv. 67. 

Simony detested by William, the 
Conqueror, ii. 32, 33 ; canons 
against, 63; iv. 17; flagrant cases 
of, iii. 287, 288, 368, 369. 

Simpiicius, Pope, i. 335; ii. 143. 

Simplicius, abbot of Monte-Cassino, 
ii. 146. 

Sinope, Gratinus of, i. 225. 

Sintice, an Lidian woman, i. 260. 

Sion, Mount, iii. 172 ; Raymond's 
station at the siege of Jerusalem, 
169, 170. 

Siricius, Pope, i. 332; ii. 141, 

Sisinnius, Pope, i. 358, 359; ii. 148. 

Sisinnius Fesceninnus, ii. 101. 

Siward Barn, son of Algar, ii. 4, 
26, 198. 

Siward, earl of Northumbria, father 
of Earl Waltheof, ii. 49, 99, 100, 
103. 

Siward, a learned priest at Shrews- 
bury, the first master of Orderi- 
cus, ii. 113; iv. 222, 223. 

Sixtus L, Pope, i. 317; ii. 135, 335, 
363. 

Sixtus IL, Pope, i. 97, 322. 

Sixtus IIL, Pope, i. 334; ii. 142. 

Sixtus (Benjamin), bishop of Jeru- 
salem, i. 89. 

Skins, deer-, given as presents by 
the monks, ii. 238 ; relics of saints 
wrapped in, 303, 304; of oxen, 
the corpse of Hugh de Grente- 
mesnil sewn up in, iii. 55 ; 
that also of Henry L, iv. 150, 
note. 

Smiths and goldsmiths employed at 
the abbey of Tiron, iii. 51; Otho, 
a goldsmith, enriches the tomb 
of William the Conqueror, ii. 
424, 425; Wulfin, a goldsmith at 
Chichester, ii. 196, 255. 



Snowdon, ii. 449. 

Sodomy practised among the Nor- 
mans, ii. 176, 451, 478; iii. 362; 
iv. 38, and note. 

Soissons, battles at, i. 116, 138, 
149 ; ii. 338; Robert L anointed 
king there, 338 ; the cathedral of 
St. Medard consecrated by Inno- 
cent IL, iv. 130. 

Sokman, emir of Jerusalem, iii. 127. 

Solemnis, bishop of Chartres, ii. 
143. 

Soliman, routs the crusaders, iii. 
295, 297 ; he makes war on his 
brother Daliman, 311 ; is defeated, 
313. 

Solomon, king of Hungary, iii. 12. 

Solomon de Sable, i. 345. 

Somerset, insurrection of the people 
of, against the Normans, ii. 26. 

Somme, the, i. 142 ; ii. 158. 

Sophia, wife of the emperor Justin, 
i. 115. 

Sophonias, a disciple of St. Peter, 
i. 190. 

Sor, Adam de, Walter de, &c. 

Soracte, Mount, Pope Silvester re- 
tires there with his clergy, i. 325. 

Sorel, castle of, ii. 109 ; iii. 441. 

Soter, Pope, i. 319. 

Sosthenes, of Corinth, i. 206. 

Spain, i. 85, 108, 17% 197, 360 ; ii. 
142, 181 ; Baudri de Guitri goes 
there, ii. 417 ; wars in Spain in 
the 12th century ; iv. 109, &c. 

Spaniard, Roger the ; see Roger de 
Toeni, so called. 

Spaniards, the, i. 132, 158, 179 ; ii. 
69; in 1105, they are false to 
their Norman allies, iv. 109 ; they 
recall them in 1114, iii. 

Speen, near Newbury, Berks ; the 
church, glebe, and tithes fiivento 
St. Evroult, ii. 264 ; Everard 
pi-iest there. 

Spires, Henry V. buried there, iv. 
81. 

Spoleto, Thrasamond duke of. 

Stafford, William the Conqueror 
defeats the Western insurgents 



408 



GENERAL INDEX. 



there, ii, 27 ; Henry I. gives the 
custody of the castle to William 
Pantulf, iii, 334 ; possessions of 
St. Evroult in the county, ii. 196, 
254, 255. 

Stainton, in Lindsey, tithes there 
given to St. Evroult, ii. 257. 

Standard, battle of the, iv. 205. 

Standard-bearers of Normandy, 
Roger de Toeni, i. 462 ; ii. 188 ; 
Osberne, 402; Thurstin, son of 
Rollo, at the battle of Hastings, 
i. 483. 

Standards . consecrated banner sent 
by the pope to William the Con- 
queror, i. 463 ; of Louis le Gros, 
purchased by Henry I. after the 
battle of Bremule, iii. 485 ; of 
Bohemond and the count of St. 
Gilles, planted on the towers of 
Antioch, 141, 142. 

Stars, falling, seen in 1095, ii. 168 ; 
iii. 62 ; iv. 251. 

Stephen, Saint, his history and mar- 
tyrdom, from the Acts, i. 167 ; 
from legends, 167, 168. 

Stephen, son of Airard, pilot of 
William the Conqueror, i7..33. 

Stephen, count d'Aumale, (or 
Albemarle), son of Eudes of 
Champagne, in alliance with 
William Rufus, ii. 473, 474, 
495 ; iii. 73 ; with Henry I., 356 ; 
he revolts and is reduced to sub- 
mission, 450, 451, 457; iv. 20, 86. 

Stephen, count de Blois, son of 
Theobald, ii. 182 ; iii. 77 ; his 
first crusade, 78, 82, 90, 95, 99, 
101, 122 ; pretends sickness and 
returns home, 133, 134 ; his se- 
cond crusade, ii. 233, 249, 289, 
292, 297, 300, 301, 303, 304 ; he 
marries Adela, daughter of Wil- 
liam the Conqueror, ii. 181, 377 ; 
iii. 283. 

Stephen de Blois, king of England, 
son of Stephen de Blois and Adela, 
ii. 182 ; knighted by Henry I., 
346 ; the king gives him the 
county of Mortaln and domains ' 



in England ; ii. 183 ; iii. 346 ; 
his acts in Normandy, 439, 455, 
461, 462, 463, 476 ; iv. 34, 42, 
56, 70, 89, 90, 94 ; becomes king 
of England, i. 131, 157, 158 ; iii. 
346; iv. 152—155, 254; delays 
going to Normandy, 157, 158, 
161 ; lands at La Hogue, 174, 
175 ; his proceedings in Norman- 
dy, 177 — 182 ; returns to Eng- 
land, 184; besieges Bedford, 195; 
Hereford, 203 ; takes Shrewsbury, 
204 ; forces the bishops to submit, 
210, 211 ; gives a safe conduct to 
the Countess Matilda, 212 ; holds 
a great council, 213 ; besieges 
Lincoln, 215 ; fights a battle with 
the relieving army, and is defeated 
and made prisoner, 216 — 218; is 
conducted to the countess at 
Bristol and imprisoned there, i. 
157 ;iv, 218; his treaty with Henry 
n. in 1154, 253; a favourable 
characterof him, 218 ; he marries 
Matilda, heiress of Boulogne, ii. 
183 ; iii. 13, 346; was called, in 
her right, count of Boulogne, iv. 
89, 90. 

Stephen, count of Burgundy, takes 
the cross, iii. 289. 

Stephen, an Englishman, abbot of 
Citeaux, iii. 47. 

Stephen, Emperor, i. 137 ; ii. 159. 

Stephen, a chief of the Gauls, i. 301, 
303, 307, 309,310. 

Stephen de Mandeville, an adherent 
of the family of Anjou, ir. 195. 

Stephen, a miller, discovers the 
relics of St. Judoc. i. 474. 

Stephen L (Saint), Pope, i. 97, 322. 

Stephen n.. Pope, i. 131, 363. 

Stephen HL, Pope, i.367 ; ii.l53, 154. 

Stephen IV., Pope, i. 371; ii. 154. 

Stephen V., Pope, i. 371; ii. 157. 

Stephen VL, Pope, i. 371. 

Stephen IX., Pope, i. 371, 431; ii, 
195, 348. 

Stephen, bishop of Paris, ii. 319; 
iv. 131. 

Stephen, abbot of St. Jean-en- 



GENERAL IXDEX. 



400 



Vallee, at Chartres, is at York in 
1112, iv. 55; he becomes patri- 
arch of Jerusalem, 55, 103. 

Stephen, chanter of St. Nicholas at 
Angers, purloins a relic of St. 
Nicholas, ii. 395, 396. 

Stigand, archbishop of Canterbury, 
before chaplain to Queen Emma. 

Stigand, bishop of London, iv. 51, 
52; refused the pallium by the 
pope, 52; laid vmder an interdict 
by Alexander II., i. 490; iv. 52; 
crowns Harold, i. 460; iv. 52; 
opposes liing William, 488, 489 ; 
submits, 489; attends him to 
Normandy, ii. 5 ; is deposed, 31, 
39,42; iv. 52. 

Stoughton in Thoresby, Leicester- 
shire, a farm there, given to the 
abbey of St. Evroult, by Hugh de 
Grentemesnil, ii. 255. 

Streon (Edric). 

Studies and arts pursued by the 
monks: architecture, i. 442; ii. 
259; divinity, iii. 406; history, 
407, &c.; gardening, i. 338; iii. 
207 ; grammar, i. 388, 443 ; manu- 
scripts ; copying, i. 406, 407, 442, 
&c., illuminating, i. 401, 429 ; 
mechanics, i. 442; iii. 51; medi- 
cine, i. 394, 423, 424, 471; ii. 
185, 204, 237; iii. 401; music, i. 
429, 439, 443, &c.; poetrv, i. 493; 
ii. 214, 215, 323, &c. (.see Verses) ; 
sculpture, i. 442; iii. 51. 

Subiaco, St. Benedict first retires 
there, i. 346. 

Suffragan bishoprics, six in Nor- 
mandy, ii. 139. 

Sugar canes, fields of, found by the 
crusaders near El-Barre, iii. 152, 
note; manufiicture and use of, 
ibid. 

Suisner, name of a Norman peasant. 
See Roger. 

Sun, eclipses of, iii. 193; iv. 251. 

Sunno, a chief of the Franks, ii. 55, 
142. 

Surrey, earl of, see William War- 
renne. 



Susannah, a noble matron of Li- 
moges, i. 299, 300. 

Susa, Humbert marquis of. 

Sussex, possessions of St. Evroult 
in, ii. 196. 

Sutri, i. 347 ; the antipope Clement 
III. resides there, iii. 195; Bour- 
din is arrested there, iv. 43. 

Sweden Lacman, king of 

Sweyn I., king of Denmark, i. 146, 
147; ii. 9, 24, 492. 

Sweyn II., king of Denmark, ii. 9, 
413; his descent on England in 
the time of the Conqueror, 24 — 29. 

Sweyn, son of Earl God>vin, i. 487. 

Swicher, bishop of Bamberg, after- 
wards pope,i. 371. See Clement II. 

Sylvanus, Saint, i. 108. 

Sylvia, Saint, mother of Gregory 
the Great, i. 367. 

Symmachus, consul and patrician of 
Ravenna, i. 114, 239; ii. 144. 

Symmachus, Pope, i. 337, 338; ii 
143, 144. 

Syracuse, i. 343, 353; ii. 371. 

Syria, i. 16, 183, 186, 200; ii. 420; 
iii. 66, 127, 295, 397. 

Syrians, the, i. 263; iii. 109; iii. 
115, 119, 125, 141, 297,395,396. 

Syrtes, the, i. 204 

Synods, see Councils; Rouen. 

Tabor Mount, visited by Pons, abbot 

of Cluni, iv. 45. 
Tacitus, Emperor, i. 98. 
Taisson, Ralph. 
Talbot, family of, iii. 452, iiote. See 

Hugh. 
Talgarth, Bernard du Neuf-Marche, 

lord of, ii.267. 
Talou, the, i. 402; ii. 130, 263,267, 

407, 474; iii. 450, 453, 479. 
Talvas. son of Robert de Belesme, 

iii. 474. 
Talvas, family of, ii. 453. 
Tancard, prior or provost of Fecamp, 

abbot of Jumi ges, ii. 67; iii. 207. 
Tancred de Hauteville, i. 412, 428, 

437; ii. 209; iv. 85. 
Tancred, son of Eudes, the Good 



410 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Marquis, iii. 57; takes the cross in 
1096. iii. 82; his crusade, 89, 92, 
93, 95, 99, 101, 104, 112, 119, 122, 
130, 141, 169, 178, 180,185, 186, 
307,318; succeeds Bohemond iu 
the principality of Autioch, 390, 
391; his death, 391; he is suc- 
ceeded by Roger of the Princi- 
pality, 322. 

Tancred of Conversana, iv. 137. 

Tannei, family of, iii. 487, note. 

Tankerville, see William de. 

Tarento, ii. 371 ; Bohemond II. is 
brought up there, iii. 409. 

Tarragona, see Robert Burdet, 
prince of; St. Oldegaire, archbi- 
shop of. 

Tarsus, i. 98, &c. ; iii. 104, 143 ; 
taken by Bohemond, iii. 255. 

Tatwine, archbishop of Canterbury, 
ii. 151. 

Taurinus, Saint, ii. 241 ; legend of, 
132—137. 

Tees, the William the Conqueror 
encamps on the banks of, ii. 29. 

Telesphorus, Pope, i. 318 ; ii. 363. 

Templars, the Knights, Fulk count 
of Anjou joins them, iii. 44; on 
his return he grants them an 
annual rent, 44. 

Terbellus, king of Bulgaria, i. 127. 

Terence, quoted, iii. 319. 

Terouanne, the count of, ii. 1 2. 

Terouanne, St. Omer, bishop of. 

Tertullian, i. 93, 174. 

Tetta, mother of St. Guthlac, ii. 86. 

Tewksbury abbey founded by Ro- 
bert Fitz-Hamon, ii. 250 ; Gerald 
d'Avranches first abbot. 

Thames, the, i. 480; ii. 11. 

Thebaid, the, iii. 41. 

Thebes, iii. 408. 

Themard, castellan of Bourbourg, 
iv. 87. 

Theobald, archbishop of Canterbury, 
before prior and abbot of Bee, iv. 
163, 208. 

Theobald III., count de Blois and 
Chartres, ii. 49, 74, 183 ; iii. 77, 
78. 



Theobald IV., count de Blois and 
Champagne, son of Count Stephen 
by Adela, daughter of William 
the Conqueror, ii. 182 ; iii. 346, 
426 ; succeeds his father in 1101, 
ii. 183 ; his acts, iii. 346, 428, 
429, 439, 441, 445, 455, 461, 
462 ; iv. 5, 10,18, 27, 37 (iii. 119, 
320) ; after the death of Henry 
I., iv. 148, 162, the Norman 
lords propose to make him duke, 
154, 155 (iii. 346) ; again offer 
him the duchy and the crown of 
England, 220 ; concludes a truce 
with the count of Anjou, 158 ; 
appointed governor to the young 
Louis le Jeune, 182; is benefactor 
to the monks of Tiron, iii. 51 ; 
his great power and wealth, 499 ; 
his character, 346. 

Theobald, son of Walerau de Bre- 
teuil, called the White Knight, ii. 
507. 

Theobald de Maule son of Peter, 
217, 220 ; he supports his father 
in defending his fortified place, 
iii. 212. 

Theobald Paganus, of Gisors, an 
adherent of Robert Curthose, iii. 
209, 278; iv. 61, 68; his fiefs 
forfeited for his treason to Henry 
I., 70 ; restored to his son Hugh 
Paganus, 71. 

Theobald, archbishop of Rouen, iv. 
259. 

Theocritus, a centurion in Judaea, 
i. 177. 

Theodatus, king of the Goths, i. 
341, 342. 

Theodebert, king, i. 119; ii. ^145, 
283 ; iii. 43. 

Theodilin de Tanaisie, i. 414, 415. 

Theodelinde, queen of the Lom- 
bards, ii. 146, 153. 

Theodora, Empress, i. 99, 342, 343. 

Theodore, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, i. 121; ii. 36, 147. 

Theodore, bishop and exarch, i. 384. 

Theodore, exarch, i. 121, 352, 359; 
ii. 147. 



GENEHAL INDEX. 



411 



Theodore Gregory, bishop inPontus, 
i. 95, 97. 

Theodore, a heretic, i. 123. 

Theodore, bishop of Jerusalem, i.351. 

Theodore, priest, proposed for pope, 
i. 356. 

Theodore, pope,i.l20,12 1,35 1 ;ii. 147. 

Theodoret, bishop, his ecclesiastical 
history, i. 112; ii. 143. 

TheodoricI.,kingoftheFranks,i.ll3. 

Theodoric II., king of the Franks, 
i. 119; ii. 148, 284. 

Theodoric III., king of the Franks, 
i. 119; ii. 148; iii. 44, 430. 

Theodoric IV., king of the Franks, 
ii. 333. 

Theodoric, king of the Ostrogoths, 
i. 112; ii. 143. 

Theodoric (Walamar) king of the 
Ostrogoths, i. 112, 114, 336, 337, 
338,339, 341; ii. 143, 144. 

Theodoric, abbot of Jumieges, i. 
.387, 422 

Theodoric de Mathonville, abbot of 
St. Evroult, before monk of Ju- 
mieges, i. 386, 387, 388, 400, 402, 
403, 406, 428, 439; ii. 259, 349, 
372; resigns, i. 417; goes on a 
pilgrimage to Jerusalem, 418 — 
420; ii. 43; account of his death 
in the isle of Cyprus, i. 420, 422 ; 
ii. 3 1 6, 349 ; his life and character, 
ii. 387, 402 — 419; his epitaph, 
316,317; his relics, 317; miracles 
wrought at his tomb, 349. 

Theodoric, a monk of St. Evroult, 
at the cell of Fames, i. 472. 

Theodosius the Great, emperor, i. 
103, 105, 106, 123; ii. 148. 

Theodosius the younger, emperor, i. 
108, 109, 111; ii. 142. 

Theodosius III.,emperor,i.l 28 ;ii. 148. 

Theona.«!, patriarch of Alexandria, 
i. 99. 

Theophania, wife of the emperor 
OthoII., i. 138; ii.l79. 

Theophanius, abbot in Sicily, pa- 
triarch of Antioch, i. 122. 

Theophanius, patriarch of Alexan- 
dria, i. 99. 



Theophilus, patriarch of Alexandria, 
i.l03, 105. 

Theophilus, bishop of Csesarea, i.9I. 

Theophilus, emperor, i. 134, 135; 
ii. 155. 

Thessaly, i. 112; Bohcmond lands 
there,' ii. 388. 

Thessalonians, the, i.200, 238. 

Thessalonica, i. 227, 228, 229. 

Thetford, priory of, founded by 
Roger Bigod, buried there, iii. 
418. 

Thetford, Herbert, bishop of. 

Thierri, see Theodoric. 

Thomas, Saint, i. 15, 81, passim; 
legends of his acts and martyr- 
doms, 252 — 262; his relics trans- 
lated to Edessa, 263. 

Thomas d'Aunou, bishop of Leiz, 
iv. 260. 

Thomas Becket, archbishop of Can- 
terbury, murdered, iv. 256. 

Thomas de Ductn (de Douet), abbot 
of St. Evroult 1303—1309, iv. 
263, 264. 

Tliomas, son of Stephen, master and 
pilot of the Blanche-Nef, iv. 33, 
36. 

Thomas, son of Ranulph Flambard, 
who takes possession of the see of 
Lisieux in his name, iii. 287, 283. 

Thomas de Marie, iv. 6, 27. 

Thomas, count of Perche, slain, iv, 
259. 

Thomas de St. Jean, iii. 375. 

Thomas, archbishop of York, i. 153; 
ii. 32, 115, 116,430; he writes the 
epitaph of William the Conqueror, 
425; his denth, 465; ii. 267. 

Tholousc, battle of, against the Sara- 
cens, ii. 151; besieged by Louis 
VII., iv. 221. See Raymond, etc., 
counts of. 

Thor, a Scandinavian divinity, ii. 24. 

Thorney abbey, ii. 36, 323; iii. 421. 
Richard, abbot of St. Evroult, 
bui'ied there, iv, 214. 

Thorold, bishop of Evreux, resigns 
his see, and becomes a monk at 
Bee, iii. 206. 



412 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Thorold de Montanis, prince of Ar- 
menia, iii. 402; and note. Cf. 399, 

410. 
Thorold, father of Humphrey de 
Yielles, i. 384; grandfather of 

Roger de Beaumont, ii. 489. 
Thorold, abbot of Peterborough, ii. 

449. 
Thrace, i. 10; ii. 105, 108, 226, 357; 

iii. 295. 
Thracians, the, ii. 223, 366; iii. 295, 

366. 
Thrasamond, king of the Vandals, 

i. 113; ii. 144. 
Thrasamond, duke of Spoleto, i.362. 
Thurcaston, Leicestershire, the 

church and tythes, with lands there, 

given to St. Evroult by Hugh de 

Grentemesnil, ii. 256. 
Thuribius, St., at Mans, iii. 234. 
Thuringia, i. 136". 
Tliurmeston, a hamlet in Belgrave 

parish, a farm then given to St. 

Evroult by Hugh de Grentemes- 
nil, ii.255. 
Thurstan, of Bayeux, archbishop of 

York, iv. 22; brother of Ouen, 

bishop of Evieux, 209; at the 

council of Rheims, 3; at the court 

of Henry I. at York, 55, 56; his 

death, 209. 
Tiber, the, i. 129, 194, 360, 366, 

413; inundations of, i, 129, 359, 

368. 
Tiberius, en^peror, i. 6, 84, 85, 173, 

175. 
Tiberius Constantine, emperor, i. 1 16, 

117; ii. 145. 
Tiberius, brother of Constantine III., 

emperor, i. 122, 126, 127; ii. 148. 
Tiburcius, saint and martyr, i. 320; 

ii. 364. 
Tigris, the, iii. 144. 
Tilleul, ii. 443.— Arnold de, Roger 

do, Hiim])hrey de. 
Tillieres Gilbert Crispin Castellang, 

iii. 490. 
Timotheus, saint, i. 325. 
Tinchebrai, battle of, its prelimina- 
ries and results, i. 154; iii. 260, 



356,376—382; iv. 25, 26,86, 122, 
252. 
Tirel de IManieres, attends William 
of Normandy in his exile, iv. 79, 
89; his conduct at his death, 93. 
Tirel, see Walter. 

Tiron, foundation of the abbey, iii. 
50, 51 ; two monks of it I'efuse to 
sail in the Blanche-Nef, iv. 34. 
Titus, emperor, i. 87, 494; ii. 55. 
Titus, companion of St. Peter and St. 

Paul, i. 195, 209, 221. 
Tobias, bishop of Jerusalem, i. 82. 
Toeni, the castle belongs to Ralph 
de, iii. 487; vineyards and other 
possessions there given to St. Ev- 
roult, ii. 189; iii. 249. 
Toeni, see Ralph de, Roger de. 
Toledo, iv. 111. 
Tolosa in Spain, iv. 111. 
Tombelaine, Robert de, 
Tonnerre, the Normans defeated 

there, ii. 337. 
Tonsberg, an ancient town in Nor- 
way, iii. 215, and note. 
Tonsure, the, ii. 64, 128. 
Tortosa in Syria, iii. 162. 
Tostig, son of earl Godwin, i. 461. 

463, 464, 480, 482, 486, 487. 
Totila, king of the Goths, i. 115, 343; 

ii. 145. 
Toto, duke of J^epi, i. 364. 
Touque, William Rufus embarks 
there, iii. 201; lands there, 240; 
the count of Anjou foiled in at- 
tacking it, iv. 207,208. 
Tower, of the abbey church of St. 
Evroult built, i. 468; the new 
towx-r blown down in 1284, iv. 262 ; 
of the cathedral of Lisieux stnick 
by lightning, ii. 118; of the church 
at Sap garrisoned and stormed, 
iv. 167. 
Tournai,the people of, join the levy en 
wias.se, under Louis le Gros.iii. 488. 
Tours, i. 309 ; burnt by the North- 
men, 379; coimcils of, in 1096, iii. 
74; in 1163, iv. 256; Lanfranc 
disputes with Berenger there, ii. 
41; St. Martin of, 141. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



413 



Trahaem-ap-Caradoc, prince of 
South Wales, iii. 449. 

Trajan, Emperor, i. 88. 

Treport, Osberne, abbot of. 

Treves, i. 195 ; Eudes, archbishop of; 
St. IMaximin, of. 

Trial by the ordeal of hot iron, ii. 
210; iii. 259. 

Trie, near Gisors, iii. 209; iv. 91. 

Trie, Engucrran de. 

Trinity, at Caen, abbey of, founded 
by qu^eu Matilda, " i. 382 ; ii. 2 : 
she is buried there, 376. 

Trinity, at Rouen, abbey of, founded, 
i. 382, 442; ii. 196; proposal to 
fortify it, iii. 457. 

Tripoli," in Syria, i. 190; the Cru- 
saders there, iii. 161, 162, 164, 166; 
season of bean and corn harvest, 
and the vintage, early there, 166. 
Pons, count of. 

Troad, the, i. 184,200, 205. 

Troarn. abbey of, founded by Roger 
de Montgomeri, i. 389; ii. 197; 
his countess, Mabel, buried there, 
194; the monks oppressed by Ro- 
bert de Belesme, iii. 29 ; protected 
by Henry I., 444. 

Trogus Pompeius, i, 1 ; ii. 494. 

Trojans, migrations of the, ii. 55; 
ancestors of the Franks, 142; of 
the Scythians, Danes, and North- 
men, iii. 72, 73. 

Trophaire, a chant in the choir 
service, i. 443. 

Trophimus, Saint, i. 200, 206. 

Trossebot, family of, iii. 328, note. 

Trotton, in Sussex, the manor of, 
given to St. Evroult by William 
Pantulf, ii.241. 

Troussel, Guy. 

Troy, siege of, ii. 55 ; iii. 400. 

Troyes, i. 139 ; ii. 222, 234, 336, 341. 

Truce of God, iii. 70. 

Trullo, a palace of Constantino at 
Rome, so called, i. 354. 

Tudela, in Spain, iv. 1 1 1 . 

Tunbridge besieged by William Ru- 
fus, iii. 205. See Gilbert de Clare, 
and cf. ii. 492, and note. 



Turenno, Raymond, viscount of, 

Turgis. bishop of A\Tanches, ii 8; 
iii. 72, 459; iv. 105. 

Turgis de Traci, governor of IMans, 
ii. 75. 

Turin, Agilulf, duke of, ii. 1 53. 

Turkytel, abbot of Croyland, ii. 97, 
98. 

Turkytel, du Neuf-Marche, i. 149; 
ii. 163, 267, 403. 

Turkytel, monk of St. Evroult, a 
copyist, i. 406 ; came from the ab- 
bey"' of Dive, ii. 107. 

Turks, the, ii. 56, 355 ; iii. 66, 80, 87, 
89, 96, 127, 128, 129, 288, 295, 
297, 300, 301, 307, 308, 316, 318. 

Turstin, father of Richard d'Avran- 
ches, i. 415, 450. 

Turstin de Bastembourg, i. 390. 

Turstin de Caen, abbot of Glaston- 
bury, ii. 52, 430, 466. 

Turstin, monk of St. Evroult, i. 435. 

Tutbury, castle of, granted by the 
Conqueror to Henry de FeiTers, 
ii. 49 ; Robert de Ferrers (in the 
time of king Stephen) called Ro- 
bert de Tutbury, iv. 203, and note. 

Tweed, the, after the battle of the 
Standard, the Scots are slaughtered 
there, finding no ford, iv. 205. 

Tyre, i. 96, 190, 200; called Sor 
(Tsur), iii. 168; Sigurd besieges, 
not Tyre, but Sidon, 213; taken 
by the Crusaders and Venetian 
fleet, 405 ; an Englishman (Wil- 
liam) made bishop there, 405, 406, 
and note. 

Tythes inlay hands, ii. 188; of bees, 
i. 205 ; of cheese and wool in Wilt- 
shire, ii. 196, 255; of l^easts of 
chase, 205; of fairs and markets, 
196, i. 205; of mills, i. 396, 397; 
ii. 205, etc.; of woods, i. 397; ii. 
205. 

Ulfin, a citizen of Aquileia, ii. 240, 
241. 

Ulfkytel, abbot of Croyland, ii. 86, 
99^ 100; before, a monk of Peter- 
borough, 99; retires there, 100. 



414 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Ulger, bishop of Angers, iv. 80, 85. 

Ulger, the Hunter, commands in 
Bridgnorth, iii. 334, 336. 

Umfrid, father of Robert de Rhudd- 
Ian, of Danish extraction, 11. 443, 
448. 

Universal, Gilbert, the. 

Urban L, pope, i. 91, 320; li. 363. 

Urban II., born at Rheims, monk of 
Clani, and bishop of Ostia, il. 463, 
464; notices of, i. 372, 439; ii. 58, 
83,168, 214, 362, 497; iv. 251; 
holds a council at Piacenza, iii. 
61 ; at Clermont, and preaches the 
crusade, i. 154; ii. 67, 168; iii. 
59, 65—68, 204; iv. 9, 251; at 
Tours, iii. 74; at Bari, iii. 204 ; 
other acts, ii.482; iii. 4. 46, 63, 
74, 198, 202, 203, 204, 207, 249; 
his death, 1. 154; iii. 193; iv. 251; 
epitaphs, iii. 193, 194. 

Urban III., pope, iv. 256, 257. 

Urban IV., pope, iv. 261. 

Urban v., pope, iv. 267. 

Urgel, in Spain, the bishop of, iv, 
125. 

Uraca, queen of Leon and Castille, 
wife of Alfonso I., king of Na- 
varre and Aragon, iv. 119, 120. 

Ursatiui, a heretic, i. 330. 

Ursinus, bishop uf Naples, i. 331. 

Urso, archbishop of Bari, ii. 393. 

Urso, a monk of E'VToult, attends 
abbot Robert to Rome, i.482. 

Usurer, a rich, carried off and im- 
prisoned, iii. 348. 

Usury, William de Glos, in purga- 
tory for, ii. 516. 

Valens, emperor, i. 106. 

Valens, patriarch of Jerusalem, i. 

84. 
Valentia, in Spain, kingdom of, iv. 

112. 
Valentine, saint, i. 364. 
Valentine, the heretic, i. 90. 
Valentine, pope, i. 368; ii. 155. 
Valentine L, emperor, i. 104, 105, 

106. 
Valentine II., emperor, 110, 111. 



Valentine III., emperor, i. 108, 110, 
111, 333, 334; ii. 142; iv. 9V. 

Valeri, St., apparition of, i. 142; his 
relics translated to a monastery 
on the Somme, 142, 481. 

Valeri, St., sur- Somme, duke Wil- 
liam embarks there for the con- 
quest of England, i. 480, 481. 

Valeria, daughter of Diocletian, i. 
99. 

Valeria, saint, i. 300, 303. 

Valerian, saint, i. 320; ii. 138. 

Valerian, emperor, i. 97, 322. 

Valesdunes, battle of, i. 150, 151, 
vote; ii. 167, 348, 405, 408, 491, 
464; iv.249. 

Vallorabrosa, abbey of, iii. 49, and 
note; iv. 13. 

Valois. counts of, see Crepi. 

Vandals, invasion of, i. 105, 108, 
114, 343; ii, 56, 143. 

Vascelin, see Wascelin. 

Vatican, the temple of Apollo, and 
Nero's house on, i. 96, 101; the 
body of St. Peter translated 
there, i. 96; church of, 101, 215, 
321. 

Vatteville, on the Seine, iii. 474; iv. 
72, 77. 

Vaudreuil, expedition of Roger de 
Toeni against, iv. 157, 158, 171. 

Vaux, Roger de. 

Vedast, bishop of Arras, ii. 143. 

Vendome, Geoffrey de. 

Venice, the doge of, invests Tyre 
with his fleet, during the siege by 
the crusaders, iii. 405. 

Venetians, their reverence for the 
relics of St. Mark, which they 
possess, i. 295; with the Pisans 
and Genoese, convey troops and 
provisions in the first crusade, 
iii. 77. 

Venosa, abbey of, i. 439 ; the Laha- 
rnm preserved there, ii. 360; Ro- 
bert Guiscard buried there, 372; 
relics of St. Nicholas deposited 
there, 396. 

Vere. Robert de. 

Vercelli, council of, ii. 41. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



415 



Verclive, a high hill, on which 
Henry I. posted four men-at-arms 
hefore the battle of Bremule,iii.481. 

Verdun, Richard, abbot of. 

Vermandois, the people of, join the 
communes in arms under Louis le 
Gros, iii. 488. Counts of, Hugh the 
Great, etc. 

Verneuces, churches of St. Mary and 
St. Paul founded, i. 390, 397^1398; 
the place burned by Eustace de 
Breteuil, iii, 472. 

Verneuil burnt by hghtning, iv. 141 ; 
submits to Geotfrey of Anjou, 
221 ; besieged by Philip Augustus, 
iv. 257. 

Vernon, ii. 320, 404; iii. 464. 

Verses, on the labourers in the vine- 
yard, by a modern poet, i. 41 ; of 
Ordericus on earl Waltheof, ii. 
103; on Johnof Rheims, 215; on 
the achievements of Robert de 
Rhuddlan, 449 ; on his own ordi- 
nation, iii. 415; on Henry I., iv, 
152, 153; of Grossif, ii. 479; on 
St. Medard and St. Godard, by 
St. Ouen, ii, 143, 144; lament of 
the Myrians, 391; on Guntard, 
prior of Noyou, iii, 423 ; on the 
shipwreck of the Blanche Nef, iv. 
38 ; of Hildebert, bishop of Mans, 
iii. 227; composed and sung by 
"William,count of Poitou,on his ad- 
ventures in the Crusade, 300. See 
Epitaphs, and Remarks prefixed 
to this volume, pp.lxxix., etc. 

Vert Ralph, le. 

Verus, emperor, i. 90, 318. 

Vespasian, emperor, i. 86, 87, 250, 
494; ii. 55. 

Vestina founds the church of SS. 
Gervase and Protase, i. 106. 

Vexin, the, i.457, 469, 470; ii. 140, 
400,521; iii. 6, 208, 358; iv. 87, 
88; ravaged by Edward HI., 266. 

Vices of the age, ii. 176, 451, 478, 
479; iii. 361— 368, 

Victor, pope, i. 91, 319. 

Victorn.,pope,i.372,417;ii.l65,348. 

Victor HL, pope, i. 372 ; ii. 168, 462. 



Victor, bishop of Capua, refutes 
Victorius, i, 115; ii. 144. 

Victor, Saint, his relics in the church 
of St. Gervase at Mans, iii. 284, 

Victorius, his canon of Easter, i, 1 12, 
115. 

Victrieius, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 
141; iv. 235. 

Vienne, city of, in Gaul, i. 11, 

Vienne, the river, i. 304, 

Vieux-Pont, Walter de. 

Viger de Bocquence, or of Apulia, 
sou of Baudri the Teutonic, i. 426, 
428. 

Viger, son of Baldwin de Meules, a 
monk of Bee, ii. 493. 

Vigilius, pope, i. 123, 160, 161, 342, 
343; ii. 145, 284. 

Vigilius, deacon, i. 340. 

Vignats, castle of, ii. 453,504,333,474. 

Villeins, ii, 212, 238; given to the 
abbey of St. Evroult, 255, 257, 364, 
403. 

Vimeux, the, i. 142, 383, 

Vineyards, two arpents of, at Toeni, 
given to the monks to supply wine 
for the mass, ii. 189 ; three arpents 
at Toeni given them, iii, 249; 
Peter de Maule gives the vineyai d 
of Clairfont, 233; the mesne- 
tenant gives the vintage of the 
year to buy an image of the Virgin, 
233; the monks re-convey ons 
arpent of, ad gardam? ii. 227; 
archers posted in, to gall the ene- 
my, iii. 231. 

Vincent, Saint, and deacon, i,323. 

Vire, shoals of the, near Harfleur, i. 
360. 

Virgil quoted, i.493; ii. 51 ; iii. 504. 

Vitulis, Saint, iv, 223, 

Vital is, a hermit, tries to reconcile 
Henry I, and Robert Curthose, iii. 
377. 

Vitalis, Chaplain of the count of Mor- 
tain, ii. 2 ; founds the abbey of 
Savigni, 51, 52; his life and cha- 
racter, sickness and death, 52, 

Vitalis, legate of pope Eelix II. or 
HI., i. 366. 



416 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Vitalis, abbot of Bernai, i. 458. 

Vitalis, abbot of Monte-Cassino, ii. 
146. 

Vitalis Ordericus, monk of St, 
Evroult, calls himself an English- 
man, ii. 103, 214, 269, 448; per- 
sonal references in his work. i. 2 — 
4, 495; ii.48, 110, 112, 113, 198, 
200, 201, 204, 243, 244, 331, 432; 
iii. 60, 63, 191, 222—225, 415; he 
travels to Cambray and England, 
i. 494, 495; visits Worcester, 494; 
spends five weeks at Croyland-ab- 
bey, ii. 86; goes to France in 1108, 
iii.'369; is atCluniin 1132,iv. 132; 
visits Merlerautin 1134, 141. His 
poetry, see Verses. 

Vitalian, pope, i. 121,352, 353; ii. 
147. 

Vitellius, emperor, i. 87. 

Vitot, Matthew Robert de. 

Viviers, Haton, bishop of. 

Volusian, emperor, i. 96, 321. 

Vortigern, king, i. 109,494; ii. 142; 
iv.97,98. 

Wacho,kingof the Lombards, ii. 153. 

Wado de Dreiix, a knight, i. 399. 

Waimalch, duke of Salerno, i. 411, 
412; ii. 366; iii. 435. 

Walamer, see Theodoric, king of the 
Ostrogoths. 

Waleran I., count de Meulan, ii. 
192, 489. 

Waleran If., count de Meulan (earl 
of Mellent), born in 1 104, iii. 348 , 
called the brother of Wilham 
Warrenue, iv. 207; brought up by 
Henry I, who knights him, 58; is 
loyal to that king, iii 474; revolts, 
i.l55; iv.61, 86, 253; his move- 
ments, iii. 330, 458; iv. 61, 62, 6S, 
71, 72, 73; he is taken prisoner 
at the battle of Bouig-Teroude, 
i. 155; iv. 74; surrenders Beau- 
mont, 78; his captivity in Eng- 
land for five years, ibid; is present 
at the death of Henry I., 150; 
king Stephen promises him his 
daughter, 157; his acts, 157, 162, 



166, 170, 171, 193, 199, 206,210, 
213; is at the battle of Lincoln, 
217; continues loyal to Stephen, 
219 ; makes a truce with the party 
ofAnjou, 221. 

Waleran, son of Hugh de Montfort, 
iv. 63. 

Waleran du Puiset, a crusader, falls 
into the hands of the Turks, iii. 
394; his captivity, 395, 402; his 
death, 403. 

Walkeliu de Eerrieres in arms in 
duke William's minority, ii. 49, 
163; his death, i. 149. 

Walkelin Maminot garrisons Dover 
castle against king Stephen, iv., 
201, and note-, joins the king's 
party, 403. 

Walkeliu, priest of Bonneval; ac- 
count of his vision of a cavalcade 
in piirgatory, ii. 511, 520. 

Walkelin de Tannic, i. 393 ; has the 
chai'ge of Amauri de ISIontfort's 
fortified mansion at Cintrai, iii. 
487. 

Walkelin, bishop of Winchester, ii. 
32, 250; his death, 466; iii. 200. 

Wales, kings of, i. 461; ii. 18, 442, 
445, 447, 449, 450; iv. 102; de- 
scription of the country in William 
the Conqueror's campaign, ii. 80; 
in Robert de Rhuddlan's poetical 
epitaph, 449 ; part of granted to 
the Flemings, iv. 143. 

Wall of Severus, i. 192. 

Wallingford, William the Conqueror 
halts there, i. 489. 

Walo, bishop of Leon, censures Pas- 
chal II., iii. 147. 

Walo, bishop of Paris, iii. 6. 

Walo de Trie, brother of Enguerran, 
a prisoner exchanged, iii. 472. 

Walter d'Aufai, cousin of Henry I., 
is at the battle of Bremule, iii. 482. 

Walter, canon of Aufai, gives up his 
prebend of Beaunai, ii. 263; be- 
comes a monk of St. Evroult, 266. 

Walter, son of Richard de Bienfaite, 
ii. 493. 

Walter, son of Guy Bollein, i. 428. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



417 



Walter, the Bald, monk of St. Ev- 
roult, at the cell of Parnes, i. 472. 
Walter, the Bald, a knight, ii. 213, 
Walter, bishop of Chalon, iii. 47. 
Walter de Clare, son of Gilbert de 
Clare, defends the church tower at 
Sap, iv. 167. 
Walter of Cormeilles, relates an 
anecdote to Ordericus of his mas- 
ter Gilbert, bishop of Lisieux, iii, 
62. 
Walter of Spain, ii. 189. 
Walter of Falaise, father of William 

de Moulins, ii. 193. 
Walter GifFard, is at the battle of 
Hastings, i. 484; has the eai'ldom 
of Buckingham, ii. 49. 
Walter Giffard, second earl of Buck- 
ingham, supports William Rufus 
in Normandy, ii. 474; iii. 74, 308; 
acts for Robert Curthose respect- 
ing the priory of Aufai, ii. 266; 
joins the league for placing him 
on the throne of England, iii. 277 ; 
his death and epitaph, 342. 
Walter GifFard, third earl of Buck- 
ingham, son of Walter the second, 
brought up by Agnes his mother, 
iii. 343, loyal to Henry I., 474; is 
at the battle of Bremule, 482. 
Walter, uncle of William the Con- 
queror, ii. 404. 
Walter the Hardy, son of Eudes, 

son of Walo, ii. 234. 
Walter, son of Gilbert de Heugle- 
ville, iii. 268; his benefactions to 
the priory of Aufai, 264, 265; his 
chaiacter and conduct, 268; his 
death and epitaph, 270. See 
Avicia, his wife. 
Walter de Laci, employed by Wil- 
liam the Conqueror against the 
Welsh, ii. 47. 
Walter de Montsorel, made pri- 
soner by the Normans, iii. 332. 
Walter the Little, a monk of St. 

Evroult, goes to Italy, i. 435. 
Walter de Foissi, son of Peter de 
Maule, ii. 2 19 ; companion of Peter 
the Hermit, iii. 76; at his death 
VOL. IV. E 



the sign of the cross was found on 
his corpse, 77. 

Walter, archbishop of Kouen in 1 183, 
iv.256, 258. 

Walter, son of Ansger, a rich burgher 
of Rouen, in the service of WQ- 
liam Rufus, iii. 236, 239, 273—275. 

Walter, abbot of Melun, ii. 345. 

Walter de St. Valeri, iii. 266; called 
count, and nephew of Richard 
III., duke of Normandy, iii. 80; 
joins the crusade, SO ; is a follower 
of Bohemond, 99. 

Walter Sans- Avoir, a companion of 
Peter the Hermit, fii. 75, 85. 

Walter (de Sauqueville?), a knight 
of Mortain, quits the Blanche-Nef' 
before she sails, iv. 42. 

Walter le Sor, his sons murder Ro- 
bert I. deBelesme, iv, 110. 

Walter Tirel, son of Fulk, dean of 
Evreux, ii. 185. 

Walter Tirel, lord of Poix, iii. 263; 
a favourite of William Rufiis, 
ibid; account of him, and an 
anecdote of this king, ibid; kills 
him in hunting, 264; flies to 
Prance, 260; dies afterwards in 
the Holy Land, ibid. 

Walter, abbot of the Trinity at 
Rouen, ii. 420. 

Walter de Valiquer\alle, made pri- 
soner at Vatteville, iv. 72. 

Walter, count of Ponthieu, son of 
Dreux, i. 448; ii. 79, 399. 

Waltheot; son of Siward, ii. 49; 
brother of Cospatric, earl of Nor • 
thumbria, i. 103; iv. 49; after the 
conquest joins the Danes in the 
North, ii. 26; is reconciled with 
the king, 29; made earl of Nor- 
thampton, and man-ied to the 
king's daughter Judith, 49; at- 
tends the king to Normandy, 5 ; 
refuses to conspire against the 
king, 80, 81; condemned for not 
having revealed the plot, 84; his 
execution at Winchester, 85; 
buried at Croyland, 86, 100, 101; 
a benefactor to that abbey, 91, 



418 



GENERAL INDEX. 



100; miracles at his tomb, 102; 
his epitaph by Ordericus, 103; re- 
marks on his execution, 103, 104. 

Wandrille, St. (or Fontenelles), i. 
119, 378; iv, 239; abbey of, 
founded, 381; iL 147; the saint's 
relics, 247,308. 

Wanelo, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 
156; iv. 244. 

Waradoch, a Babylonian chief, i. 
227, 228. 

War-cries of the English — of the 
French, iii. 469. 

"Ware, see Churchover, and note. 

"Wareham castle, held by Robert, 
son of Alured de Lincoln, against 
king Stephen, iv. 201. 

Warin, prior of Aufai, ii. 269. 

Warin, of Domfront, strangled by 
devils, iv. 110. 

Warin des Essarts, monk and after- 
wards abbot, of St. Evroult, ii. 2 14, 
523; elected abbot, 260; iv. 55; 
confirmed by Henry I., 55 ; con- 
secrated, 56, 253; his acts, iii. 
318, 320; iv. 105; administration 
and character, iii. 323, 324; en- 
courages Ordericus to write, i. 
3, 4; ii. 112; his death, iv. 179, 
180, 254; epitaph, 180, 181. 

Warin, bishop of Evreux, iv. 258. 

Warin, son of Fulk, dean of Ev- 
reux, ii. 185. 

Warin Sancho, fights against the 
Infidels in Spain, iv. 113. 

Warin of Seez, a monk of St. Ev- 
roult, i. 318, 320; prior of Maule, 
ii. 236. 

Warin, viscount of Shrewsbury, 48 ; 
a benefactor to the abbey there, 
196, 201; to the abbey of St. 
Evroult, 255. 

Warlewast, William de. 

Warwick, the castle founded by 
William the Conqueror, ii. 19 j the 
earldom of, given to Henry de 
Beaumont, iii. 34. 

Wascelin de Pont Echanfi-e, i. 392, 
395, 398, 400; goes on the cru- 
sade, iii. 367, 383, 390. 



Wearmouth (Monk's), monastery of 
St. Peter and St. Paul founded 
there, ii. 150. 

Welsh, the, Edwin, son of earl Mon- 
car, allies with, ii. IS; after the 
conquest they besiege Shrewsbury, 
26; the king's campaign against 
them, 30, 41; he retreats to Ches- 
ter, 31; appoints lord-marchers 
to repel and invade them, 411, 
444, 445; Robert de Rhuddlan 
subdues them, and builds castles, 
444, 445; hostilities with, when 
the fleet of king Magnus appeared 
on the coast, iii. 218; revolt in the 
time of Henry I,, iv. 143; their 
ravages, 144, 213; the king aban- 
dons his design of marching 
against them, 145; their insurrec- 
tion against king Stephen, 186; 
large bands of them auxiliaries to 
Robert earl of Gloucester, their 
atrocities, 213; march with him 
to Lincoln, 205; their conduct in 
the battle, 216; Henry II. reduces 
them to submission, iv. 255. 

Werleng, William. 

Westminster Abbey, rebuilt by Ed- 
ward the Confessor, i, 460; he is 
buried there, 460—490; William 
the Conqueror crowned there, 
490, 491; ii. 242; William Rufuu 
crowned there, 425; Henry I. 
crowned there, iii 267; his queen 
Matilda said to be buried there, 
448; [at Winchester]. 

Weston-Lizard, Staffordshire, the 
tithes of, given to St. Evroult, by 
Warin, A-iscount of Shrewsbury, 
ii. 255. 

Whittington, written Geddingtonam 
by Ordericus, a castle belonging 
to William Peverel on the Welsh 
border, iv. 201, and note. 

Whittlesey, the body of St. Neot 
carried there, ii. 98. 

Wihtred, a youth of East Anglia, 
ii. 90. 

Wigheard, archbishop of Canterbury, 
ii. 147. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



419 



Wigfricl, librarian of Croyland ab- 
bey, ii. 92. 

Wight, Isle of, conquered by Ves- 
pasian, i. 87 ; given by William 
the Conqueror to William Fitz- 
Osberne, ii. 47 ; the king arrests 
bishop Odo there, 374, 416. 

Wilcot, a manor in the parish of 
Quinton, Gloucestershire, given 
by Hugh de Grentemesnil to the 
abbev of St. Evroult, ii. 256. 

Wilfrid, friend of St. Guthlac, ii. 90. 

Wilfrid, archbishop of York, ii. 151. 

Willebert, archbishop of Roueii,ii,l 54. 

William I'Aiguillon, allies Avith Wa- 
leran de Meulan against Henry I., 
iv. 68. 

William Fitz-Alan, viscount of 
Shrewsbury, besieged there by 
king Stephen, iv. 204 ; he married 
the niece of Robert earl of Glou- 
cester, ibid. 

William, son of Amauri, governor 
of Plessis, iii.453. 

William, son of Ansger, a rich 
burgher of Rouen ; his enormous 
ransom paid to Robert de Be- 
lesme, ii. 503; brother of Walter, 
son of Ansger, 

William d'Arques, a monk of Mo- 
leme, councillor of Robert Curt- 
hose, ii. 476. 

William d'Asnieres (de Arneriis), 
chanter, and afterwards bishop of 
Lisieux, iv. 262, 263. 

William d'Aubigni, brother of Ni- 
gel; loyal to Henry I., iii. 473; 
witnesses a charter of the King at 
York, 56. 

William, count d'Aumale (earl of 
Albemarle), commands at the bat- 
tle of the Standard, iv. 205. 

William Balot, abbot of St. Ouen, at 
Rouen, iii. 38. 

William Basset, monk of St. Evroult, 
abbot of St.. Benedict at Hulme, 
ii. 523, 524. 

William, abbot of Bee, ii. 68,493; 
iii. 206, 248, 459. 

William de Belesme, has the bish- 



opric of Seez given him by duke 
Richard II., iii. 29; castles built 
by him, ii. 454; attacks Herbert, 
count of Maine, i. 390. 

William Bigod, is lost in the wreck 
of the Blanche-Nef, iv. 40. 

William, son of Stephen, count de 
Blois, ii. 183; iii. 426; marries 
the daughter of Giles de Sulli, 
ii. 183; iii. 346. 

William de Montreuil, called the 
Good Norman, son of William 
Giroie, i. 393, 397; goes to Apu- 
lia, 393, 412, 437. 

William, Bonne- Ame, archbishop of 
Rouen, son of Radbod, bishop of 
Seez, i. 419; ii. 42; canon and 
archdeacon of Rouen, 43; ac- 
companies abbot Theodoric in his 
pilgrimage to Jenisalem, i. 419, 
420; ii. 43; monk of Bee, 43; 
abbot of Caen, 42, 123, 168; iv. 
250; archbishop of Rouen, i. 153; 
ii. 42, 123, 168; iv. 250; he is at 
the funeral of queen Matilda, ii. 
168; of William the Conqueror, 
168, 419, 420; of the duchess 
Sibylla, 343; baptizes William, 
son of Robert Curthose, 257, 272; 
ordains Ordericus priest, 414, 415 
iv. 224; other acts of his admi- 
nistration, ii. 124, 265, 521; iii. 
7, 69, 71, 287, 288, 412, 414; his 
death in 1110, 1, 154; iii. 227,435, 
437; iv. 252; his epitaph, iii. 437, 
438 ; his buildings and character, 
ii. 123, 124. 

William de Breteuil, son of William 
Fitz-Osberne, ii. 60, 187, 190, 191, 
358, 398, 427, 428, 454, 484, 485, 
495,496,499,502,516; iii. 467; 
he was hunting with William Ru- 
fus when the king was slain, 264; 
opposes raising Henry I. to the 
throne, and defends the rights of 
Robert Curthose, 264, 265; his 
benefactions to St. Evroult, ii. 191, 
192; iii. 248, 249; he dies at Bee, 
ii. 191; iii. 244; buried at Lire, 
ii.191, 192. 



420 



GENERAL INDEX. 



■William de Buchelai attends Louis, 
son of the French king, in his visit 
to England, iii. 353. 

William, bishop of Chalon?, at the 
council of Rheims, iv, 16. 

William le Charpentier, viscount de 
Melun, a crusader, iii. 78, 112. 

"William de Chaumont, son-in-law of 
Louis le Gros, iii. 490. 

"William de Chaumont, bishops of 
Lisieux in 1386, iv. 266. 

"William, son of Robert Curthose, i. 
156; ii. 474; his birth and child- 
hood, iii. 257, 272, 381, 382 ; iv. 
26, 86; escapes king Henry's at- 
tempt to seize him. iii. 430, 431; 
iv. 86; his exile and wanderings, 
iii. 432, 433; iv. 79, 86; efforts of 
princes and lords in support of 
his rights, iii. 432 — 434, 450, 454; 
iv. 23, 58, 79, 85, 86; Louis le 
Gros pleads his cause at the coun- 
cil of Rheims, 5 ; gives him Johanna 
of Maurienne, his queen's sister, 
with the Vexin, 87; he was with 
that king at the battle of Breraule. 
iii. 482 ; his cousin, king Henry's 
son, returns him his horse and 
accoutrements, 485; succeeds 
Charles, count of Flanders, iv. 88, 
89; punishes the assassins, 89; 
engaged in intestine wars, 89, 92; 
his expedition against Stephen, 
count of Boulogne, 89 ; wounded 
at the siege of Alost, 92, 93 ; his 
death, i. 156; iv. 93, 96, 253; his 
father, Robert Curthose, presages 
it from a dream, 96; political re- 
sults, ibid.; he is buried at St. 
Bertin, 93, 94; his epitaph, 94; 
his person, character, and habits, 
79, 80, 86. 

William the Conqueror, duke of 
Normandy, king of Lngland, men- 
tioned, i. 375, 397, 401, 450; ii. 
121, 207, 211; iv. 484: son of 
duke Robert IL, his accession, 
i. 148, 381, 382; ii. 161; iii. 73, 
433; iv.248; Turkytel his go- 
vernor, i. 149; troubles in Nor- 



mandy during his minority, 149, 
150; "ii. 163, 403, 404; goes to 
implore aid from Henry L of 
France, i. 150; gains the battle of 
Valesdunes, 150,151; ii. 167,348, 
405; iii. 464; besieges Vemon 
and Brionne, ii. 232, 404, 405; iii. 
404; defeats an expedition of 
Geoffrey Martel, count of Anjou, 
1.425; ii. 410; gains the battle of 
Mortemer, i. 152 ; ii. 167, 249, 407 
— 409 ; his marriage with Matilda, 
i. 441; ii. 348; he causes Mau- 
rilius, archbishop of Rouen, to be 
degraded, i. 150; ii. 405, 406; the 
duke's benefactions and charters 
to St. Evroult, i. 386, 400, 450; ii. 
189; iv.180; other acts, i. 415, 
417, 422, 425, 431, 432, 441, 448, 
455; ii. 74, 157, 211, 212; iii. 171, 
187; Harold does him homage, i. 
458,459; his expedition against 
Conan IL, duke of Brittany, i. 
459 ; his prepai'ations for invading 
England, i. 462, 463, 465; his 
fleet assembles at St. Valeri, 480; 
he crosses the Channel, 481, in 
the ship of one Stephen, son of 
Airard, iv. 33 ; on his landing, oc- 
cupies Pevensey and Hastings, i. 
48 1 ; gains the battle of Hastings, 
i. 153, 483—487; ii. 242; iv. 249, 
250; marches to Dover, i. 488; to 
London, 489; Stigand and the no- 
bles submit to him as king; he is 
crowned, i. 153, 489 — 491; ii. 
4; returns to Normandy, 5, 6; 
transactions there, 6; returns to 
England, 14; expedition against 
the rebels in the West, 15 — 17; 
sends for queen Matilda, 17; 
marches northward against Ed- 
win and Morcar, 17 — 28; erects 
castles, 19; hastens to York from 
the forest of Dean, 25 ; to Stafford, 
27 ; his winter campaign in North- 
umbria, 27 — 30; he is crowned by 
the papal legates at Winchester,31 ; 
puts down the rebellion of Edwin 
and Morcar, 44, 45; returns to 



GENERAL INDEX. 



421 



Normandy, 61; transactions there, 
61, 75; lii. 233, 234, 275; iv. 
158; returns to England, ii. 82; 
defeats a conspiracy of the English 
nobles, 80, 83 ; condemns earl 
Waltheof, 84 ; again in Normandy, 
104; transactions there, 70, 71,76, 
77, 104, 105, 108, 110, 120, 124; 
origin and results of his quarrel with 
Robert Curthose, 107—119, 169 — 
181 ; in 1082, the king hastens fi'om 
Normandy to the Isle of Wight, 
374 ; arrests bishop Odo, and 
sends liim to the Tower of Rouen, 
375; his expedition to Maine, 
377, 381; he claims the Vexin, 
392, 400; lays siege to Mantes, 
400; falls sick, and is carried to 
Rouen, 401; his illness, 402; 
sends for his son Robert, ii. 181; 
his will, ii. 402, 412, 413; letter to 
Lanfranc, 414; his discom-se on 
his death-bed, 403 — 412 ; grants an 
amnesty, 415, 417; his death, i. 
153; ii. 417, 418; iv. 251; his 
funeral, 168, 419 -423; his tomb 
and epitaph, 424, 425; character 
of William the Conqueror, ii. 242, 
243; his laws and government, 3, 
4, 13, 44; gives lands and honours 
to his Norman followers, 47 — 50, 
242; his severities on the English, 
28, 413; his revenue, 50; Domes- 
day book, 51, 382; makes the 
New Forest, iii. 260; his promo- 
tion of able prelates, ii. 32 ; founds 
two abbeys at Caen, i. 382; ii. 1; 
founds Battle Abbey, ii. 1 ; Wil- 
liam of Jumieges dedicates his 
book to him, 298; he is called the 
Bastard, iii. 433, and passim. 

William de Conversana, brother of 
the duchess Sibylla, iii. 341, 361. 

William de Corboil, archbishop of 
Canterbury, iv. 51, 253; crowns 
king Stephen, 154; his death, 
137. 

William, abbot of Cormeilles.iii. 435. 

William (St.) Courtnez, count of 
Tholouse, his legend, ii. 243—249, 



William Crispin, nephew of Amauri 
de Montfort, iii. 403, 456; is at 
the battle of Bremule, iv. 453; 
assaults Henry I., 454; is struck 
down and made prisoner by 
Richard, the king's son, ibid. 

William, abbot of La Croix, iii. 
459. 

William, abbot of Dijon, restorer 
and abbot of Fecamp, i. 422 ; ii. 
6G; iii. 415. 

William, bishop of Durham, iii. 200. 

William d'Echoufour, son of Arnold, 
i. 452; goes to Apulia, 453. 

William, priest of Essarts, i. 398. 

William I., count d'Eu, i. 400; 
founds the abbey of Dive, 382; 
father of Hugh, bishop of Lisieux, 
462. 

William IL, count d'Eu, marries the 
sister of Hugh, earl of Chester, iii. 
21; cruelly dismembered, 22. 

William, count a'Evreux, is at the 
battle of Hastings, i. 484; receives 
lands in England, ii. 50; his acts 
in Normandy, 77, 381, 427, 455, 
475, 476, 495, 496, 499; iii. 236, 
272, 340, 342, 348, 357, 376, 420, 
443; he founds the priory of 
Noyon, 419; begins the church 
of St. Mary, ibid; his death, 420, 
448. 

William Fleitel, bishop of Evreux, 
son of Gerard, i. 400, 423, 425, 
462; ii.43. 

William de Ferrieres, ii. 507 ; goes 
to the crusade, 29; serves there 
xmder duke Robert, iii. 376; taken 
prisoner at the battle of Tinche- 
brai, 381. 

William de la Ferte, governor of 
Mans for William the Conqueror, 
ii. 75. 

William de Flavacour, archbishop of 
Rouen, iv. 261. 

William de Fontaines, governor of 
the castle of Pont St. Pierre, iv. 
162. 

William Fresnel, iii. 472, 473; iv 
197. 



422 



GENERAL INDEX. 



William de Garlande, is at the battle 
of Bremnle, iii. 482. 

William Gitfard, bishop of Win- 
chester, chancellor of William 
Rufus, iii. 268, 346. 

William Giroie, son of Giroie, i. 390, 
413; lord of Echoufour, ii. 315; 
assists in restoring the abbey of St. 
Erroult, i. 384— 386; goes tv/ice 
to the Holy Land, 384, 385; be- 
comes a monk of Bee, 385; gives 
the old church of St. Evroult to 
the abbey of Bee, ibid-, goes to 
Apulia, 406, 413; his death, 413, 
414; uncle of Hugh de Grente- 
mesnil, ii. 255; exercises episcopal 
jurisdiction in his fiefs, i. 392. 

William de Glanville, dean and arch- 
deacon of Lisieux, ii. 122 ; iii. 248. 

William de Glos, son of Barno, 
steward of William de Breteuil, 
ii. 191; his exactions and usury, 
516, 517. 

William de Grandcourt, son of Wil- 
liam count d'Eu, iv. 74 ; he assists 
Amauri de Montfort, his pri- 
soner in battle, to escape, 74; be- 
comes an exile with him in France, 
75. 

William Gregory, son of Guy Bol- 
lein, a monk of Sc, Evroult, i. 428 ; 
his character, 429 ; a skilful reader 
and chanter, copied and illumi- 
nated manuscripts, ibid. 

William de Grentemesnil, son of 
Hugh, ii. 505; settles in Apulia, 
ii. 506; settles in Apuha, 213, 
448 ; marries Mabel, daughter of 
Robert Guiscard, 464, 506; iii. 
56; is at the siege of Durazzo, ii. 
358; deserts from the crusade at 
Antioch, iii. 56, 128, 129. 

William de Harcourt, is loyal to 
Henry I., iv. 71 ; is at the fight of 
Bourg-Teroude, 72. 

William, son of Ingran, a native 
and clerk of St. Evroult, i. 439 ; 
afterwards monk and prior of 
St. Euphemia, and abbot of Me- 
lito, i. 439 : ii. 362. 



William d'Ypres, natural son of 
Philip, son of Robert, count of 
Flanders, iv. 91; in 1127 besieges 
the assassins of count Chai-les, 88 ; 
opposes count William, the Nor- 
man, 98; is reconciled with him, 
ibid.; in 1137 he is in the service 
of king Stephen in Normandy, 
176, 177; ravages the country, 
199; in 1139 he is in England, 
211; employed at Devizes to co- 
erce the bishops to sun-ender, 
ibid. ; is at the battle of Lincoln, 
216; he and his Flemings, with 
the Bretons, opposed to the Welsh, 
ibid. ; they are the first to fly, 
217. 

William, abbot of Jumieges in 1128, 
iv. 105. 

William de Jumieges, the historian, 
i. 375, 425; account of his work, 
ii. 298. 

William, bishop of Lisieux (1191 — 
1200); iv. 257, 258. 

William, Longue-Epee, duke of 
Normandy, i. 137; ii. 145, 452; 
iii. 73; son of Rollo, i. 380; iv. 
246; recalls Louis d'Outre-Mer, 
ii. 137, 339; restores the abbey of 
Jumieges, i. 381; ii. 157,166; de- 
feats Ralph, count of Evreux, i. 
137 ; iv. 247 ; is murdered by Ar- 
nulf of Flanders, i. 137; ii. 158, 
299; iv. 247; his tomb and epi- 
taph in Rouen cathedral, ii. 165, 
166. 

William Louvel (Lupellus), son of 
Ascelin Goel, ii. 238 ; inherits 
Ivri, iv. 61, joins a league against 
Henry L, 61, 62; marries the 
daughter of Ralph, count de Meu- 
lan, 61 ; tries to reinforce the 
garrison of Vatteville, 72 ; escapes 
after the fight of Bourg-Teroude 
in the disguise of a peasant. 75; 
makes his peace with the king, 
79 ; see Ralph Louvel. 

William de Mandeville has the cus- 
tody of Ralph Flambard in the 
Tower of London, iii. 280. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



423 



"William Mallet is entrusted with 
the burial of king Harold, i. 487; 
is governor of York, ii. 22. 
William [of M alines] patriarch of 

Jerusalem, iv. 104, 
William, the Marquis, son of Eudes, 
the Good Marquis, a crusader, 
lands at Durazzo, iii. 83 ; is killed 
at the battle of Dorylisum, 102. 
William Manger, bishop of Seez, iv. 

265. 
William de Merleraut, monk of St. 
Evroult, an able copyist, i. 395; 
lives at the priory of Maule, ii. 
206. 
William, son of Eichard II. duke of 
Normandy, a monk of Fecamp, 
iv. 248. 
William, son of Eoger de Mont- 
gomeri, his turbulence in Wil- 
liam the Conqueror's minority, 
ii. 163. 
William de IMontpelier, reconnoitres 
Antioch, iii. 106; is at the siege 
ofMarrah, 156. 
WilHam, son of Hugh de Mont- 
pin9on, ii. 218; takes possession 
of Richard Basset's tower at Mon- 
treuil, iv. 165. 
William de Montpin9on, abbot of 

St. Evroult, iv. 261, 262. 
William de Montreuil, prior of 

Maule, ii. 236. 
William de Montreuil, monk of St. 
Evroult, a skilful copyist, trans- 
ferred to the abbey of Dive, ii. 
107. 
WiUiam, count de Mortain, iii. 358 ; 
a partisan of Eobert Curthose, 
374; draws stores of provisions 
into his castle of Tinchebrai; 375; 
taken prisoner in the battle, 347, 
380,381; iv. 25; imprisoned for 
life, 381, 383. 
William de Moulins, son of Walter 
of Ealaise, ii. 77, 173, 193; his 
death and character, 193; iv. 
108. 
William de Moulins, son of William, 
made prisoner, iii. 221. 



I William de Moiun, holds Dunster- 
castle against king Stephen, iv. 
201. 
William of Mantes, abbot of Mar- 

moutier, ii. 3. 
William I,, count de N'evers, father- 
in-law of Hubert de Suzasme, ii. 
378. 
William II., count de ISTevers, incar- 
cerated by Theobald de Blois, iv. 
6,27. 
William, bishop of Orange, dies in 

the crusade, iii. 158. 
William Fitz-Osborne, steward of 
Normandy, i. 399, 400, 450, 462; 
nephew of Hugh, bishop of Bay- 
eux, ii. 187; founds the abbeys 
of Lire and Cormeilles, i. 338, 
442; ii. 60; is at the battle of 
Hastings, i. 484; his power and 
oppressions, ii. 83; governor of 
Winchester, 5; of one of the 
castles at York, 22; sent to re- 
lieve Shrewsbury, 26; has the 
earldom of Hereford, and the Isle 
of Wight, 47; employed to de- 
fend the Welsh marches, 47 ; sent 
to govern Normandy with queen 
Matilda, 59; goes to the aid of 
count Arnulf in Flanders, 59; is 
slain there, 59, 190. 
William de Paci, son of Eustace, 

iv. 170, 171. 
William de Paci, offers a bribe for 
the bishopric of Lisieux, iii. 287, 
288. 
WiUiam Paganel died about 1087; 

ii. 426. 
William Pantulf, ii. 196, 207,211; 
a mesne-tenant of Eobert de Mont- 
gomeri in Shropshire, 48 ; goes 
twice to Apulia, 209, 2U; brings 
back some relics of St. Nicholas, 
397; deposits them at Notron, and 
founds a church there, 397; is 
accused of the murder of Mabel 
de Montgomeri, 210; purges him- 
self by the ordeal of hot iron, 
210; his lands in England se- 
questered by Eobert de Belesme, 



424 



GENERAL INDEX. 



334; Henry I. makes him gover- 
nor of Stafford castle, 334; lie ne- 
gotiates for the king with the 
garrison of Bridgnorth, and the 
Welsh princes, 334. 

Wilham Peverel (bastard son of 
William the Conqueror), has the 
custody of Nottingham castle,ii, 19. 

William Peverel, witness to a char- 
ter of Henry I., signed at Rouen 
(brother of the last?), iii.440. 

William Peverel, the younger, pos- 
sesses four castles in England, iv. 
201 ; revolts against king Stephen, 
« ibid. 

William of Picardy, dies in the 
crusade, iii. 165. 

William de Pirou, steward of Henry 
I., is lost in the Blanche- Nef\ iv. 
41. 

William Pointel, holds the citadel 
of Evreux, iii. 460, 478. 

William de Poitiers, archdeacon of 
Lisieux, historian of William the 
Conqueror, i. 425, 492; ii. 122; 
particulars of his life, 46. 

William VII., count of Poitou, joins 
his forces with William Rufus, iii. 
211, 212; his crusade, 258, 288, 
291, 297; returns, and composes 
and sings ballads on his adven- 
tui-es, 300; is governor of Fulk, 
the young count of Anjou, 370; 
extorts some castles for his ran- 
som, 371; repudiates his countess 
Hildegarde, and takes the wife -of 
the viscount de Chatelleraut, iv. 
7; makes an excuse for not at- 
tending a summons to the coun- 
cil of Rheims, 7; his death, i, 
156; iv. 85, 254; his character, 
iii. 289. 

William VIII., count of Poitou, iv. 
50, 92; accompanies Geoffrey of 
Anion to Normandy, iv. 164; dies 
in Gallicia, 175. 

WilUam of Pont de I'Arche, bishop of 
Lisieux, iv. 259, 260. 

William, duke of Apulia, i. 156; iv. 
85, 137, 254. I 



William Ranulf, son of Ranulf, earl 
of Chester, is at the first crusade, 
iii. 99 ; succeeds his father, iv. 44. 

William de Rhuddlan, son of Robert, 
lost in the Blanche-Nef, iv. 40. 

William, natural son of Robert 
Curthose, goes to the crusade, and 
fails in battle, iii. 260. 

William, son of Robert, archbishop 
of Rouen, i. 395; ii. 160; he pur- 
loins, to please his wife Havise, 
the illuminated psalter given by 
queen Matilda, and afterwards 
presented to St. Evrouk, i. 402. 

Willifm, son of Roger, bishop of 
Coutances ; he is chaplain to Henry 
I., and perishes in the Blanche- 
Nef, iv. 36. 

WiUiam de Ros, also called de Ba- 
yeux, iii. 416 ; brought up by Odo, 
bishop of Bayeux, ii. 430 ; chanter, 
dean, and archdeacon of Bayeux, 
i.468; monk of Caen, 469; iii. 14; 
abbot of Fecamp, i. 469; ii. 66, 
420; erects a screen, and improves 
the nave of the church, iii. 412; 
his death and burial, 412; his 
epitaph, 413; character and elegy, 
413,414; person so handsome that 
he was called Puella, 416. 

William III., archbishop of Rouen, 
before bishop of Langres, iv. 26.5. 

William de Roumare, half-brother 
of Ranulf, earl of Chester, iv. 214, 
215; debauched in his youth, 95, 
his relations with Henry I., i. 
Normandy, iii. 454, 473; iv. 61 
95; is at the battle of Bremule 
iii. 482 ; escapes being lost in the 
Blanche-Nef, 1034; at Henry's 
death entrusted with the defence 
of the frontiers, 15 1; is governor 
of the duchy for king Stephen, 
184; seizes Lincoln Castle, 214, 
215. 
William Rufus, king of England, 
i. 441, 450; ii. 22, 116, 196, 202, 
348, 258; iii. 73, quarrels with 
his brother Robert, ii. 108 ; is with 
his father at his death, 182, 402, 



GENERAL INDEX. 



425 



413, 414; crosses to England, ii. 
414; iii. 201; his accession and 
coronation, i. 153; ii. 168, 424; 
Odo, bishop of Bayeux, and 
some Anglo-Norman lords league 
against him, 432 — 434; Lanfranc, 
with the bishops and commons of 
England, suppoi^ts him, 435 ; the 
campaign, siege of Eochester 
and its results, 436—442; sieges 
.of Pevensey and Tun bridge cas- 
tles, 205; opposes the pretensions 
of Robert Curthose, 471, 472; 
makes a party against him in 
Normandy, 45'2, 473, 474, 495, 
498, 499; he crosses there and 
stays at Eu, 510, 520; transactions 
in Normandy, 510, 511, 520, 521; 
duke Robert cedes to him great 
part of the duchv, 521; returns 
to England, 523 ; iv. 17 ; at Wind- 
sor confirms the election of Roger, 
abbot of E\Toult, ii. 523 ; grants a 
charter to the abbey, ibid ; his ex- 
pedition against Malcolm, king of 
Scots, iii. 1 7, 1 8 ; he falls sick, ii.469 ; 
appoints Anselm to the vacant see 
of Canterbury, 469, 470; his quar- 
rels with that preLate, iii. 202, 237 ; 
his campaign in the North against 
Robert de Mowbray, ii. 380; iii. 
18 — 21; he receives Normandy 
in pledge from Robert Curthose, 
74; iii. 205, 223; his administra- 
tion there; attempts on Maine and 
the Vexin, 207, 208, 211, 212, 
223, 225, 226, 229—236; he re- 
turns to England, 238; recalled 
to Normandy by the revolt of 
Elias, count of Maine, 240—243 ; 
in 1100 prepares a fleet and army 
to take possession of Poitou, and 
secure that of Normandy, 258, 
260; predictions of his approach- 
ing death, 260—262; he jests at 
them, 263; goes to hunt in the 
New Forest, 263. 264; he is killed 
by Walter Tirrell, i. 154; ii. 168, 
263, 264, 267; iv. 252; his body 
is carried to Winchester and bu- 



ried there, ii. 168; iii. 265,266; 
judgments on him, 266; his cha- 
racter, ii. 470, 471; iii. 199, 229; 
his devotion to war, 208 ; his bad 
administration, 200 — 202; a pas- 
sage in Merlin's prophecies ap- 
plied to him, iv. 102 ; he builds the 
frontier forti'ess of Gisors, iii. 209 ; 
Chateau-Neuf on the Epte. 479. 

William, son of Henry I., by queen 
Matilda, iii. 13, 270; in May, 
1119, he goes to Normandy, iii. 
474; marries Matilda, daughter 
of the count of Anjou, 443, 474; 
iv. 38; in August he is at the 
battle of Bremule, iii. 485 ; in No- 
vember, 1120. he embarks in the 
Blanche-Nef, iv. 33 ; tries to save 
his sister, the countess of Perche, 
40, note ; he perishes in the wreck, 
i. 155; ii. 48, 380; iv. 36, 37, 
253; opinions respecting him. 37, 
38. 

William de Sabran, is at the siege of 
Jerusalem, iii. 172. 

William, bishop of Saintes, at the 
council of Rheim,s, iv. 7. 

William Sans-Avoir, brother of 
Walter, and companion of Peter 
the Hermit, iii. 75, 85, 301, 302; 
his brother Simon, iv. 302. 

William Selleys, abbot of St. Evroult 
(1459—1468), repaired the abbey 
buildings, iv. 268. 

William, count of Talou, i. 152, ii. 
266, 405, 406. 

William Talvas, son of William de 
Belesme, i. 384—393. 

William Talvas, son of Robert de 
Belesme, iii. 21, 444; iv. 146, 147, 
156, 161, 164, 174. 

William de Tankerville, chamberlain 
of Plenry L, iii. 458 ; draws off the 
king from relieving Laigle by a 
ruse, 457; supports him in 1119, 
473, 474; before the battle of 
Bremule, dissuides him from en- 
gaging Louis, 481; is in the bat- 
tle, 482; witnesses a royal letter 



426 



GENERAL INDEX. 



William Tete-Hardie, count of Bur- 
gundy, son or grandson of Rey- 
nold, father of Guy, archbishop 
of Vienne, and pope as Cal- 
lixtus IL, i. 373: iii. 464; iv. 136. 

William, son of Umfi-id du Tilleul, 
i. 454 ; abbot of St. Euphemia, ii. 
447. 

William Trossebot, castellan of Bon- 
neville, iv. 207 ; routs the Anjevins, 
208 ; one of the low persons ele- 
vated by Henry I., iii. 328. 

WilHam de Warrcnne, his position 
in Normandy, i. 462 ; ii. 473, note; 
at the battle of Hastings, 484 j 
one of the lords entrusted with the 
government on the king's return 
to Nonnandy, ii. 5 ; is made earl 
of Surrey, 49, 472, and note; 
quells a revolt, 81, 82; is at the 
siege of Sainte-Suzanne, 356; 
supports William Rufus against 
his enemies, 436; his death, 472; 
buried at the priory at Lewes 
fovmded by him, 472, and note; 
his epitaph, 472, 473; his wife, 
Gundrede, daughter of queen 
Matilda (?), ii.49, 473, and note. 

William de Warrenne (II.), earl of 
Sun-ey, son of the preceding, ii. 
473; serves in Normandy, 506, 
507; demands the hand of Ma- 
tilda of Scotland, iii. 13; espouses 
the cause of Robert Curthose, 277, 
282, 287; is deprived by Henry of 
his earldom of Surrey, 287, 325; 
worth £1,000 a-year, ibid.; the 
king restores it to him, 325; he is 
thenceforth loyal and favoured, 
327, 431, 473, 474 ; is with the king 
at the battle of Bremule. 481,482. 

William de Warrenne (III.?), earl of 
Surrey, is present at the death of 
Henry I., iv. 150; has the charge 
of Rouen and the Pays du Caux, 
151; king Stephen makes over- 
tures to him, 178; engaged in the 
battle of Lincoln on his side, 217; 
continues loyal to the king after 
his captivity, 219; Ordericus calls 



him brother of Waleran, count de 
Meulan, 217. 

William de Vergi, cardinal of St. 
Cecilia, commendatory abbot of 
St. Evroult in 1392, iv. 267. 

William de Warlewast, bishon of 
Exeter, iii. 201 ; attends He iry I. 
on his visit to St. Evi-oult, 439. 

William Werlenc, count de Mortain, 
son of Malger (son of duke 
Richard I.), ii. 79, and note, 416. 

Willibrod, Saint, surnamed Clement, 
bishop of the Frisians, i. 124,357; 
iv. 240. 

Winchelsea, William the Conqueror 
lands there in 1067, ii. 14. 

Winchester, the capital of the pro- 
vince of Sussex, iii. 260; William 
the Conqueror builds a citadel 
there, ii. 5 ; signs a charter there, 
249, 250 j Hugh de Grentemesnil 
governor of the district, 21; the 
regalia kept at, 20; the king keeps 
Easter there, 22,31; is crowned 
there by the papal legates, 31; 
holds a council there, ibid. ; earl 
Waltheof imprisoned and executed 
there, 84, 85 ; William Rufus as- 
sembles his troops there, ii. 471; 
his corpse carried and inteiTcd 
there, 168; iii. 265; Henry I. seizes 
the royal treasure in the castle, 
264, 265 ; Robert Curthose marches 
there, 282; Eulk, abbot of Dive, 
dies there, 207, 368 ; IVIatilda, 
queen of Hemy I., buried there, 
449, note; the empress Matilda 
received there with royal honours, 
iv. 219; the church of St. Giles, 
near, ii. 85; the people of that 
neighbourhood called " Gewissse," 
20, 33. 

Winchester, see the names of bishops 
of. 

Windesmoth, wife of Peter de Maule, 
i. 217, 220, 221. 

Windsor, Stigand deposed at a synod 
held there, ii. 31; Roger, abbot- 
elect of St. Evroult, confirmed 
there, 523. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



427 



Wine, one muid, yearly, given to 
the monks of Aufay for use iu the 
mass, ii. 263. 

Winigis, duke of Spoleto, i. 366. 

Winili, or Guinili, see Lombards. 

Winnoc, nephew of St, Jiidoc, i. 
474. 

Wissant, William Rufus embarks 
there to take possession of the 
throne of England, ii. 414; cj. iii. 
201. 

Wittigis, king of the Goths, i. 341, 
342. 

Witikind, king of Saxony, i. 134. 

Witmund, see Guitmond. 

Witto, archbishop of Rouen, ii. 156; 
iv. 245. 

Woden, ii. 24, 350. 

Worcester, Ordericus there, i. 494; 
Florence the chronicler, a monk of, 
1. 493, note ; John, his continuator, 
a monk of, 493, 494, and note. See 
bishops of. 

Worcestershire, called W>'ssa, ii. 94, 
and note ; possessions of the abbey 
of St. Evroult in, ii. 189, 287 ; ra"- 
vaged by Richard Scroop and 
Bernard du Neuf-Marche, 434. 

Wridthorpe, in Northamptonshire, 
given to Croyland abbey, ii. 98. 

Wulfhere, king of Mercia, ii. 36. 

Wulfin, goldsmith at Chichester, ii. 
196. 

Wulfin, prior of Croyland, ii. 86. 

Wulfran, Saint, archbishop of Sens, 
a monk of St. Wandrille, i. 128; 
iv. 240; his relics, ii. 247, 308. 

Wulgcat, abljot of Peukirk and Croy- 
land, ii. 99. 

Wulnoth, brother of Harold, i. 487. 

Wulstan, Saint, bishop of Worcester, 
i.494; ii. 434, 466. 

Wurzburg, St. Kilian. bishop of, ii. 
105. 

Wye, the, iv. 204. 

Xativa, in the kingdom of Valencia, 
iv. 112. 



Xerxes, king of Babylon, i. 276, 279, 

283. 
Xistus, father of pope Sixtus, i. 334. 

Ylgazy, nephew of the sultan o. 
Persia, defeats the Crusaders, iii. 
323; besieges Saldanas, 391; de- 
feats Roger of the Principality, 
392; is slain, 393. 

York, iii. 284; Severus Pertinax dies 
there, i. 92: also, Constantius,100; 
insurrection there against the Nor- 
mans, ii. 19; Robert Pitz-Richard, 
tlie governor, slain, 21, 22; Wil- 
liam Malet, governor, holds the 
castle against the Northern lords, 
22; they join their forces with the 
Danes and storm it, 26; William 
the Conqueror marches there, 28 ; 
keeps Christmas there, 39 ; Henry I. 
holds his court there in December 
1 122, ii. 2 12 ; Henry, son of Henry 
II., crowned at London by the 
archbishop of York, iv. 256. See 
archbishops of. 

Zabdias, patriarch of Jerusalem, i. 

89. 
Zach arias, architect, a disciple of St. 

Peter, i. 190. 
Zacharias, captain of the guards, i. 

124. 
Zachary, pope, i. 362, 363; ii. 34,151. 
Zaccheus, ordained bishop of Cce- 

sarea, i. 190. 
Zaccheus, bishop of Jerusalem, i. 89. 
Zanibri, a magician, i. 328. 
Zara, priest of Diana, ii. 133. 
Zarol's, a magician, i. 271, 277, 279, 

282, 283. 
Zeno, emperoi*, i. 112, 113, 276,290, 

335, 336; ii, 143. 
Zenophilus, i. 329. 
Zephyrinus, pope, i. 319. 
Zoe, empress, i. 136; ii. 157. 
Zosinias, pope, i, 333; ii. 142. 
Zwintibold, king of Bohemia, i. 

136. 



HADDON, BROTHERS, AKD CO., PRINTERS, CASTLE STEERT, FINSBURY. 



BOHN'8 VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



Longfellow's Poetical Works, com- 
plete, including The Wayside Inn. 
Tueaty-four page Engravings, hy Birlcct 
Foster and others, and a veio FortroAt. 

or, without tlie illustrations. 



3s. 6d. 



Prose "Works, complete. Six- 
teen page Engravings by Birket Foster 
and ethers. 

Marryat's Kasterman Ready; or, 

The Wreck of the Pacific. 93 Engravings. 

Mission ; or, Scenes in Af- 
rica. (Written for Young People.) Jllus- 
trated by Gilbert and Dalzid. 

Pirate and Three Cutters. 



New Edition, with a Memoir of the 
Author. With 20 Steel Engravings, from 
Drawings by Clarkson Stansjlell, R.A. 

Privateer's-Man One Hun- 



dred Years Ago. Eigh.t Engravings on 

.-■'t^jel, after Stothard. 

Settlers in Canada. New 



Kdition. Ten fine Engravings by Gilbert 
and Dalziel. 

Llazwell's Victories of "Wellington 

u!id the British AiTuies. Illustrations on 
Ste^l. 

Michael Angelo and Haphael, their 

J^ives and Works. By Dcppa and Qtja- 
TKaiERE DE QuiKCT. Wttk 13 highly- 
finished Engravings on Stcd. 

Miller's History of tlie Anglo-Sax- 
ons. Written in a popular style, on the 
basis of Sharon Turner. j'o^-trait of 
Alfred, Map of Saxon Britain, and 12 
elaborate Engravings on Steel. 

Milton's Poetical "Works. Vv^ith a 
Memoir by Jajies iloxTGOiiEUT, Todd's 
N'erbal Index to all the Poems, and Ex- 
planatory Notes. With 120 Engravings 
by Thompson and others, from Drav.-ings 
by W. Harvey. 2 vols. 
Vol. 1. Paradise Lost, complete, with 

Memoir, Notes, and Index. 
Vol. 2. Paradise Kegained, and other 
Poems, with Verbal Index to all the 
Poems. 

liudie's British Birds. I^e^nsed by 
\V. C. L. Martin. Fifty-two Figures arid 
7 rUiles of Eggs. In 2 vols. 

; or, with the plates coloured. 

Is. 6d. per vol. 

Ifaval and Military Heroes of Great 

Britain ; or. Calendar of Victory. Being a 
J'.ecord of British Valour and Conquest 
by Sea and Land, on every day in the 
year, from the time of William the 
Conqueror to the Battle of Inkermann. 
By Major John's, R.M., and Lieutenant 
F. H. Nicolas, R.M. Twenty -forir Por- 
traits. 6s. 



Kicolini's History of the Jesuits : 

their Origin, Progress, Doctrines, and De- 
signs. Fine Portraits of Loyola, Laines, 
Javier, Borgia,' Acquaviva, Pere la. Chaise, 
and Pope Ganganelli. 

Norway and its Scenery, Compris- 
ing Price's Journal, with large Additions, 
and a Road-B^jok. Edited by T. Forester. 
Tt'.enty-two Illustrations. 

Paris and its Environs, including 

Versailles, St. Cloud, and Excursions into 
the Champagne Districts. An illustrated 
Handbook lor Travellers. Edited by T. 
Forester. Twenty-eight beautiful En- 
gravings. 

Petrarch's Sonnets, and other Poems. 

Translated into English Verse. By various 
hnnds. With a Life of the Poet, by 
Thomas Campbell. With 16 Engravings. 

Pickering's History of the Eaces of 

Man, with an Analytical SiTiopsis of the 
Natural Historj' of Man. By Dr. Hall. 
Illustrated by numerous Portraits. 

; or, Kith the plates coloured. 

7s. 6d. 
*:^* An excellent Edition of a work ori- 
ginally published at 3l. 3s. by the 
American Government. 

Pictorial Handbook of London. Com- 
prising its Antiquities, Architecture, Arts, 
I^Ianufactures, Trade, Institutions, Ex- 
hibitions, Suburbs, kc Two hundred 
and five Engravings, and a large Map, by 
Lov.ry. 
This volume contains above 900 pages, 
and is undoubtedly the cheapest five- 
shilling volume ever produced. 

Pictorial Handbook of Modem Geo- 
graphy, on a Popular Plan. 3s. ad. Illus- 
trated by 150 Engi-avings and 51 31aps. 6s. 

; or, with the maps coloured, 

75. 6d. 
Two large Editions of this volume have 
been sold. The present Nev.- Edition 
is corrected and improved ; and, besides 
introducing the recent Censuses of 
England and other cotm tries, records 
the changes which have taken place 
in Italy and America. 

Pope's Poetical "Works. Edited bv 

PvODERT Carruthers. Kumej'ous En- 
gravings. 2 vols. 
Homer's Iliad. With Intro- 
duction and Notes by J. S. Watsox, I\r.A. 
Illustrated by the entire Series of Flax- 
man's Designs, beautifully engraved by 
Moses (in tlie full 8fo. size). 

Homer's Odyssey, Hymns, 

&c., by other translators, including Chap- 
man, and Introduction and Notes by J. S. 
Watsox, M.A. Flaxman's Designs, beati'- 
tifully engraved by Moses. 

9 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Pope's Life. Including many of his 
Letters. By Robert Carrutheks. New 
Edition, revised aiid enlarged. Illustra- 
tions. 
The precedinfj 5 vols, malce a complete 
and elegant edition nf rape's I'oetical 
Works and Translations for 25s. 

Pottery and Porcelain, and other Ob- 
jects of Vertu (a Guide to the Knowledge 
of). To whicli is added au Engraved List 
of till the known Marks and Monogiams. 
By IIexky G. Bonx. A'u.nc7'ous Er.grav- 
ings. 

; or, coloured. 10s. M. 

Prout's (Father) Eeliques. New- 
Edition, revised and largely augmented. 
Twenty-one, spirited Etchings by llaclise. 
Two volumes in one. Is. &d. 

Recreations in Shooting. By 

" Craven." 62 Engravings on Wood, 
after Harvey, and 9 Engravings on Steel, 
chiefly after A. Cooper, R.A. 

Hedding's History and Descriptions 

of \Vines, Ancient and Modern. Twenty 
heauLifal Woodcuts. 

Robinson Crusoe. With Illustrations 
by Stothard and HAKVEr. Twelve beau- 
tiful Engravings mi Steel, and 74 on 
Wood. 

; or, without the Steel illustra- 
tions. 3s. 6d. 

The prettiest Edition extant. 

Rome in the Nineteenth Century. 

New Edition. Revised by the Author. 
Illustrated by 34. fuie Steel Engravings. 
2 vols. 

Soiithey's Life of ITelson. With 

Additional Notes. Illustrated v:iih 64 
Engravings. 

Starling's (Miss) IToble Deeds of 

AVomen ; or. Examples of Female Courage, 
Fortitude, andVii'tue. EourteenbeoMiful 
, Illustrations. 



Stuart and Revett's Antiquities of 

Athens, and other Monuments of Greece. 
Illustrated in 71 Steel Flates, and nu- 
merous Woodcuts. 

Tales of the Genii ; or, the Delightful 

Jvcssuns of Horam. Kximerous V.'oodcuts, 
and 8 Steel Engravings, after Stothard. 
Tasso's Jerusalem Delivered. Trans- 
lated into English Spenserian Verse, with 
a Life of the Author. By J. H. Wiffen. 
Eight Engravings on Steel, and 24 on 
Wood, by Thurston. 

Walker's Manly Exercises. Con- 
taining Skating, Riding, Driving, Hunting, 
Sliooting, Sailing, Rowing, Swimming, &c. 
New Edition, revised by " Craven." 
Forty-four Steel Plates, and numei'ous 
Woodcuts. 

Walton's Complete Angler. Edited 

by Edv>'ard Jksse, Esq. To which is 
added an Account of Fishing Stations, &c., 
by H. G. BoHN. Upwards of 203 En- 
gravings. 

; or, with 26 additional page 

Illustrations on Steel. Is. Qd. 

Wellington, Life of. By An Old 

Soldier, from the materials of Maxwell. 
Eighteen Engravings. 

"\Tnite's Fatural History of Sel- 

borne. With Notes by Sir William Jar- 
dine and Edward Jesse, Esq. Illustrated 
by 40 highly-finished Engravings. 

; or, with the plates coloured. 

Is. 6d. 

Young, The, Lady's Book. A IMn- 

nual of P^legant Recreations, Arts, Sciences, 
and Accomplishments ; including Geology, 
Mineralogy, Conchology, Botany, Ento- 
mology, Ornithologjs Costume, Embroi- 
dery, the Escritoire, Archery, Riding, 
Music (instrumental and vocal). Dancing, 
Exercises, Painting, Photography, kc. &c. 
Edited bj' distinguished Professors. Twelve 
Hundred Woodcut Illustrations, and seve- 
ral fine Engravings on Steel. Is. 6d. 
; or, cloth gilt, gilt edges, 9s. 



XI. 



Bohn's Classical Library. 



unifoem with the standard library, at 5s. per volume 
(excepting those marked otherwise). 



.Ssehylus. Literally Translated into 
English Prose by an Oxonian. 3s. 
6d. 

, Appendix to. Containing 

the New Readings given in Hermann's 
posthumous Edition of ^schylus. By 
Geokoe Bubges, M.A. 3«. 6d. 
10 



Ammianus Marceilinus. History of 
Rome from Constimtius to Valeus. Trans- 
lated by C. D. YoNGE, B.A. Double 
volume, 7s. 6d. 
*:^* This is a very drcwnistantial and 
amusing history. Gibb<.n expresses 
himself largely indebted io it. 



BOHN'S VARIOUS LIB RABIES. 



Apuleius, the Golden Ass ; Death of 

Socrates; Florida; and Discourse on Magic. 
To which is added a Metrical Version of 
Cupid and Psyche ; and Mrs. Tighe's 
Psyche. Froiitispiece. 

Aiistophanes' Comedies. Literally 

Translated, with Notes and Extracts from 
Frere's and other Metrical Versions, by 
W. J. HicKiE. 2 vols. 
Vol. 1. Achamians, Knights, Clouds, 

Wasps, Peace, and Birds. 
Vol. 2. Lysistrata, Thesmophoriazusffi, 
Frogs, Ecclesiazusffi, and Plutus. 

Aristotle's Ethics. Literally Trans- 
lated by Archdeacon Broavne, late Classical 
Professor of King's College. 

Politics and Economics. 

Translated by E. Walford, M.A. 

Metaphysics. Literally Trans- 
lated, with x>iutes. Analysis, Examination 
Questions, and Index, by the Eev. John 
H. M'Mahon, M A., and Gold Medallist in 
MeUiphysics, T.C.D. 

History of Animals. In Ten 

Books. Translated, with Motes and Index, 
by Richard Ceesswell, M.A. 

Organon ; or, Logical Treat- 



ises. With Notes, Ac. By 0. F. Owen, M.A. 
2 vols., 3s. 6d. each. 

Ehetoric and Poetics, lite- 



rally Translated, wi;h Examination Ques- 
tions and Notes, by an Oxonian. 

Athenseus. The Deipnosophists; or, 
the Banquet of the Learned. Translated 
by C. D. YoxGE, B,A, 3 vols. 

C88sar. Complete, with the Alexan- 
drian, African, and Spanish Wars. Lite- 
rally Translated, with Notes. 

Catullus, TibuUus, and the Vigil of 

Venus. A Literal Prose Translation. To 
which are added Metrical Versions by 
Lamb, Grainger, and others. Frontis- 
piece. 

Cicero's Orations. Literally Trans- 
lated by C. D. YoNGE, B.A. In 4 vols. 

Vol. 1. Contains the Orations against 
Verres, &c. Portrait. 

Vol. 2. Catiline, Archias, Agrarian 
Law, Eabirius, IMurena, Sylla, &c. 

Vol. 3. Orations for his House, Plancius, 
Sextius, Coelius, Milo, Ligarius, &c. 

Vol. 4. Miscellaneous Orations, and 
Khptorical Works ; with General In- 
dex to the four volumes. 

on Oratory and Orators. By 

J. S. Watson, M.A. 

on the Nature of the Gods, 



Divination, Fate, Laws, a Republic, &c. 
Translated by C. D. Yonge, B.A., and 
F. Baeham. 



Cicero's Academics, De Finibus, and 

'i'usculan Questions. By C. 1). Yonge, 
B.A. With Sketch of the Greek I'hilo- 
sophy. 
Oflices, Old Age, Friendship, 

Scipio's Dream, Paradoxes, &c. Litcraliy 
Translated, by R. Edmokds. 3s. &d. 

Demosthenes' Orations. Translated, 
with Notes, by C. Rakn Kennedy, In 5 
volumes. 
Vol. 1. The Olynthiac. Philippic, and 

other Public Orations. 3s. 6d. 
Vol. 2. On the Crown and on the Em.- 

bassy. 
Vol. 3. Against Leptines- Midias, An- 

drotrion, and Aristocrates. 
Vol. 4. Private and other Orations. 
Vol. 5. Miscellaneous Orations. 

Dictionary of Latin Quotations. In- 
cluding Proverbs, Maxims, Mottoes, Law 
Terms and Phrases; and a Collection of 
above 500 Greek Quotations. With all the 
quantities marked, & Englit-h Translations. 

, with Index Yerhorum. Gs. 

Index Verborum only. Is. 

Diogenes laertius. Lives and Opin- 
ions of the Ancient Philosophers. Trans- 
lated, with Notes, by G. D. Yonge. 

Euripides. Literally Translated. 2 vols. 
Vol. 1. Hecuba, Orestes, Medea, Hippo- 

lytus, Alcestis, Bacchse, Heraclidii', 

Iphigenia in Aulide, and Iphigenia in 

Tauris. 
Vol. 2. Hercules Furens, Troades, Ion, 

Andromache, Suppliants, Helen, 

Electra, Cyclops, Rhesus. 

Greek Anthology. Litei'aily Trans- 
lated. With Metrical Versions by various 
Authors. 

Greek Eomances of Heliodorus, 

Longus, and Achilles Tntius. 
Herodotus. A New and Literal 
Translation, by Hickiit Cart, M.A., of 
'\\'orcester College, Oxford. 

Hesiod, Callimachus, and Theognis. 

laterally Translated, with Notes, by J 
Banks, M.A. 
Komer's Iliad. Literally Translated, 
by an Oxonian. 

Odyssey, Hymns, &c. Lite- 
rally Translated, by an Oxonian. 

Horace. Literally Translated, by 
Smart. Carefully revised by an Oxonian. 
3s. 6d. 

Justin, Cornelius Nepos, and Eutro- 

pius. Literally Translated, with Notes 
and Index, by J. S. Watson, M.A. 

Juvenal, Persius, Sulpicia, and Lu- 

cilius. By L. Evans, M.A. With the 
Metrical Version by Gifford. Frontispiece. 
11 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Livy. A new and Literal Translation. 
By Dr. Spillan and others. In 4 vols. 
Vol. 1. Contains Books 1 — 8. 
Vol, 2. Books 9—26. 
Vol. 3. Books 27—36. 
Vol. 4. Book» 37 to ibe end ; and Index. 
Lucan's Pharsalia. Translated, with 

Xotes, by H, T. Rilkw 
Lucretius. Literally Translated, with 
Notes, by the Rev. J. S. Watsok. M..\.. 
And the Metrical Version by J. M. Good. 

Martial's Epigrams, complete. Lite- 
rally Translated. Each accompanied by 
cue or mure Verse Translations selected 
from the Works of English Poets, and 
other sources. With a copious Index. 
Double volume (G60 pages). Is. 6d. 
Ovid's Works, complete. Literally 
Translated. 3 vols. 
Vol. 1. Fasti, Tristia, Epistles, &c. 
Vol. 2. Metamorphoses. 
Vol. 3. Heroides, Art of Love, &c. 
Pindar. Literally Translated, by Daw- 
fco:> W. TuRXEK, and the Metrical Version 
by Abraham I^Ioobe. 
Plato's Works. Translated by the 
Kev. H. Caiiy and others. In 6 vols. 
Vol. 1. The Apology of Socrates, Crito, 
Phffido, Gorgias, Protagoras, Pheedrus, 
Theietetus, Euthyphron, Lysis. 
Vol. 2. The Republic, Timaeus, & Critias. 
Vol. 3. Meno, Euthydemus, The So- 
phist, Statesman, Cratylus, Parme- 
nides, and the Banquet. 
Vol. 4. Philebus, Charmides, Laches, 
The Two Alcibiades, and Ten other 
Dialogues. 
Vol. 5. The Laws. 

Vol. 6. The Doubtful Works. With 
General Index. 
Plautus's Comedies. Literally Trans- 
lated, with Notes, by H. T. Pjley, B.A 
In 2 vols. 
Pliny's Natural History. Translated, 
with Copious Notes, by the late John 
BosTOCK. M.D„ F.R.S., and H. T. E-ilet, 
U.A. In 6 vols. 

Propertius, Petronius, and Joiiannes 

Secundus, Literally Translated, and ac- 
companied by Poetical Versions, from 
\arious sources. 



Quintilian's Institutes of Oratory. 

Literally Translated, with Notes, kc, by 
J. S. Watso:;, M.A. In 2 vols. 

Sallust, Florus, and Velleius Pater- 

culus. With ('opious Notes, Biosraphical 
Notices, and Index, by J. S. Watson. 
Sophocles. The Oiford Translation 
revised. 

Standard Library Atlas of Classical 

(jeography. Tiuenty-tn.o large coloured 
Maps according to the latest authorities. 
With a complete Index (accentuated), 
giving the latitude and longitude of every 
place named in the Maps. Imp. 8vo. 7s. 6'J. 
Strabo's Geography. Translated, 
with Copious Notes, by AV. Falconer, 
M.A., and H. C. Hamilton, Esq. With 
Index, giving the Ancient and Modern 
Names. In 3 vols. 

Suetonius' Lives of the Twelve 

Ca-sars, and other Works, Thomson's 
Translation, revised, with Notes, by T, 

FORESTICB. 

Tacitus. Literally Translated, with 
Notes. In 2 vols. 
Vol. 1. The Annals. 

Vol. 2. The History, Germania, Agri- 
cola, &c. With Index. 

Terence and Phaedrus. By H. T. 

Riley, B.A. 

ThoQcritus, Bion, Moschus, and 

Tyrtajus. By -L Banks, M.A. With the 
Metrical Versions of Chapman. 
Thucydides. Literally Translated by 
Rev. H. Dale. In 2 vols. 3s. ed. each.' 
Virgil. Literally Translated by Da- 
vidson. New Edition, carefully revised. 
3s. 6tZ. 
Xenophon's Works. In 3 Vols. 

Vol. 1. The Anabasis and Memorabilia. 
Translated, with Notes, by J. S. Wat- 
son, M.A. And a Geographical Com- 
mentary, by W. F. AiNSWOKTH, F.S.A., 
F.R.G.S., &c. 
Vol. 2. Cj'ropffidia and Hellenics. By 
J. S. V/atson, M.A., and the Rev, H. 
Dale, 
Vol. 3. The Minor Works, By J. S, 
Watson. M.A. 



XII. 



Bohn's Scientific Library. 



uniform with the standard 

(excepting those M 

Agassiz and Gould's Comparative 

Physiology. Enlarged by Dr Wright. 
Upvurds 0/^400 Erifjrnmngs. 

Bacon's Novum Organum and Ad- 
vancement of Learning. Complete, with 
Notes, by J. Dfaev. MA. 

Blair's Chronological Tables, Revised 

and ICniarged. Comprehending the Chro- 
nology and History of the World, from 
12 



LIBRARY, AT OS. PER VOLUME 

ARKED otherwise). 

the earliest times. By J. Willoughbt 
RossE. Double Volume. 10s.; or, half- 
bound, 10s. 6i. 

Index of Dates. Comprehending the 
principal Facts in the Chronology and 
History of the World, from the earl'iest to 
the present time, alphabetically arranged. 
By J. V*''. RossE. Double volume, 10s. ; 
or, half-bound, 10s. Gd. 



BOHN'8 VABIOVS LIBRARIES. 



Bolley's Manual of Teclinical Analy- 
sis. A GiPde ibr the Testing of Natural 
and Artificial Substances. By B. H. Paul. 
100 Wood Engravings. 
BEIDGEY/ATEE TREATISES. — 

Bell on the Hand. Its iM echa- 

nism and Vital Endowments as evincing 
Design. Sevmth Kdifion Iicvis.''d. 

Eoget's Animal and Vege- 
table Pbysioloiry considered v.itb refer- 
ence to "Natural Theology. JJany En- 
ijravingx. \ln i)reiMyaticn. 

Buckland's Geology and 

^Mineralogy considered with reference to 
^Natural 1 heology. Xamcrous Illustra- 
tions. 1 vols. [In ther.ress. 

Kirby on the History, Habits, 

and Instincts of Animals. Edited, with 
Notes, by T. Etmee Jones. Numerous 
Engravings, many of ichich are additional. 
In 2 vols. 

■ Kidd on the Adaptation of 

External Nature to the Physical Condition 
of Man. 3s. Qd. 

Whewell's Astronomy and 

General Physics, considered with refer- 
ence to Natural Theology. 3s. CcZ. 

• Chalmers on the Adaptation 

of External Nature to the Moral and in- 
tellectual Constitution of Man. 5.s-. 

Front's Treatise on Chemis- 
try, Meteorology, and Digestion. Edited 
by Dr. J. W. GEiFi-iTH. 

Cacpsnter's (Er. W. B.'i Zoology. A 

Systematic View of the Structure, Habits, 
Instincts, and Uses, of the principal Fami- 
lies of the Animal Kingdom, and of the 
chief forms of Fossil Remains. New edition, 
revised to the present time, under arrange- 
ment with the Author, by W. S. Dallas, 
F.L.S. Illustrated v:ith mmnj hundred 
fine Wood Engravings. Jn 2 vols. Gx. each. 

Mechanical Philosophy, As- 
tronomy, and Horology. A Popular Ex- 
position. 183 lllu&traiions. 

Vegetable Physiology and 

Systematic Botany. A complete Intro- 
duction to the Knowledge of Plants. New 
Edition, revised, under arrangement with 
the Autlior, by E. Laxkestes, M.D., &c. 
Several hundred Illustrations on Wood. 6s. 
Animal Physiology. New 



Edition, thoroughly revised, and in part 
re-written by the Author. Upwards of 
300 capital rllustratioyis. 6s. 

Chess Congress of 1862. A Collec- 
tion of the Games played, and a Selection 
of the Problems sent in for the Competi- 
tion. Edited by J. Lowenthal, Manager. 
With an Account of the Proceedings, and 
a Memoir of the British Chess Association, 
by J. AV. ]\Iedley, Hon. Sec. 7s. 

Chevreul on Colour. Containing the 



Principles of Harmony and Coutriist of 
Colours, and their application to the Arts, 
Translated from the French by Chakles 
Maktel. Only complete Edition. Several 
Elates. 
: or, v>ith an additional series 



of 16 Plates in Colom-s. Is.M. 
Clark's (Kagh) Introduction to 

Heraldry, With nearlij ^ uoo Illustraticn.t. 
IStk Edition. Revised and enlarged by J. R. 
Plaxcu£, Esq., Rouge Croix. Or, with all 
the Illustrations coloured, 15s. 

[Just jmhlished. 

Comte's Philosophy of the Sciences. 

• Edited by G. H. Lewes. 

Ennemoser's History of Magic. 
Translated by Vv'illiam Hov.itt, AVitii 
an Appendix of the most remarkable and 
best authenticated Stories of Apparitions, 
Dreams, TableTurnuig, and Spirit-Rap- 
ping. &c. in 2 vols. 

Handbook of Domestic Medicine. Po- 
pularly arranged. By Dr. Hexky Davies. 
700 pages. AViih complete Index. 

Handbook of Games. By various 
Amateurs and Professors. Comprising 
treatises on all the principal Games of 
cliance, skill, and manual dexterity. In 
all, above 40 games (the V»'hist,Drauglits, 
and Billiards being e.specially comprehen- 
sive). Edited by H. G. Bohn. Illus- 
tra'ed by vumerous Diagrams. 

Hogg's (Jabezj Elements of Esperi- 

meutal and Natural Philosophy. Con- 
taining Mechanics, Pneumatics, Hydro- 
statics, Hydraulics, Acoustics, Optia^, 
Caloric, Electricity, Voltaism, and Mag- 
netism. New Editiou, enlarged. Up- 
I'sards of 400 Woodcuts. 

Hind's introduction to Astronomy. 

With a Vocabulary, containing an Exphs- 
iiation of all the Terms in present use. 
New Edition, enlarged. Numerous En- 
gravings. 3s. &d. 

Humboldt's Cosmos ; or Sketch of a 

Physical Description of the Universe. 
Translated by E. C. Oxrfi and \\\ S. 
Dallas, F.L.S. Eine Portrait. In five 
vols. 3s. 6d. each ; excepting Vol, V., 5f. 
*»* In this edition the notes are placed 
beneath the text, Humboldt's analytic;il 
Summaries and the passages hitherto sup- 
pressed are included, and new and com- 
prehensive Indices are added. 

Travels in America. In 3 vols. 

— Views of Nature ; or, Con- 
templations of the Sublime Phenomena of 
Creation. Translated by E. C. Ott£ and 
H. G. BoHN. A fac-simile letter from the 
Author to the Publisher ; translations of 
the quotations, and a complete Index. 

Humphrey's Coin Collector's Ma- 
nual. A popular Introduction to the 
Study of Coi ns. Highly fv iiU ed Engro-v- 
ings. In 2 \'u\s. 

13 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Hunt's (Eobert) Poetry of Science ; 

or, Studies of the Physical Phenomena of 
-Nature. By Professor Hunt. Xew Edi- 
tion, enlarged. 

Index of Dates. See Blair's Tables. 

Jojc^'" Rr^it^nfi^p. rUrCmmies. Con- 
pl 



Eichardson's Geology, mcluding- 

Mineralogy and i'ala;ontology. Revised 
and enlarged, by Dr. T. AVright. Upwords 
of AOQ Illustrations. 

Schouw's Earth, Plants, and Man ; nn»i 

Kobell's Sketches from the Mineral iving- 

lEY, F.R.S. 

f Plants. 

d Scrip- 

the Holy 




'4ilMLiailll 



F 
n- 
P 

A 
h- 
Mc 
t- 

t 

; t 

r- 



Ee 
^ 



Bo 



J L. B. Cat. No. 1137 

Copyright Edition, re-arranged and re- 
T^S ^^^''''^''^^ to the suggestions of 
WniGHT, Esq.. with further additions by 



indbook. 

_pplement 
ok. Con- 
It modern 

—illustrated 
3e of Chess 
Morphv's 

- 6s. 

npanion. 

_ Odds, Col- 
i Selection 

-of 1851. 



__ Chemis- 

mple expe- 
stratioiis. 

-stry; or, 
(dressed to 

_ Notes, by 
o which is 
[anure, by 

lufacture 

_lly investi- 

view of Its 

Countries. 

_mpleted t; 
OM)S. rjne 
r. In 2 vols. 

-tfactures ; 

ory System 
inued to the 
~DS. 7s. 6d 



-0 fne En- 
8. cloth, 4 s. 

""I6S. what 
Id at 21. 

Collection 
id Sayings 
i-Jered "from 
nearly a hundred publications. A Sequel 
to the preceding, 0/ which it forms vol 5 
or parts 9 and 10. Engravings on Steel 
In 1 %-ol. cloth, 4s., or in 2 parts, 2s. each ' 



Cape and tlie Kaffirs. A Diary of 
Five Years' Residence. With a Oh"'^*'— 
of Advice to Euiic""""'" '^ 

Carpenter'' 

of Temp 
the Effe 
on fine p 

Cinq-Mai 



riA^i^^ 




ffec^s:^^:::^r'""" 



Irvinff's AW-^'-^-fordandNewstead. Is. 
undi. Is. 6d. 
idgeHall. Is. 6c?. 

2s. 
's Roost, and other 

paper, Is. Qd. 
/asMngton, Autho- 
^„wiiorm with the Works). 
t?;e Fortrait, <tc. 5 parts, with General 
Index. 2s. 6cZ. each. 



BR 252 . 07 1353 4 



Louis XI 1 
Count All 
W. Hazlitt. ^ - 

Dibdin's Sea Soiigs 
tiou). rilustratiom 
2s. 6cL 

Emerson's Orations s 

Representat Order Icus 

plete. Is. 
Franklin's (Benjam 1143? 

tobiography. From 
script. By Jaked Sp. 

Gervinus's Introduc The- e-ccle-slas-tical 



Vitalis, 1075- 



tory of the 19 th C( 
German. Is. 

Guizot's Life of M02 

Honk's Contemporaries. Stu- 
dies on the English Revolution of 1688. 
Portrait of Clartndon. Is. 6d. 

Hawthorne's (Nathaniel; T\sdce Told 

Tales. Is. 

the Same. Second Series. Is. 

■ Snow Image & other Tales. Is. 

• Scarlet Letter. Is. 

• House with the Seven Gahles. 

A Romance. Is. 

Ir^ing's (Washington) Life of Mo- 
hammed. Portrait. Is. Gd. 
■ Successors of Mohammed. 

is. 6cZ. 

Life of Goldsmith. Is. 6 J. 

Sketch Book. Is. Qd. 

Tales of a Traveller. Is, M. 

Tour on the Prairies- Is. 

Conquests of Granada and 

Spain. 2 vols. Is. 6cZ. each, 
Life of Columbus. 2 vols. 



of Enqland and 



h±st.ory 
Normandv 



is. 6d each. 

Companions 



of Columbus. 



is. 6tZ. 

Adventures of Captain Bon- 
neville, is. 0(i. 
Knickerbocker's New York. 



is. 6d. 



Tales of the Alhambra. Is. 6a'. 
Conquest of Elorida. Is. 6'i. 



London • and its Environs. ±5y 
Cykus Redding. Numerous Illustrations. 
2s. 

Mayhew's Image of his Father. 

Twelve jjage Illustrations on iiteel hy 
" Phiz." ys. 

Modern Hovelists of France. Con- 
taining Paul Huet, the Young Midship- 
man, and Kernock the Corsair, by Eugene 
Sue ; Physiology of the General Lover, 
by Suulie ; the Poacher, by Jules Janin ; 
Jenny, and Husbands, by Paul de Kock. 
2s. 

Muachausen's (Baron) Life and Ad- 
ventures. Is. 

Preachers and Preaching. Includ- 
ing sketches of Robert Hull, Newman, 
Chalmers, Irving, Melvill, Spurgeon, Bel- 
iew, Dale, Gumming, &c. Is. 6ii. 

Sandford and Merton. By Thomas 
Day. Eightjlne Engravings hyAnelay. 2s. 

Taylor's El Borado ; or, Pictiires of 

the Gold Region. 2 vols. Is. each. 

Willis's (N. Parker) People I have 

IVIet ; or, Pictures of Society, and People 
of Mark. Is. 6(2. 
Convalescent ; or, Rambles 

and Adventures. Is. Gd. 

Life Here and There ; or, 

Sketches of Society and Adventure. Is. Qd. 

Hurry-graphs ; or, Sketches 

of Scenery, Celebniius, and Society. Is. 6d. 

Pencillings by the Way. 

Four fme plates. 2s. 6d. 

15 



x^ 






d 




