LIBRARY OF 

WELLES LEY COLLEGE 




FROM THE FUND OF 
EBEN NORTON HORSFORD 



d 



THE 



ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY 



OF 



ENGLAND AND NORMANDY 



BY 



EDERICUS VITALIS. 



TRANSLATED, WITH NOTES, 
AND THE INTRODUCTION OF GUIZOT, 

By THOMAS FORESTER, M.A. 



VOL. I. 



LONDON: 

HENRY G. BOHN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN. 



MDCCCLIII. 



J. HADDO^' ASD SON, PRINTERS, CASTLE STREET, TINSBUKT. 



EDITOR'S PREFACE. 



ORDEKicrs ViTALis, in his personal and literary history, as 
well as in the annals which compose the most valuable part 
of his voluminous work, forms a connecting link between 
the English and JSTorman writers of the eleventh and twelfth 
centuries. Eorn in England, and having received the 
first rudiments of learning at Shrewsbury, he was removed 
at an early age to a monastery in Normandy, in which he 
completed his education, and passed the rest of his life 
in the duties of his monastic profession and in literary 
labours. These, as M. Guizot has remarked were " espe- 
cially devoted to the glory of Normandy ;"* and, doubtless, 
that was the field on which all his immediate associations 
led him to dwell with the greatest freedom, and to cultivate 
in its minutest details. 

But Ordericus did not forget his native country ; he so 
gloried in the name of "Englishman" that it is added to 
his Norman designation of "monk of St. Evroult" in his 
autograph manuscript ; and the accounts he gives of English 
afiairs generally, during the reigns of the three first Norman 
kings, interspersed with local and personal matters of con- 
siderable interest, exhibit the same careful research, if they 
are not so difiuse, as the portion of his work devoted to 

* Notice sur Orderic Vital, prefixed to the French translation of our 
author's History, 



IV EDITOk d PEE FACE. 

Normandj. He undertook a journey to England for the 
express purpose of collecting materials, and his connection 
with the family of the great Earl of Shrewsbury, who had 
possessions in both countries, would give him access to 
precise information on English affairs. In point of fact, he 
alternately transports his readers from Normandy to 
England, and from England to ]N"ormandy, two states which 
may be considered to have formed in his time almost an 
united kingdom, and he treats the affairs of both with nearly 
equal precision. 

There is a peculiar advantage in studying English history 
from such a point of view, during a period when many of its 
most eminent characters were playing a distinguished part 
in both countries. England was surrendering to the inva- 
ders her broad acres and free institutions, and the churches 
and monasteries were being filled and remodelled by Norman 
ecclesiastics, while she was adopting the feudal tenures, the 
rules of chivalry, and the habits and manners of the con- 
querors, and their magnificent architecture was employed in 
raising stately cathedrals, abbeys, and castles in all quarters. 
On these subjects, and others connected with the changes 
then taking place in the social and dynastic system of Eng- 
land, Ordericus was better qualified to throw strong light 
than any English historian of the time. The advanced 
stages of his education, and almost all the associations of 
his maturer life were foreign. His family ties had been 
somewhat rudely severed, and he was torn from his native 
country at an age when it would hardly fail to leave 
some impression on so intelligent a mind ; and it appears 
from several passages in his work that he fondly cherished 
recollections of it in the land of the stranger. What thus 
remained of English feeling probably contributed, in com- 
bination with his natural honesty and simplicity of cha- 
racter, to the general impartiality of his narrative of English 



editor's PTIEFACE, 



affairs, and the sympathy he betrays for the sufferings of 
his countrymen and their patriotic struggles against Nor- 
man usurpation. 

While such are our author's claims to the consideration 
of the students of history his works have hitherto received in 
England a share of attention very disproportionate to that 
which tliey have obtained in France. The History of 
Ordericus Vitalis has never yet been published in England, 
and private enterprise is now employed in carrying into 
effect, in a popular shape, what both a royal commission 
and a literary association have alike failed in accomplishing. 
In Erance, the original text of Ordericus was printed, as 
early as the year 1619, in Duchesne's Collection of the 
Norman Historians, published at Paris, but it was never re- 
printed in this country ; and besides its being suited only 
to readers of erudition, the work has now become some- 
what scarce. AV^ithin the last thirty years, however, no 
less than two distinct editions of Ordericus have been 
published at Paris under the auspices of the Historical 
Society of Erance. The first, which commenced in 1826, is 
a Erench version, accompanied by a few notes explain- 
ing localities, by M. Louis du Bois. It is prefixed by a 
Notice from the pen of M. Gruizot, who was then Pro- 
fessor of Modern History in the Academy of Paris, giving 
particulars of the several manuscripts of Ordericus now 
extant, a short account of the author's life, and an estimate 
of his character, which it has been thought desirable to 
translate and print as an introduction to the present work. 

In 1838, the Erench Historical Societv undertook an 
edition of the original text of Ordericus, which was confided 
to the editorial care of M. Auguste Le Prevost. Eour 
volumes octavo have been already published at Paris, con- 
taining twelve books of the History, and the thirteenth is 
announced to be in the press. This work does great credit 



vi editor's PRErACE. 

to all concerned in it, being edited and printed with extreme 
accuracy, after a laborious collation of the best manuscripts 
and illustrated by a vast number of valuable notes. The 
translation now presented to the English reader is based 
upon this edition of the author's text, compared, from time 
to time, with that of Duchesne, in which, as elsewhere ob- 
served, there are numerous errors. Eree use has been made 
of the notes appended to the last Paris edition, and some 
are added, having in general more especial reference to 
English affairs. 

August 20, 1853. T. E. 



M. GUIZOT'S 

INTRODUCTION TO THE FRENCH TRANSLATION OP 

ORDERICUS VITALIS. 



Of all the works published in our collection/ that of Ordericus 
Vitalis is the most extensive, a sure proof of the claims it pos- 
sesses to more than ordinary attention. The annals of that ao-e 
are generally characterised by the brevity of their details, and the 
dryness of their style. It would seem that the genius of the 
author was so dull and barren that it satisfied itself with simply 
accepting the facts presented to his notice, without being alive to 
any necessity of accounting for them, of connecting them with 
other circumstances, or of adding the reflections required to give 
them further consistency than the mere order of dates. In those 
times of darkness and isolation, the life of man was so confined 
and his views so circumscribed, that even curiosity seemed 
to have lost its influence, and an elevated position, or a stirring 
career, supplied the only situations in which the intellectual 
horizon was extended, and an earnest desire for information 
excited ; but those who found themselves by birth or accident in 
such unusual circumstances devoted all their time and efforts to 
action, and were too much occupied in playing their part in the 
history of the times to give themselves any trouble about writing 
it. Among the men of rank who flourished in the age of which 
we are collecting memorials, two bishops, Gregory of Tours, and 
Wilham of Tyre, are the only persons who found leisure to bequeath 
to posterity any lengthened account of events, the character of 
which their situation led them to penetrate ; their histories there- 
fore, the most extensive we have yet published, are also, regard 
being had to the difference of the times, the most interesting, the 
most useful, and the most rich in valuable details. Ordericus Vitalis 

^ Collection des Mtmoires rclatifs d VHistoire de France^ published by 
the Historical Society of France, from 1831 to J 852. 



VUl OEDERICUS TITALIS. 

exhibits, if not in the same degree, at least the same kind of 
superiority over the writers of his own age ; which is the more 
remarkable in his case, because no external circumstances, no 
advantages of position, contributed to rouse or sustain the activity 
of his mind. A simple monk, buried in the depths of the most 
secluded forests of Normandy, his own genius, his instinctive 
ardour for acquiring information, the patience with which he 
pursued his researches, supplied the incentives and the opportu- 
nities for collecting materials for his vast undertaking. 

Ordericus was born in England on the fifteenth of February, 
1075, at Attingham,* on the banks of the Severn, the residence of 
his father Odelirius, a native of Orleans, who, at the time of the 
Norman conquest, was a follower of Roger de Montgomery, after- 
wards created Earl of Shrewsbury, to whose household he 
continued to be attached in the character of one of his council. 
Ordericus received the name of his godfather, a Saxon priest and 
curate of the parish, who both baptized him and undertook the 
office of sponsor. At the age of five years, Ordericus was sent to 
school at Shrewsbury, where he learnt reading, grammar, and the 
chants used in the church, under a master whose name was 
Siegward.^ It would appear that his own father was a man of 
some learning, a clerk, and a priest, for at that time, particularly 
in England, priests were not absolutely forbidden to marry. But 
a more perfect state of life was known, and Odelirius, who was 
now become a widower, thought it his duty not only to renounce 
himself all worldly. attachments, but to withdraw from them his 
eldest son Ordericus, then ten years old. He therefore devoted 
him as well as himself to the religious life, and retired to a 
monastery in Great Britain,^ Shortly afterwards, however, his 
mind became disturbed by the obstacles which family ties were 

1 Atcham, a village near Shrewsbury, where the Terne falls into the 
Severn. Our author tells us, book v. c. 1, that he was born on the 14th of 
the calends of March, which answers to the sixteenth of February. He 
was baptized on the Saturday of Easter, the 4th of April following. 

2 Sivvard, " a noble priest/' as our author calls him. He was of Anglo- 
Danish extraction, connected with the blood-royal of the Saxon kings, and 
also, it would appear, in some way with the Earl of Shrewsbury, the patron 
of Odelirius. Sivvard had built a small wooden church in the suburbs of 
that town, which becoming the property of Odelirius, was given by him for 
the site of the stately Benedictine abbey founded there by the earl. 

2 Odelirius assumed the monastic habit, after the death of his patron, in 
the abbey he had lately assisted in founding at Shrewsbury, where he also 
entered his yougest son, Benedict, to be brought up as a monk. He 
further endowed the abbey with one half of all the esto-tes which the earl 
had conferred upon him, reserving the other moiety to his remaining son 
Everard, our author's second brother, to be held as a fief under the abbey. 



M. GUIZOt's INTllODUCTION. ix 



calculated to offer to his salvation, and he thought that neither 
his own nor his son's would be secure if they remained in the 
same monastery. In order, therefore, to render their separation 
more entire and more irrevocable,^ he made him cross the sea^ 
sending him to Normandy under the care of a monk named 
Ragnold, where Ordericus, making an endowment of thirty silver 
marks, entered the abbey of Ouche, belonging to the rule of St. 
Benedict, and founded by St. Evroult, an Orleanais saint, for whom 
Odelirius, as his countryman, felt especial veneration. This 
abbey, which at a later period took its founder's name, stood in 
that part of the diocese of Lisieux which is now included in the 
department of the Orne. Buried in the bosom of forests, enriched 
since the eleventh century with a considerable library, and in- 
habited by monks who were the friends of learning, the abbey of 
Ouche was a retreat well calculated to foster the studious turn of 
mind which, it is said, was already remarked in the young novice. 
John, the sub-prior of the abbey, had the charge of his education, 
and formed a strong attachment for him ; he also gained the good- 
will of the rest of the monks, and among others that of Mainier, 
then abbot of St. Evroult. Ordericus entered the monastery in the 
year 1085. The year following, on the 22nd of September, the 
feast of St. Maurice, he received the tonsure, changing at the 
same time his English name of Ordericus for that of Vitalis,^ one 
of the companions of the saint whose memory was that day 
observed. On the 15th of March, 1091, Gilbert Maminot, bishop 
of Lisieux, admitted him to the order of sub-deacon at the request 
of Serlo d'Orgeres, the then abbot of St. Evroult ; and two years 
afterwards, on the 26tli of March, 1098, Serlo himself, having 
then become bishop of Lisieux, ordained him deacon. Ordericus 
was then eighteen years of age. All the records of those ancient 
times concur in informing us with what holy fear truly pious men 
then regarded the duties of the priesthood, how they shrunk 
from undertaking them, and often only consented to accept the 
office upon the express command of their superiors. It was not 
till fifteen years afterwards, the 21st of December, 1107, that 

' Our author pays an affectionate tribute to his father's memory in book 
V. c. 14 of the following History, where he says that he never saw him 
again after this early separation. See also book v. c. 1. 

- The name Ordericus, is also variously written Odericus, Udalricus, 
&c. The last seems to point to the priest from whom our author derived 
his name of baptism, being, as well as his schoolmaster, of Scandinavian 
extraction. He tells us that it was changed to Vitalis, because his former 
name appeared barbarous to the Normans. There seems an impropriety 
in the common practice of combining his name of baptism with that of his 
profession, as the latter superseded the former. He always calls himself 
simply Vitalis, but there is authority for using both names in the oldest 
MSS. of his works. 



X OEBERICUS TITALIS. 

William Bonne- Am e, archbishop of Rouen laid on Ordericus, as 
he tells us himself, "the burden of the priesthood."^ 

Such are the simple facts which the writings of this excellent 
monk supply concerning his own life. Taking no part in worldly 
affairs, and equally a stranger to the high places of his own pro- 
fession, we find him never quitting his retirement but, on one 
occasion, to attend a general chapter of the order of St. Benedict 
convoked by the abbot of Cluni, and for two journeys, one to 
Worcester,^ the other to Cambray, both, as it would appear, under- 
taken for the purpose of procuring information necessary in the 
prosecution of his literary works. These formed the sole employ- 
ment of his life, and he does not appear to have pushed his labours 
to extreme old age, for he tells us, at the close of his history, that 
he had reached his sixty-seventh year, and the thirty-fourth of 
his ministry in the priesthood, when he felt himself compelled by 
age and infirmities to bring his work to a close ; and it is scarcely 
probable that, after a career so occupied, release from labour very 
long preceded that from life. We ought then, if I am not mis- 
taken, to place the death of Ordericus Vitalis in the year 1141, or 
at the latest in 1142. The authors of the Histoire Litteraire de la 
France have fixed the year 1143 as the period at which his work 
concluded ; but they are evidently under a mistake, for at the 
end of his last book Ordericus speaks of Stephen king of England 
as being at that time in confinement, but that prince, who was 
made prisoner at the battle of Lincoln on the 20th of February, 
1141 , was exchanged in the month of November of the same year. 
Again, he mentions the death of John, bishop of Lisieux, as having 
occurred so recently that his successor was not yet appointed ; 
and the bishop died on the 21st of May, 1141. Besides Avhich, he 
reckons eleven years from the election of Pope Innocent II., which 
took place in the month of February, 1 1 80. Everything therefore 
concurs in pointing out the year 1141 as the period at which 
Ordericus found himself under the necessity of terminating the 
labours to which his life was consecrated. 

His work, devoted in an especial manner to the glory of Nor- 
mandy, comprised originally but the seven last books, in which 
Norman history, in point of fact, holds the first place. At a later 
period he added four books, the present third, fourth, fifth, and 
sixth, to enable himself to give fuller particulars of some events, 

^ He was ordained priest on the feast of St. Thomas, 1107, in company 
with one hundred and twenty others, being then, as he tells us, thirty-three 
years of age. Book xi. c. 30, and book xiii. at the end. 

^ During this joiu-ney to England our author also spent some weeks at 
Croyland Abbey, where, as he tells us, he collected the materials for several 
chapters of his fourth book, and, at the request of the monks, composed 
the epitaph on Earl Waltheof. See book iv. c. 15 — 17. 



, M. gttizot's ixteodfctiott. xi 

as well as to connect tlie glory of Normandy with that of the 
abbey of Ouche,on the foundation and progress of which the new 
])ooks enter into minute details. Furthermore, having a due 
regard to his own character, and ambitious of the honour of 
bequeathing to posterity a complete universal history, from the 
birth of Jesus Christ to his own day, he composed the first and 
second books, containing long extracts from the Gospels and the 
Acts of the Apostles, and legends which give an account of the 
establishment of Christianity in Asia and Africa, as well as in 
Europe, concluding the whole with short chronicles, or rather 
tables of the emperors and popes. Then, at last, Ordericus con- 
sidered his work complete, and gave it the title of an Ecclesiastical 
History, a title which singularly exhibits, as we have elsewhere 
observed, how far the church had then become the centre of 
society. 

It is plain enough that the way in which his work was put 
together has contributed in no small degree to the confusion which 
reigns throughout the writings of the monk of St. Evroult : his 
whole object having been to make collections from all quarters of 
facts, traditions, adventures, acts, and letters, his work repeatedly 
changed its form and its object while under his hands, and he 
gave himself but little trouble, except to find a place in it, no 
matter in what order, for all the stores of information he had 
gathered. Accordingly, on more than one occasion his materials 
seem thrown together pell-mell, as chance or opportunity brought 
them into the author's power ; sometimes he interrupts the course 
of his narrative by dividing the account of a particular event into 
distinct portions, separated by long intervals ; and, at others, he 
repeats the same story in different parts of his work ; so that the 
reader is continually surprised by the strange manner in which 
times, and places, and subjects, the most distant and the most 
incongruous, are brought together. No sort of art or method 
appears to have been used in combining this prodigious mass of 
facts, and when the work is considered as a whole, from a single 
point of view, one cannot fail, on a first impression, of being most 
sensible of this striking confusion. But this irregular surface covers 
a mine of real wealth. No book contains so much and such valu- 
able information on the history of the eleventh and twelfth 
centuries, on the pohtical state, both civil and religious, of society 
in the west of Europe, and on the manners of the times, whether 
feudal, monastic, or popular. In his genuine honesty and native 
frankness, Ordericus makes no attempt to argue anything, to 
conceal anything: he tells his story, and gives his opinion; he 
blames or approves, without any other idea but that of publishing 
what he knows and what he thinks. Simple, credulous, and 
having no pretensions to be considered a sagacious observer, or a 



XU OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. 

critic, still he was independent and sincere — rare merits among 
the monkish chroniclers of his own a.i';e, who, besides, are quite as 
deficient as himself in those qualities wherein he failed. 

The History of Ordericus has not hitherto been translated ; the 
version which we now present to the public is the work of M. 
Louis du Bois, of Lisieux, a man of letters, whose modesty is 
equal to his diligence, and who, having devoted himself to all 
that is interesting in connection with Normandy, his native 
country, is already well known by some useful works on the 
antiquities and statistics of that fine province. The principal 
difficulties which lie in the way of the readers of Ordericus 
Vitalis arise from the vast variety of minute circumstances, of 
distant allusions, and of geographical references, connected with 
Normandy. It was, therefore, of importance that the translation 
should be made on the very spot, among the recollections to 
which it would give rise, and by a person capable of explaining 
the local obscurities, so to speak, of the text, in short but 
frequent notes. M. Du Bois, having kindly undertaken this 
minute task, will best be able to give an account of his pro- 
ceedings, and we therefore propose to close this notice by sub- 
joining an exact copy of the report with which he has favoured 
us, respecting the manuscripts of the historians of St. Evroult, 
the labours of which they were the object, and the researches to 
which he has devoted himself.' 

" In the earliest manuscripts of Ordericus Vitalis, his work 
takes the title of Orderici Vitalis Angli Monachi Uticensis Historia 
Ecdesiastica. It is thus entitled in a manuscript which came 
from the abbey of St. Evroult itself, and, as we are inclined to 
believe, in the author's own hand-writing, of which we shall pre- 
sently speak more in detail. Duchesne was unaware of the exis- 
ence of this autograph, and printed his edition from more recent 
manuscripts, under the title of Orderici Vitalis Angligence Cosnobii 
Uticensis Monachi, libri xiii. 

"The autograph manuscript of the abbey of St. Evroult served 
in former times for the original of the different copies which 
were dispersed of this important history. 

"In the beginning of the sixteenth centuary, a monk of St. 

^ M. Du Bois was the author of an able article on the life of Ordericus 
Vitalis, published in 1822 in the B'Miograpkie Universelle, which has 
supplied the materials for the present notice. It would appear from 
some expiessions at the close of the article, that he then contemplated 
using the result of his researches in publishing a corrected edition of the 
text of Ordericus, lamenting, however, that, at that time, the publication 
of Avorks of erudition, particularly in Latin, was a difficult enterprise for an 
individual. He seems to have changed his intention, and four years after- 
wards began to publish his translation. 



M. guizot's inteoduction". xiii 

EvrouU (probably Yallin), made a copy of this manuscript, which 
was then composed of four volumes, and in a perfect state. The 
copy formed also four volumes, in a handwriting which, though 
not very close, was almost illegible. According to Charles du 
Jardin, prior of the abbey of St. Evroult in 1717, the two first 
volumes of this copy were then at the abbey of St. Ouen, at 
Rouen, and the two others at that of Glanfeuil-sur-Loire. I have 
reason to think that the prior Du Jardin was mistaken ; the two 
volumes now in the library at Rouen, which were brought from 
St. Ouen, are the two last of the work, containing the seven 
last books. 

" The royal library possesses the following MSS. of Ordericus : 
No. 5122, MS. de Bigot; the one which Duchesne used. No. 
5123, MS. de Colbert, two volumes. No. 5124, MS. de Baluz, two 
volumes, containing only the five first books. 

[These MSS. are in folio, written on paper, and all of the six- 
teenth century.] 

No. 5506, MS. de Colbert, as No. 5123. 2 volumes on vellum, 
containing only the six first books. 

" There is also in the same library, No. 4861, a MS. on vellum 
in folio, mixed with others which came from Bigot, and containing 
a fragment entitled : Fragmentum ex Orderici Vitalis historilihro 
tertio de novis monachoriim Cistercentium, et aliormn illius scecvli 
ivstitutis. This copy is the more curious because it is of the 
thirteenth century. 

" Independently of these dilFerent copies, which are more or 
less faulty, and even incomplete, there is in the library of St. 
Germain-des-Pres, a copy of the three first books, bequeathed to 
it by CoasHn de Cambout, and made in the sixteenth century, at 
the time when the autograph was still perfect, by Vallin, a 
monk of St Evroult, who dedicated it to his abbot Felix de Brie. 

The most valuable manuscript of Ordericus Vitalis was pre- 
served in the abbey in which he wrote his history. We have now 
indeed only the fragments of this autograph, but even the frag- 
ments are precious. I had the pleasure of saving them from 
imminent danger of destruction at L'Aigle in 1799. just after I was 
nominated by the assembly librarian of the central school of the 
Orme, and I hastened to deposit them in the establishment com- 
mitted to my care. The manuscript forms a quarto volume, written 
on parchment, which the monks of St. Evroult, in their negligence, 
during the seventeenth century, took no care to have fresh bound 
until they had suffered great part to decay and be lost. We know 
that it was perfect at the commencement of the preceding century, 
because a copy of it was then made, which, though unfortunately 
marked by blanks and omissions, is still of great value. What 
remains of this autograph is as follows : book vii., four leaves ; 



XIV OEDEEICUS TITALIS. 

books ix., X., xi., xii., and xiii., are complete, except the four or five 
last leaves. 

"I feel certain that this valuable manuscript is really an 
autogragh, as the monks of St. Evoult believed it to be from the cir- 
cumstance of its having been inserted in a catalogue taken shortly 
after the death of Ordericus Vitalis. Among many reasons that 
might be offered in justification of this opinion, I shall confine 
myself to these : the manuscript is not illustrated ; it is written 
on common parchment, in small sheets ; it is in general very clear, 
but there are places in which it has been corrected ; and since 
the twelfth century, that is a few years only after the death of 
the author, it passed for having been written with his own hand 
a short time before. I insist the more on these points, because at 
the period when this manuscript saw the light the abbey possessed 
very skilful copyists who have left magnificent copies of some 
of the Fathers of the church, and several other works, all tran- 
scribed with great beauty on the finest vellum, and in a folio 
shape. Assuredly therefore, if they had made a transcript of 
Ordericus, it would have had all the embellishments which the 
historian of their own community of St. Evroult, and the 
achievements of the Normans, so justly merited. 

" M. La Croix du Maine is the first of our bibliographers who 
called attention to Ordericus Vitalis. He remarks, with justice, 
that good manuscripts of this historian have been always scarce ; 
that even John Bale does not mention him in his list of English 
authors, nor do other compilers of biography and literary history. 
It appears from what La Croix du Maine says further, that he had 
in his possession a fine manuscript of Ordericus, which he intended 
to publish ; but this intention was never carried into effect. 

"It was not till the year 1619 that the learned Andrew Du- 
chesne published his Ordericus Vitalis in the collection to which 
he gave the title of, Historioe Normannorum scriptores antiqui. The 
thirteen books of the Ecclesiastical History are the most impor- 
tant work contained in this valuable collection, now become scarce 
and dear : they fill 606 pages of the volume. Duchesne printed 
his edition from the manuscript of J. Bigot : unfortunately he 
omitted to collate it with the other manuscripts to which he 
might have had access, and more especially with the autograph 
in the library of St. Evroult. He even increased the confusion 
by taking no pains with the marginal dates he affixed, so that 
events quite different in point of time and character are often 
marked with the same date. 

" These deficiencies, which were generally acknowledged, in- 
duced Bessin, the Benedictine, to whom we are indebted for the 
Concilia Rotomagensis Provincice, fol. 1717, to undertake a new 
and better edition of Duchesne's Ordericus. With this view, he 



M. GUIZOT'S introduction. XV 



had made a great number of corrections on a copy of the edition 
of 1619 by collating it with a manuscript then the property of M. 
Mareste, advocate-general to the chamber of accounts of Nor- 
mandy. He had besides, in 1 722, the valuable assistance of Charles 
du Jardin, prior of the abbey of St. Evroult, who had made great 
proficiency in calligraphical studies. All was ready for the press, 
and the bookseller, Behourt, was on the point of undertaking the 
work, when the death of Bessin, which happened in 1720, put an 
end to this useful publication, and the project was no further 
thought of. I have had the advantage of the labours of Bessin 
and Du Jardin, and the volume they prepared for publication has 
been of essential service ; but still I found that even after the care 
it had received from these learned and indefatigable Benedictins, 
there was much to reap, and I trust I have been able to do so 
with some profit. 

*' The learned and judicious authors of that great work, the Col- 
lection of the Historians of France, did not omit including in it so 
important a writer as Ordericus ; they have accomplished this 
successfully by dividing their extracts in the following manner : — 

Extracts from books i., iii., v., vi., and vii., in tome ix., pp. 10 to 
18 ; from books i., iii. vii., in toine x., in pp. 234 to 236 ; from 
books i., iii., iv., v., vi., and vii., in tome xi., pp. 221 to 248 ; and 
from books i. and iv. to xiii., in tome xii, pp. 285 to 770. 

•'Dom Bouquet made the first of these extracts; those contained 
in tome xii., which are the longest and the most interesting, are 
the work of M. Briae, who has not incurred the censures justly 
applied to his predecessor. 

" After these learned labours, there still remained some useful 
objects to be obtained. 

" As I have before remarked, I did not fail to take advantage of 
what had been accomplished by Bessin and Du Jardin ; but 
besides this, I have made use of some new observations procured 
from St. Evroult, have made a collation of the different manu- 
scripts with extreme care, which I have since repeated at Rouen, 
with the assistance of two accomplished Normans, whose learning 
is only equalled by their obliging disposition, M. Auguste Le 
Prevostjwho is in possession of very valuable collections, relating 
to the history of Normandy, and M. Theodore Liquet, who has 
been kind enough to communicate to me the manuscript of the 
library at Rouen, of which he is the keeper. 

" Some important corrections and numerous additions have 
been the fruits of these labours. Besides, a long study of the 
antiquities, the history, and the geography of Normandy has 
placed at my disposal a vast mass of information, which I trust 
will throw some light on our author's statements. The number 
of explanatory notes appended at the bottom of the pages form 



XVI ORDEEICIJS VITALIS. 

the best proof of the pains I have for twenty years bestowed on 
this undertaking. Still, however, I dare not flatter myself that I 
have cleared up all the obscurities, filled up all the gaps, and 
ascertained exactly all the names of places and proper names. 
The difliculties have been enormous ; but I have used all the 
means in my power to overcome them. 

" However this may be, it may be asserted with truth that, of 
all our ancient provinces, there is none in comparison with Nor- 
mandy, which has been the scene of such celebrated events, and 
given birth to such distinguished men, none which can boast so 
many and such excellent historians ; and that of all these his- 
torians, Ordericus Vitalis is the most important, while, though 
continually quoted, his work has never been translated, nor even 
correctly published." 

F. G. 



THE PREFACE 



OF 



ORDERICTJS VITALIS. 



Former writers, from early times, carefully remarking the 
occurrences of the passing age, have noted the good or 
evil which befell mankind for a warning to others ; and 
while thus continually aiming to benefit posterity, they 
heaped volume upon volume. We see, for instance, that 
this was done by Moses, Daniel, and the other sacred 
writers ; and we discover the same object in the works of 
Dares of Phrygia,^ Pompeius Trogus,^ and other gentile 
historians ; of Eusebius,^ Orosius, who wrote the History 

' Considering the age in which Ordericus Vitalis lived, we need not be 
surprised at finding him place Dares of Phrygia at the head of the writers 
of profane history. A Trojan priest of that name is said to have composed 
an account of the Trojan War ; the history, however, attributed to him 
is a spurious composition, and its origin may be placed somewhere between 
the fifth and eighth centuries ; but it was so much in vogue in the middle 
ages, that a translation in French verse was current in the eleventh 
century. 

2 Pompeius Trogus, a Roman historian, flourished in the time of Au- 
gustus. He wrote a history of the Macedonian empire, of which we have 
only an Epitome by Justin. 

* Eusebius (Pamphilus) became bishop of Caesarea, a.d. 313, and died 

B 



2 PREFACE OP 

of the World ;^ of Eede the Englishman, Paul of Monte 
Cassino,^ and the rest of the ecclesiastical writers. I 
peruse their accounts with delight, I praise and admire the 
elegance and usefulness of their works, and recommend the 
learned of our age to imitate their invaluable remains. 
But, without presuming to dictate to others, at least I 
contend against self-indulgence in enervating sloth, and, 
rousing myself to exertion, desire to undertake some work 
which may be acceptable to my immediate superiors.^ In my 
account of the restoration of the monastery of St. Evroult,* 
written by the command of Abbot E-oger, I adhered faith- 
fully to the simple truth, choosing to speak frankly of the 
great men of this perverse age, whether good or bad, and 
relying solely on my honesty of purpose, without making 
any pretensions to a polished style or the gifts of eloquence. 
My present object is to treat of what passes under our 

about 338. He has left a number of works, displaying great learning and 
ability, the best known being his "Ecclesiastical History," which has met 
with three Latin translators, and an English translation from the original 
Greek is published in the "Ecclesiastical Library," uniformly with the 
present series. 

^ Orosius (Paul), a Spanish ecclesiastic, born at Tarragona, who 
flourished in the fifth century. By the advice of St. Augustine, he 
f.ndertook his " History of the World," here called the " Ormesta ;" an 
unintelligible word, unless, as some commentators have conjectured, it is a 
corruption of Hormisdas, an additional name of Orosius. 

2 Better known as Paul the Deacon; he died in the monastery of Monte 
Cassino, about a.d. 799. 

' Simplicibus summitatis. — Duchesne. The former word is omitted in 
the Latin text of the French edition, though the sense of it is expressed in 
M. Du Bois' translation. Ordericus means his monastic superiors. 

* The popular name of this abbey, derived from its founder St. Evroult, 
is adopted in the present translation. Ordericus Vitalis calls it *' Uticense 
ccenobium," or " Uticum," that is, the Abbey of the Ouche. It was in the 
diocese of Lisieux in Normandy, near the limits of the present departments 
of the Eure and the Orne. 



ORDERICTJS VITALIS. 3 

own observation, or we are called upon to endure. For it 
is fitting that as new events continually occur they should 
be carefully committed to writing, to the praise of God ; 
and thus, as the history of the past has been handed down 
to us by preceding writers, so also a relation of what is 
going on around us should be transmitted to future gene- 
rations by the pen of contemporaries. I propose to treat 
of ecclesiastical affairs with the modesty becoming a 
humble son of the church ; and to the best of my ability, 
diligently treading in the steps of the ancient fathers, I 
shall search out and give to the world the modern history 
of Christendom, venturing to call my unpretending work 
"An Ecclesiastical History." 

Confined to my cloister by the vows which have volun- 
tarily bound me to the strict observance of the monastic 
rule, I am unable to make researches into the affairs of 
Alexandria, Greece, or Eome, and others worthy to be 
related ; but I labour, by God's help, to unfold with truth 
contemporary events for the instruction of posterity, — both 
such as have passed under my own observation, and those 
which, occurring in neighbouring countries, have come to 
my knowledge. I firmly believe, however, from observation 
of the past, that some one will arise with far more penetra- 
tion than myself, and more capable of examining the course 
of worldly affairs, who will perhaps extract from my pages, 
and from those of others of the same class, what he thinks 
worthy of being inserted in his chronicle or history for the 
information of posterity. 

I derive confidence from having begun my work by the 
express command of the venerable Abbot Eoger,^ when he 
was advanced in years, and from now submitting it to you, 

^ Roger du Sap, elected abbot of Saint Evroult in 1091 ; was conse- 
crated Aug. 23, 1098 ; reiigned in 1123; died Jan. 13, 1126. 

B 2 



4 PEEFACE OP ORDEEICirS VITALTS. 

father Gruerin/ his lawful successor according to the order 
of the church, that its redundancies may be expunged, and 
its errors rectified, and, being thus corrected, it may be 
stamped with your judicious authority. I shall treat first 
of the Source of all things, itself having no beginning, by 
whose aid I trust to persevere to the end, which, in truth, is 
endless, and to sing for ever, with the blessed above, devout 
praises to Him who is the Alpha and Omega. 

^ Gu^rin des Essart3, or the Little, who probably derived his surname 
from the commune des Essarts, near St. Evroult, succeeded Roger du Sap 
in 1123; died June 20, 1137. 



THE 

ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY 



OF 



ORDERICUS VI TALIS. 



BOOK L^ 

CHAPTEE I. 

Birth of Christ — Chronology of the event. 

The Almighty Word, by whom God the Eather created 
all thiugs, is the true vine : and the Lord of the household 
who planted this vine cultivates the vineyard — that is, holy 
church — by means of the labourers sent into it, from dawn 
of day to the eleventh hour, that he may gather from it 
abundant fruit. He never ceases tending this vine, and 
propagating its magnificent branches, throughout every 
region of the world. He, indeed, the true King of ages, 
the true High Priest of good things to come, the true 
Prophet, and the Lord of men and angels, ineffably 
"anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows," 
the Angel of the covenant of the Father's unfathomable 
counsels, — He (according to the oracles of the prophets, 
who, taught by the Holy Spirit, shone as stars in the 

^ Duchesne, in his edition, divided the history into three parts, one of 
which included the two first books, with the following title here prefixed : 
" The first part, containing short annals of affairs, from the incarnation of 
Christ to the year of our Lord, 1149, with the succession of emperors, 
kings, and Koman pontiffs." As however, this title is not found in the 
MS. of St. Evroult, and is omitted in the recent French edition, it is not 
inserted in the present text. 



6 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [bOOK I. 

darkness of this world, and, like the cock which by his 
crowing awakes slumbering man before day-break, foretold 
the mysteries of the Lord's advent) chose for his mother, 
among many thousand women, Mary, the royal virgin, 
descended from the house of king David, and wonderfully 
endowed with the fulness of grace. This blessed Virgin, 
thus adorned with distinguished virtues, having been 
miraculously espoused to that just man, Joseph, saluted by 
the archangel Grabriel, and overshadowed by the Holy 
Grhost, conceived without sin, and brought forth without 
pain, on the eighth of the calends of January (25th of 
December), the Saviour, who was the desire of all nations. 
Thus our Lord Jesus Christ was born in Bethlehem, a city 
of Juda, at the time of the first census, when Cii'inus^ was 
governor of Syria, according to the order of all the pro- 
phecies which had announced his coming. Glorious signs, 
as the sacred oracles relate, appeared in heaven at the 
birth of Christ, and the angels with pious thanksgivings 
for the salvation of man, sang : " Glory to God in the 
highest, and on earth peace, good wdll toward men!"^ 
Thus, in the forty-second year of the reign of Csesar 
Augustus, twenty-eight years after the deaths of Cleo- 
patra and Anthony, when Egypt became a Roman pro- 
vince, in the third year of the 193rd olympiad, and 752 
years after the foundation of Eome, that is to say, at the 
time when Octavianus Caesar, ha\ing restored order among 
all the nations of the earth, and, by God's providence, 
established a most firm and secure peace, Jesus Christ, 
the Son of God, consecrated by his advent the sixth age 
of the world. Prom the creation to the birth of Christ, 
we reckon 3952 years, according to the correct Hebrew 
chronology; after the computation of Isidore, bishop of 
Seville, and some other doctors, there are 5154 years ; again, 
according to the calculation of Eusebius of Csesarea and 
Saint Jerome, we find 5231 years between the birth of 
Adam and the eighteenth year of Tiberius Caesar, when 
Christ sufiered on the cross. 

Let the whole multitude of believers rejoice in the Holy 
Spirit, unceasingly adoring the eternal Creator, and offering 

^ P. Sulpicius Quirinus. ^ Luke ii. 1 — 14. 



CHAP. II.] CIECUMCISIOK OE CHEIST. 7 

with their whole hearts a sacrifice of praise to Him, who 
appointed his only Son, co-eternal and consubstantial with 
himself and the Holy Spirit, to take upon him our flesh and 
redeem the servant of sin from a well-merited death by 
the mideserved death of his own Son ! Eor our merciful 
Maker, who had fashioned man after his own image and 
similitude, was grieved at his fall, and decreed, in his secret 
and unfathomable counsels, that his Son, co-equal with 
himself, should visit the condemned servant in prison, and 
lovingly bring back man on his own shoulders from capti- 
vity to the flock, and heartily rejoice the nine orders of 
angels by the re-establishment of their number. 



CHAPTEE II. 

Circumcision of Christ — Offering of the wise men. 

Thus, the Son of Grod, made man, remained what he 
was, and took upon him what he was not, without confusion 
or division of substance ; but ruling all things, with the 
Eather and the Holy Grhost, by his divinity, and enduring 
all the infirmities of our flesh by the assumption of huma- 
nity. The law which he had given by Moses, he kept 
inviolate; and, himself a lawgiver, fulfilled all righteousness. 
Thus, on the eighth day, he was circumcised, and on the 
tbrtieth, was presented to his Eather in the temple, with the 
legal oftering.^ 

Although the Virgin Mother WTapped her divine Son 
in swaddling clothes, although tight bandages swathed his 
feet and hands, although the tender infant, concealed within 
a narrow manger, uttered the cries of that human misery 
which it was the will of the Eather that he should take 
upon himself; yet the High God was manifested by a new 
star appearing in the heavens, and the eastern Magi, thus 
guided, sought for him at Bethlehem, found him cradled in 
a manger, and worshipped him as Grod. The wdse men then 
opened their treasures, and presented to Christ three costly 
presents, gold, frankincense, and myrrh, thus proclaiming 

^ Luke ii. 21, 24. 



8 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [bOOK I. 

him King of kings, true God, and mortal man. The first 
fruits of the election of the Gentiles were consecrated in 
those who hastened to Christ in Bethlehem from Saba, and 
from other nations scattered through the world. Being 
warned by an angel in a dream that they should not return 
to Herod, they departed, rejoicing, into their own country 
another way.^ 

"When the days of her purification were accomplished, the 
holy Virgin Mother presented herself in the temple, and? 
oftering the child to God his Father, Simeon, that just and 
devout man, took him up in his arms. Although bowed 
with age, he re'joiced in God, because he had now before 
his eyes the long-expected Saviour of the nations, revealed 
to him by the Holy Ghost; he took him in his hands, 
announced to the people that he was the Master of life and 
death, and blessed him before the admiring multitude who 
leaped for joy. 

Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, came into 
the temple at that moment rejoicing ; this widow, endowed 
with every virtue, knew that Christ was there, and an- 
nounced to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusa- 
lem, that the Saviour was come. His parents oftered for 
him the sacrifice of a pair of turtle-doves or two young 
pigeons, — a figure of the spotless purity and the gentle 
aimplicity of the church.'* 

Behold, then, how not only the angels in heaven, but also 
mortals of every age and of both sexes, gave their testimony 
to the Lord born in the flesh. The Virgin Mary, conceived 
by the co-operation of the Holy Ghost, brought forth her 
child, suckled him, and, by his aid, efiectually ministered to 
all his wants. John, leaping for joy in his mother's womb, 
saluted the Lord, and Elizabeth, filled with the Holy Ghost, 
spoke three times in prophetic language of the Messiah 
and his mother. The angels glorified God who had become 
incai'nate for the redemption of man, rejoicing to see us 
redeemed and added to their number. The shepherds, 
instructed by the angelic visitation, hasten to Bethlehem 
and search in a stable for the living bread which comes 
down from heaven ; they find Him who rules the heavens, 

1 Matt, il 1—12. , 3 Luke ii. 22—38. 



CHAP. III.] BAPTISM OF CHEIST. 9 

an infant wrapped in swaddling clothes. The hearts of 
the shepherds, when they heard from the heralds the tidings 
of Christ, were filled with joy and wonder. Zacharias and 
Simeon, both righteous men, at the end of their earthly 
career, confess their belief in Christ, and predict his future 
history; and the blessed Anna, bending with years, partakes 
of their love of Christ.^ 

But, while the righteous were rejoicing with exceeding 
great joy, the impious Herod, hearing strange rumours, was 
troubled, and commanded that all the children that were in 
Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years 
old and under, should be slain. When, therefore, Joseph 
had taken Jesus and his immaculate mother into Egypt, 
the fury of Herod vented itself in the massacre of the 
infants, and the fields of Bethlehem were watered with the 
blood of the innocents.^ But Christ received into his own 
mansions those who were slain in his stead, where they 
enjoy everlasting felicity. 



CHAPTEE III. 

Chrisfs laptism. 

OuE Saviour dwelt on the earth thirty- two years and 
three months, but he was without sin, and spake no 
guile ; and he alone among the dead was found free from 
guilt. At the beginning of his thirtieth year, he went 
down to the river Jordan, received the sacrament of baptism 
at the hands of John, and by so doing, sanctified the waters, 
and set his disciples an example of the most perfect 
humility. While Jesus was praying after his baptism., the 
heavens were opened unto him, and the Holy Ghost was 
seen to descend upon him in a bodily shape like a dove, 
and the voice of his Eather was heard from heaven : " This 
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."^ John 
indeed deserves the first place among them that are born of 
women, for Christ placed himself in his hands to be bap- 

1 Luke i. 41—80; ii. 25—40. 2 ^att. ii. 3—18. 

* Matt. iii. 13, 16, I7j Mark i. 9— 11; Luke iii. 21, 22; John i. 29—33. 



10 OEDEEICrS VITALIS. [bOOK I. 

tized, the invisible Spirit showed itself to him in a visible 
sliape, and Grod the Tather proclaimed from heaven his Son 
to him. Thus the mystery of the Trinity was manifested 
to the blessed forerunner in our Saviour's baptism. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ, in the twelfth year of his age, was 
found in the temple sitting in the midst of the doctors, not 
teaching them, but asking them questions. He was baptized 
at the age of thirty, and thenceforth proved his divine mission 
by miracles. During the space of three years He performed 
miracles and taught his disciples.^ This triennial period 
shadows forth the sacrament of our baptism, by means of 
faith in the Holy Trinity, and the operation of the legal 
decalogue. Our divine Lawgiver also teaches men, by his 
example, that they should not venture to speak in public or 
preach at too early an age, or eagerly covet preferment ; 
but be content to wait humbly for the proper and ap- 
pointed time for their admission to the priesthood, or the 
oifice of teaching. 



CHAPTEE lY. 

Chronology of Ckrisfs ministry/. 

It ia now my purpose to examine the series of our 
Lord's miracles recorded in the four gospels, giving a faith- 
ful compendium M^hich may serve easily to recall them to 
the mind. I shall trace the succession of events as the four 
evangelists have related them, and, by His help who makes 
eloquent the tongues of infants, I hope to sum them up in 
a short account. As I have determined to give a correct 
chronography, it is right that I should begin with endeavour- 
ing diligently to fix exact dates, as the holy evangelists, 
and other historians, long ago supplied them in their 
writings. 

Octavianus Caesar Augustus, nephew of Cains Julius 
Caesar by his sister Octavia, succeeded his uncle as the 
second emperor of Kome, and reigned fifty-six years and six 

1 Luke ii. 42, 46 ; iii. 23. 



CHAP. IT.] SUCCESSION OF HIGH PKIESTS. 11 

months ;^ in the forty-second year of whose reign Christ was 
born. Tiberius Caesar, the step-son of Augustus, being the 
son of his wife Livia by a former husband, reigned twenty- 
three years ; in his eighteenth year Christ redeemed the 
world by suffering on the cross. ^ After the death of Herod, 
the son of Antipater of Ascalon, who for twenty-four years 
usurped the throne of Judea, his son Archelaus exercised his 
tyrannical authority over the Jews for the space of ten 
years ; St. Matthew tells us that Joseph, after his return 
from Egypt in obedience to the commands of the angel, 
being afraid of Archelaus, turned aside into Galilee with 
the child and his mother, and dwelt at !Nazareth.^ But Ar- 
chelaus, on account of his intolerable cruelty, being accused 
by the Jcavs before Augustus, was deprived of power and 
banished for life to Yienne, a town of Gaul, where he died.'' 
In order to weaken the kingdom of Judea, Augustus 
divided it into tetrarchates for the brothers of Archelaus. 
Moreover, Pilate, in the twelfth year of the reign of Tibe- 
rius, was sent into Judea, to undertake the government of 
that country ; he remained there for ten consecutive years 
until about the time of the death of the emperor. Herod, 
Philip, and Lysanias, as St. Luke relates, shared the govern- 
ment of Judea with Pilate; they were the sons of the 
elder Herod, during whose reign the Lord came into the 
world.^ 

The whole period of our Lord's teaching on earth was 
confined within the space of four years. During that time, 
as Josephus tells us, after Annas was deposed, the following 
Jewish high priests succeeded each other: Ismael, son of 
Baffus ; Eleazar, son of the high priest Ananias ; Simon, son 

^ Augustus only reigned in reality from the time of the battle of Actium 
(Sept. 2, A.u.c. 7'23) until his death (Aug. 19, 767). The general opinion 
is, that we ought to place the birth of Jesus Christ in 749, and conse- 
quently in the 27th year of this reign. 

^ Tiberius reigned twenty -two years and about seven months (17 Au^. 
14 — 16 March, 37). The death of Jesus Christ happened in the sprint of 
A.D. 33, and consequently in the nineteenth year of this reign. 

3 Matt. ii. 22, 23. 

* Herod the Great was born at Ascalon in Judea, in the year 71, b.c. • 
he reigned thirty-seven years after he was raised to the throne by the 
Senate, and died at the age of sixty-eight. Archelaus reigned from a.u c 
750 until 759. 

^ Luke iii. 1. 



12 • OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [bOOK I. 

of Canufus; and Joseph Caiaplias, who propliesied that 
Jesus "should die for the people."^ Eusebius of Csesarea, 
reckoning from the sixth year of the reign of Darius, who 
succeeded Cyrus and Cambyses, when the works of the 
temple w^ere finished, until the period of Herod and Au- 
gustus, finds in Daniel seven and forty-two weeks, which 
make 483 years to the time when Christus, that is to 
say, Hircanus, the last high priest of the family of the 
Maccabees, was killed by Herod, and the succession of the 
high priests, according to the law, ceased. But St. Hippo- 
lytus reckons 230 years as the time that the kingdom of 
the Persians lasted, and 300 years as the duration of that 
of the Macedonians, and then thirty years until Christ ; that 
is to say, he computes 500 years from the commencement 
of the reign of Cyrus, king of the Persians, until the 
advent of our Lord. Enlightened by these researches on 
the succession of ages, the studious reader will understand 
that the Sun of Eighteousness rose in the sixth age, at the 
first hour of the century. I shall, therefore, begin my in- 
tended work ^\ith the history of our Lord, in whose almighty 
goodness I put my whole confidence, invoking his assistance 
in faith, that what I have begun I may finish worthily to 
his praise. 



CHAPTEE y. 

Chrisfs temptation. 

Jesus, being full of the Holy Ghost, returned from Jor- 
dan into Galilee, and there, on the third day, he and 
his disciples were called to the marriage in Cana. When 
they wanted wine, at the request of his mother, he 
ordered six water-pots to be filled with water, and when 
he had turned this water into wine, he commanded the 

^ John xviii. 14. *' Neither the names nor dates are given correctly. 
Ismael, son of Fabi, not of Baifus; Eleazar, son of Annas or Ananus; and 
Simon, son of Camith, not Canufe, were high priests in the years 23, 24, 
and 25 of Jesus Christ. Joseph Caiphas succeeded them in the 25th 
year ; consequently it was during his pontificate only that the gospel was 
preached." — Le Prevost. 



CHAP. T.] TEMPTATIOIS" OF CHRIST. 13 

servants to bear it to the governor of the feast. By this 
beginning of miracles Jesus manifested forth his glory to 
his disciples, and pointed out the alteration in the carnal 
meaning of the old law, which by the grace of the Holy 
Spirit he transformed into newness of life.^ 

Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted 
of the devil, who was astonished at seeing in him the man 
of incomparable righteousness. He fasted forty days and 
forty nights, and thus taught us by his example how the 
just may overcome the whole race of demons by fasting and 
prayer. The old serpent had overcome the first Adam by 
his appetite, vain glory, and unlawful desires ; he made use of 
other stratagems to tempt the second Adam, by whom he 
was repulsed three times ; he fled, and, behold, angels came 
and ministered to the Son of Grod, who will reward in 
paradise with eternal felicity the conquerors of Satan. ^ 

Our Lord, with his mother and his brethren, went down 
to Capernaum, and continued there not many days. From 
thence, when the time of the Jews' passover was at hand, 
he went up to Jerusalem, and entered into the temple, 
where he found those that sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, 
and the money-changers sitting; all these he drove out, 
in a wonderful manner.^ 

At the passover, on the feast-day, many believed in his 
name, when they saw the miracles which he did. Then a 
man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the 
Jews, came to Jesus by night, desiring to confer with 
him secretly. He was therefore worthy of being instructed 
in the efficacy of baptism, regeneration by water and the 
Spirit, how Christ was to descend into hell and ascend 
into heaven, the typical lifting up of the brazen serpent in 
the wilderness, and the unmerited passion of the Son of 
man.* 

After these things, the Lord came into Judea, and there 
tarried with his disciples, and performed many wonderful 
miracles of healing. But John was baptizing in Enon, 
near to Salim, because there was much water there; and 

^ Luke iv. 1; John ii. \ — 11. 

2 Matt. iv. 1—11 ; Mark i. 12, 13 ; Luke iv. 1—13. 

^ Matt. xxi. 12; Mark xi. 15; Luke xix. 45,- John ii. 12 — 17. 

* John ii. 23; iii. 1—3, 5, 13, U, 16. 



14 OEDEEICUS VITALTS. [bOOK I. 

gave a true testimony in answer to the inquiries of his dis- 
ciples and the Jews concerning Christ. Then Jesus left 
Judea, and departed again into Gralilee, passing through 
Samaria.^ In a city of Samaria, which is called Sichar, 
near to the parcel of ground which Jacob gave to his son 
Joseph, there was a well called Jacob's well. Jesus, there- 
fore, being wearied with his journey, sat on the well, about 
the sixth hour, and held a mystical conversation with a 
Samaritan woman. The Samaritans receiving the Saviour 
with joy, besought him that he would tarry with them, and 
he abode there two days; and many devout persons believed 
on him.^ From thence Jesus returned in the power of the 
Spirit into Galilee ; and there went out a lame of him 
through all the region round about. He taught in their 
synagogues, being glorified of all.^ 

At Nazareth he went into the synagogue on the sabbath- 
day, to read ; and, standing up, he um'oUed the book of the 
prophet Isaiah,* and found the place where this prophecy 
is written : " The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because 
he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor." 
When he had closed the book, he gave it again to the 
minister, and sat down, saying : " This day is this scripture 
fulfilled in your ears ;" and all wondered at the gracious 
words which proceeded out of his mouth. Jesus himself 
testified that a prophet hath no honour in his own country. 
That this assertion was true he proved by many examples, 
drawn from the Old Testament, saying : " Many widows were 
in Israel, when great famine was throughout all the land ; 
but unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto a woman 
of Sarepta; many lepers were left in want and affliction, 
and none of them was cleansed in Jordan by Eliseus the 
prophet, saving Naaman the Syrian." All they in the 
synagogue, when they heard the words of the Lord, were 
filled with wrath. Confirming the truth he had spoken by 
a sacrilegious act, they rose up against him, and in their 
fury thrust out of the city the chief Physician of souls, 
and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city 

1 Johniii. 22— 36; iv. 3,4. 

^ John iv. 5 — 42. 

^ Matt. iv. 12; Mark i. 14, 28; Luke iv. 14, 15; John iv. 3, 43—45. 

* Lukeiv. 17. 



CHAP. YI.] CHKIST PHEACHING AT GALILEE. 15 

was built, that they might cast him down headlong. But 
he, passing through the midst of them, went his way, and 
came down to Capernaum.^ 

Jesus returned to Cana of G-alilee, and a ruler, whose son 
was sick at Capernaum, besought him as he was coming out 
of Juda3a into Gralilee, that he would come down and heal 
his son. Then said Jesus unto him: "Go thy way; thy son 
liveth." The sick man immediately recovered ; the father 
believed the word that Jesus had spoken, returned to his 
home the next day, and there found his son in perfect 
health, to the great joy of his family ; and learning what 
had happened, himself believed and his whole house. This, 
as St. John says, is "the second miracle that Jesus did, when 
he was come out of Judea into Gralilee." "^ 

Ch. YI. Ufir is f s preaching in Galilee. 

Wheis" Jesus had heard that John was cast into pri- 
son, he left Nazareth, which signifies a flower, and dwelt 
in Capernaum, a name that means a heautiful city, and 
signifies the Church. Now Nazareth, which gave the 
surname of Nazarene to Christ, is a small town in Galilee, 
near Mount Thabor. But Capernaum is a strong city in 
" Galilee of the Gentiles," situate near the lake Gennesa- 
reth, "in the borders of Zabulonand Nephthali," where the 
Hebrews were first made captives by the Assyrians.^ 

From that time, that is to say, after that John was 
put in prison, Jesus began to preach, because the voice 
being uttered, the word follows, and the law ceasing the 
gospel follows, as the sun succeeds the dawn of day. 
" E-epent," said he, " for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." 

Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw Simon Peter, 
and Andrew his brother, and the sons of Zebedee, James 
and John, and calling them, they straightway left their nets 
and followed him. Simon means obedient — Peter, grateful 
— Andrew, strong or manly — James, swpplanter — John, grace 
of God. These interpretations are very well suited to the 
characters of these holy preachers. For without obedience 
no one comes to God ; without fortitude no one can perse- 

^ Matt. iv. 12—16; Mark i. 21, 22; Luke iv. 16—31; John iv. 44; 
Isaiah Ixi. 1. 
* John iv. 46—54. " Matt. iv. 12—16; Mark i. 21. 



16 OEDERICXJS YITALIS. [bOOK I. 

vere ; and lie who supplants vices ascribes all the good he 
possesses to the grace of God.^ 

Jesus went about all G-alilee, teaching in their syna- 
gogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and 
healing all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease, 
among the people. And his fame went throughout all 
Syria, a country extending from the Euphrates to the great 
sea, from Cappadocia to Egypt. They brought unto him 
all sick people that were taken with divers diseases, both 
of the mind and body, and torments, that is to say, acute 
sufferings, and those which were possessed with devils, and 
those which were lunatic, and those that had the palsy ; and 
he healed them." 

GTreat multitudes therefore followed him from G-alilee, 
and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, 
and from beyond Jordan. In doing this they were actuated 
by different motives; some went to Jesus as disciples, on 
account of his heavenly mission ; others, to be cured of 
their infirmities ; others, hearing the favourable reports 
that were spread abroad, and which excited their curiosity, 
wished to know by experience if all that was said of him 
were true ; some followed him from envy, wishing " to catch 
him in his words," and accuse him ; others, again, for the 
sake of obtaining food for the body.^ 

Jesus, seeing the multitudes, went up into a mountain ; 
and when he was set, his disciples came unto him. He, 
who in ancient times had given utterance to the prophets, 
now opened his own lips to preach to them a long discourse, 
full of all perfection, in which he beautifully and profitably 
instructed and enlightened the apostles. Thus he who had 
given the law to Moses on Mount Sinai, now taught his 
disciples in G-alilee, on Mount Thabor, and implanted in 
their hearts the principles of perfect righteousness. He 
discoursed fully on the eight beatitudes, and the other com- 
mandments of the law, which he came not to " destroy, 
but to fulfil ;" telling them that the precepts of the new 
law were more strict than those of the Old Testament, as 
they required men to love even their enemies ; that alms 

1 Matt. iv. 17—22; Mark i. 14-20; Luke v. 1—11. 

* Matt. iv. 23, 24; Luke iv. 40—44. 

^ Matt. iv. 25; Mark iii. 7, 8; Luke vi. 17—19. 



CHAP. YI.] SEKMON ON THE MOUNT. 17 

were to be given in secret ; and he laid down many other 
rules of a perfect life. This true Teacher of teachers con- 
cluded his incomparable discourse, by remarking on the 
treasure to be laid up in heaven ; that no man can serve 
two masters ; on the fowls of the air, and the lilies of the 
field ; the mote and the beam in the eye ; on casting your 
pearls before swine ; on our entry into life through the strait 
gate ; that we must beware of false prophets ; and that we 
must build our house upon a rock.^ 

When Jesus had ended these words of perfection, the 
multitudes were astonished at his doctrine ; for he taught 
them like God, who has authority over all things, and not 
as the Scribes and Pharisees, who were the blind slaves of 
the law of Moses, and could only teach the little they were 
capable of understanding.'^ 

When he was come down from the mountain, great 
multitudes followed him. And a leper worshipping him, 
and beseeching him to cure him of his leprosy, the Saviour 
touched him with his hand, and immediately made him 
clean, commanding him to go and shew himself to the 
priests, and to " offer the gifts required by the law." In 
which command the necessity of confession and penance for 
sin is implied.^ 

At Capernaum he approved the faith of the centurion 
and, at his entreaty, healed, by a word only, his servant 
who lay at home sick of the palsy, grievously tormented. 
On a sabbath day, while he was teaching in the synagogue, 
a man possessed with a devil cried out : " What have we to 
do with thee, Jesus of Nazareth ? Art thou come to 
destroy us ? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of 
Grod." And Jesus rebuked him, saying: " Hold thy peace, 
and come out of him. And when the unclean spirit had 
torn him, he came out of him ; " and the man was healed, to 
the great amazement of all those who were present.* 

Ajid forthwith, when he was come out of the synagogue, 
he entered into the house of Simon, where he saw Simon's 

1 Matt. V. 1—48 ; vi. 1—34 ; vii. 3, 6, 13—15, 24 ; Luke vi. 20—49. 

2 Matt. vii. 28, 29; Mark i. 22; Luke iv. 32. 

' Matt. viii. 1—4; Mark i. 40—44; Luke v. 12 — 14. 
* Matt. viii. 5—13; Luke vii. 1—10. 
^ Mark i. 23—28; Luke iv. 33—36. 

C 



18 OEDERICTJS VITALIS. [bOOK I. 

wife's mother lying sick of a fever. At the request of her 
friends, he " took her by the hand, and immediately the 
fever left her ; " and she arose in perfect health, and thank- 
fully ministered to her divine Physician.^ 

At even, when the sun was setting, they brought unto 
him many that were possessed with devUs, and sick of 
divers diseases, and the true Physician " laid his hands on 
every one of them, cast out the spirits with his word, and 
healed all that were sick." By the setting of the sun the 
death of our Lord was foreshadowed ; which happened 
when the Grentiles were delivered from the power of Satan, 
through faith, and when those who were sick with the dis- 
ease of sin were healed by the remedy of a reformed 
Hfe.2 

Ch. YII. Christ at the sea of Galilee. 

When" Jesus saw great multitudes about him, late 
in the evening, he commanded his disciples to go over 
unto the other side of the lake ; and when he was 
entered into a ship, his disciples followed him. It was but 
right that, as he had performed miracles upon the land, he 
should exhibit the same power upon the water, in order 
to prove himself master both of the earth and the sea. 
As soon, therefore, as he had got on board, he caused the 
sea to be greatly agitated, the winds to blow, and the waves 
to rise. His body was indeed asleep, but his mind remained 
awake ; and when this tempest arose, his disciples awoke him, 
saying: " Lord, save us ; we perish." Then he arose, com- 
manded the winds and the sea to be still, and there was a 
great calm.^ 

Thus does the same Emmanuel exert his power every day 
on the troubled sea of the world, while the vessel of his church 
is tossed about by the storms of so many different tribulations, 
and its safety is almost endangered by the extremity of the 
peril to which it is exposed. But when he is invoked with 
faith and tears bv his true followers, he soon listens to their 
prayers for succour, and helps them in a marvellous manner, 
by virtue of his divine nature, presently removing the 

1 Matt. viii. 14, 15; Mark i. 29—31; Luke iv. 38, 39. 

2 Matt. viii. 16, 17; Mark i. 32—34; Luke iv. 40, 41. 

3 Matt. viii. 18, 23—27; Mark iv. 35—39; Luke viii. 22—24. 



CHAP. VII.] THE HEED OF SWINE. 19 

trials which beset them, and strengthening them with his 
arm. 

When he had crossed the lake to come into the country 
of the Grergesenes, two men possessed with devils, exceed- 
ingly fierce, came out of the tombs, and running up to him, 
cried out : " What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou 
Son of Grod ? art thou come hither to torment us before the 
time ? If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the 
herd of swine." And he said unto them, " Gro." Then the 
devils immediately entered into the swine, and cast the 
whole herd into the lake. In this manner a herd of about 
two thousand swine, driven into the sea by a legion of 
devils, was drowned; and they that kept them fled, and 
coming into the city, told everything. The Gergesenes, 
seeing how the two men had been healed, and their swine 
cast into the sea, were beyond measure affrighted; and 
foolishly came forth from their city to beseech the Lord that 
he would depart out of their coasts.^ 

Gerasa is a town in Arabia,^ beyond Jordan, close to 
Mount Gilead ; it belonged to the tribe of Manasses, and is 
at no great distance from the sea of Tiberias, in which the 
swine were drowned. The name signifies ejecting the 
inhabitants, or, the stranger approaching ; in allusion to the 
Gentiles, whom the Son of God came into the world to 
save, when he had clothed himself with human flesh. 
The two men whom the legion of devils had possessed, 
represent two nations, the Jews and the Gentiles, who 
were governed by the whole "body of sins." They lived 
in tombs, because they were the servants of dead works, 
that is to say, of sin. The impotence of Satan is plainly 
manifested in this circumstance, that he was not even able 
to injure the swine without the permission of God. It is 
worthy of notice, that, while those who are predestinated 
to eternal life turn to the Lord, and, by the use of a sound 
understanding, save themselves; filthy and proud idol- 

1 Matt. viii. 28—34 ; Mark v. 1—17 ; Luke viii. 26—37. Ordericus 
calls these people " Geraseni ;" Mark and Luke, " Gadarenes ;" St. Mat- 
thew, " Gergasenes," 

' Jerash was in the Decapolis, and formed the eastern boundary of 
Petraea. Origen calls it a city of Arabia. — Kitto. This town must not 
be confounded with Gadara, the capital of Petraea. 

c2 



20 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [bOOK I. 

aters, and all reprobate men who cleave to their wicked- 
ness, here designated by the word swine, are condemned 
to live polluted in the stagnant pond of their foul 
deeds. 

Jesus entered into a ship, and passed over, and came 
into Capernaum. While he was there, so great a multi- 
tude came to him to hear his word that they filled the house 
where he was. Then four men brought to him one afflicted 
with the palsy ; and having uncovered the roof of the 
house, they let down before Jesus the bed whereon the sick 
of the palsy lay. Our merciful Lord, perceiving the faith of 
the bearers, forgave the sins of the paralytic man, and said 
to him, although the Scribes were murmuring against him: 
" Arise, take up thy bed, and go thy way unto thine house." 
And immediately he arose, took up his bed before them all, 
and returned to his own home.^ 

As Jesus passed forth from thence, he called to him a man, 
named Matthew, sitting at the receipt of custom ; the man 
followed him, and from the mean station of a publican was 
raised to the high office of an apostle and an evangelist. As 
Jesus sat at meat in the house of Levi, the Pharisees 
murmured, and spoke to him in reproachful terms, because 
he ate with publicans and sinners ; but the benign Teacher, 
perceiving their evil thoughts, uttered this useful maxim : 
" They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are 
sick. I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to 
repentance."^ Our Lord frequented the society of sinners, 
in order that, by teaching his hosts, he might invite and 
lead them to the heavenly feast. 

When Jesus was talking with the disciples of John, 
and was rebuked by the Pharisees, because his own dis- 
ciples did not fast like the followers of John, he drew a 
suitable comparison from the example of tlie children of 
the bridechamber, who could not mourn as long as the 
bridegroom was with them ; from the story of the piece 
of new cloth, which must not be joined to an old garment ; 
and of the new wine, which must not be put into old 

' Matt. ix. 1—7; Mark ii. 3—12; Luke v. 18—26. 

* Matt# ix. 9—13; Mark ii. U— 17 ; Luke v. 27—32. ''Our author 
seems to be ignorant of the fact that Matthew and Levi are the same 
person." — Le Provost. 



CHAP. YII.] JAIRUS'S DAUGHTER RAISED. 21 

bottles.^ He thus proves that the severe observances of 
the uew law are not to be required of carnal men who have 
not yet been regenerated, until it be plainly manifest that 
this spiritual renovation has taken place in them, through 
the mystery of the passion and resurrection of our Lord. 

While Jesus was speaking to the multitudes, Jairus, a ruler 
of the synagogue, came near him, threw himself at his feet, 
and worshipped him, saying : " Lord, my daughter is even 
now dead ; but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she 
shall live." The good Physician arose, and immediately 
followed him. But a great multitude surrounded and pressed 
upon him, and a woman which was diseased with an issue of 
blood twelve years, and had spent all her living upon physi- 
cians (by which term are meant the false theologians or 
philosophers, and the doctors of the secular laws), neither 
coLild be healed of any, came behind him, and touched the 
hem of his garment ; for she said within herself; " If I may 
but touch his garment, I shall be whole." But Jesus turned 
him about, and when he saw her, he said : " Daughter, be of 
good comfort; thy faith hath ma^de thee whole." And 
straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up, and she 
was made whole. And when Jesus came into the ruler's 
house, and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise, 
he said : " Give place ; for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth." 
And they laughed him to scorn. But when the people were 
put forth, he went into the chamber, but suffered no man 
to go in, save Peter, and James, and John, and the father 
and the mother of the maiden ; and he took the damsel by 
the hand, and commanded her to arise, and that some- 
thing should be given her to eat. And the fame hereof 
went abroad into all that land.^ Jairus, whose name 
signifies illuminating^ or illuminated, represents Moses and 
the other doctors of the law ; the damsel, about twelve 
years of age, is tlie symbol of the synagogue ; the woman 
with the issue of blood is the emblem of the church of the 
Grentiles, which had before received the faith through Christ, 
and was graciously saved from the corruptions of idolatry 
and carnal pleasures. Lastly : as the young maiden is said 

^ Matt. ix. 14—17; Mark ii. 18—22; Luke v. 33—39. Utresy « wine- 
bags." 

2 Matt. ix. 18—26; Mark v. 21—43; Luke viii. 40—55. 



22 OHDERTCTTS YITALIS. [bOOE: T. 

to have come to life again bj the command of the Lord, in 
the same way mil Israel at last be saved, when the fulness 
of the Grentiles be come in. 

Jesus departing thence, two blind men followed him, 
crying : " Thou Son of David, have mercy on us." And 
•when he was come into the house, he touched their eyes, 
and they again saw the light of heaven.^ 

As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb 
man, possessed with a devil. And when the devil was cast out, 
the dumb spake ; and the multitudes marvelled, saying, " It 
was never so seen in Israel." But the Pharisees said, "He 
casteth out devils through the prince of the devils." " 

The multitudes sought Jesus in the desert place, and 
when they had found him they wished to stay him, that 
•he should not depart from them.^ 

As the people pressed upon him to hear the word of Grod, 
Jesus entered into one of the ships, which was Simon's, 
and prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the 
land, into the lake of Genesareth. And he sat down, 
and taught the people out of the ship. Now when he had 
left speaking, he said unto Simon, who had toiled all the 
night in vain : " Launch out into the deep, and let down 
your nets for a draught." And when they had this done, 
they inclosed a great multitude of fishes, and their net 
brake with the weight."* 

In those days he went out into a mountain to pray, and 
continued all night in prayer to God. And when it was day, 
he called unto him his disciples ; and of them he chose 
twelve, whom also he named Apostles, that is to say, "sent." 
Now the names of the twelve apostles are these; Simon 
Peter, and Andrew his brother ; James the son of Zebedee, 
and John his brother; Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas 
and Matthew ; James, the son of Alpheus, and Thaddeus ; 
Simon, the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed 
him.^ 

The sacred number of the apostles is not free from 
mystery ; for the number twelve designates those who were 
to preach faith in the Holy Trinity throughout the four 

1 Matt. ix. 27— 31. » Matt. ix. 32—34. 

' Mark i. 35 — 37; Luke iv. 42. * Luke v. 1—6. 

5 Matt. X. 1—4; Markiil 13—19; Luke vi. 12—16. 



CnAP. Tin.] THE widow's SON l^ESTOEED TO LIFE. 23 

quarters of the world. The qiiartenary number tripled 
makes the number twelve, which figure was often used 
before for many purposes. The apostles are represented by 
the twelve sons of Jacob, the twelve princes of the people of 
Israel, the twelve springs found in Elim, the twelve jewels 
of the priest's vestment, the twelve loaves of shew-bread, 
the twelve spies sent by Moses, the twelve stones of the 
altar, the twelve stones taken out of the river Jordan, the 
twelve oxen that supported the brazen sea, the twelve stars 
in the crown of the bride, and the twelve foundations and 
twelve gates of the heavenly Jerusalem, described in the 
book of Eevelation. They were prefigured by many other 
signs excellently adapted to make known to the nations the 
mysteries of God. 

Ch. yill. OThe widow's son raised. 

The glorious Emmanuel went about all Gralilee, preach- 
ing the gospel in all the villages, towns, and cities, 
that is to say, both to small and great, without re- 
spect of persons. He did not regard the power of the 
nobles, but the salvation of believers ; and, after his 
teaching, sweet as honey, he healed every sickness and 
every disease, that those whom his discourses could not 
persuade, might be convinced by the greatness of his 
works. But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved 
with compassion on them, because they fainted and lay 
down, as sheep having no shepherd. He therefore called 
unto him his twelve disciples, and gave them power to 
cast out unclean spirits, and to heal all manner of sickness ; 
and he said to them, "As ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom 
of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, raise the dead, 
cleanse the lepers, cast out devils ; freely ye have re- 
ceived, freely give. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor 
brass in your purses ; nor scrip for your journey ; neither 
two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves." ^ Their heavenly 
Master gave them many more profitable admonitions, which 
his faithful historians, Matthew and Luke, have handed 
down to us in their writings. 

Jesus went into a city of Gralilee, called Nain, which 
is situate not far from Endor, about two miles south of 
1 Matt. ix. 35, 36; x. I, 7—10; Mark vi. 6—9. 



24 OEDERICUS VITALIS. [bOOK I. 

Mount Thabor. Now when he came nigh to the gate of the 
city, surrounded by a great multitude, they were carrying 
out the corpse of a young man, who was the only son of a 
widow ; and when the Lord saw her weeping, he had com- 
passion on her, and said unto her, " Weep not." And he 
came and touched the bier, and they that bare him stood 
still, and he said to the dead man, " Young man, I say unto 
thee. Arise ! " And he immediately revived, and sitting up 
began to speak ; and the Giver of life delivered him to his 
mother in perfect health. And there came a fear on all 
who witnessed this miracle,^ it being the will of Grod that 
a great multitude should follow the Lord ; and much people 
accompany the widow, in order that, there being many 
witnesses of this great miracle, many might be found to 
give praise to Grod. 

Now when John had heard, in Herod's prison, the works 
of Christ, he sent from thence two of his disciples, that they 
might diligently inquire of the wisdom of Grod, what were 
the secrets of the divine will. And when the messengers of 
John were departed, Jesus began to say many things con- 
cerning the greatness of John, and likened the generation of 
the Jews to children sitting in the market-place. Then began 
he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works 
were done, because they repented not on hearing him 
preach. Hitherto he had reproved the whole Jewish race 
in common, but now he reprimanded each of their cities by 
name, especially Chorazin, that is to say, my mystery ; Beth- 
saida, that is to say, tlie house of fruits ; and Capharnaum, 
because they would not be converted when they saw these 
signs and mighty works.^ 

After this Jesus returned thanks to Grod his Father, 
because he had hid his secrets from the wise men of this 
world, but had revealed them unto babes.^ 

When the Pharisees reproved his disciples, because, 
a« they went on the sabbath day through the corn-fields, 
they plucked the ears of corn and did eat, rubbing them 
in their hands ; oiir Saviour excused them, inasmuch as 
they had followed the example set by David and Abiathar 

1 Luke vii. 11 — 16. 

2 Matt. xi. 2-24; Luke vii. 18—32; x. 13—15. 
* Matt. xL 25; Luke x. 21. 



CHAP. VIII.] PAEABLES OF CHEIST. 25 

the high priest, saying : " The sabbath was made for man, 
and not man for the sabbath. Therefore, the Son of man 
is Lord also of the sabbath." ^ 

On another sabbatli he entered into the synagogue, and 
healed a man whose right hand was withered. But the 
Pharisees, moved with envy at the glory Jesus had gained 
by his many miracles, went out straightway and took counsel 
with the Herodiaus against him, how they might destroy 
him. Wherefore Jesus withdrew himself thence, and great 
multitudes followed him, and he healed them all. Then was 
brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind and dumb, 
and he healed him, insomuch that he both spake and saw. 
But when the Scribes and Pharisees wished to depre- 
ciate the works of Christ, by a false interpretation, de- 
siring him to show them a sign from heaven, he spoke to 
them words of profound wisdom and spiritual comfort, by 
which he reproved the wicked and taught the good. He 
told them that to an evil generation no sign should be 
given, but the sign of the prophet Jonas, and he set before 
them, in comparison with themselves, the queen of the 
south, who came from the uttermost parts of the earth to 
hear the wisdom of Solomon, and the Niuevites who re- 
pented." 

When his mother and his brethren stood without, 
desiring to speak with him, he stretched forth his hand 
toward his disciples, and said : " Whoever shall do the will 
of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, 
and sister, and mother."^ 

The same day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by 
the sea-side, and great multitudes were gathered together 
unto him, so that he went into a ship, and sat, and spake 
many things in parables unto the multitude that stood on 
the shore. From the husbandman, who went forth to sow, 
he took occasion to show the similarity of his owti labours ; 
and of the seed itself, part perished, because some fell by 
the way side, and it was trodden down and the fowls of 
the air devoured it ; some fell upon stony places, and some 

^ Matt. xii. 1—8; Mark ii. 23—28; Luke vi. 1—5. 

■•' Matt. xii. 9—42; Mark iii. 1—10; Luke vi. G— 11; xi. 14—32. 

' Matt, xii 46 - 50; Mark iii. 31—35; Luke viii. 19—21. 



26 OEDEEICFS YITALTS. [bOOK I. 

among thorns, and was choked by divers accidents ; but 
other fell on good ground, and yielded much fruit. What 
these things mean, I shall explain in a few sentences : The 
seed is the word of Grod ; the sower is Christ ; the birds 
are the demons ; the way is a depraved mind, worn and 
dried up by the continual circulation of evil thoughts ; the 
rock represents the hardness of a reprobate soul ; the good 
ground represents the gentleness of an obedient spirit, but 
the sun the heat of a cruel persecution ; the thorns are the 
hearts of those who are tormented by the desire to become 
rich ; the good ground is a devout and faithful soul which 
brings forth fruit, some an hundred-fold, some sixty-fold, 
some thirty-fold.^ He who, in all his actions, has eternity 
constantly in view, bears fruit an hundred-fold; he that 
bears fruit sixty-fold performs works perfected by sound 
doctrine, signified by the numbers six and ten; the fruit 
increased thirty-fold typifies faith with sound doctrine, by 
the numbers three and ten. Or in other words: the fruit 
multiplied a hundred-fold, recalls to our mind the virgins 
and martyrs, either in their sanctity of life or contempt 
of death ;~ the fruit multiplied sixty times is that of widows, 
on account of the internal calm which they enjoy, because 
they have not to struggle against the desires of the flesh. 
It is the custom to allow persons of sixty years of age to 
repose after their warfare. But the fruit multiplied thirty- 
fold is that of married people; because this is the age fit 
for contending with the world. 

After this, the true Prophet, seeing the multitudes that 
were gathered together unto him, spake other parables unto 
them, of the good seed that was sown and the tares, of the 
grain of mustard seed, and of the leaven which the woman 
took, and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was 
leavened. Our Saviour, sitting in the boat, is like a rich 
master of a house, who refreshes his guests with difierent 

^ Matt. xiii. 1—23 ; Mark iv. 1, 20 ; Luke viii. 4—15. 

* This passage is extracted from St. Augustine, Qusest. Evang. lib. i. 
quaest. 9 ; but the word nocietatem here introduced into the text of 
Ordericus Vitalis is a corruption for either sanr.titatem or satietatem, both 
of which are found in MSS. of St. Augustine The former of these 
readings is here adopted. 



CHAP. IX.] MART MAGDALEKE. 27 

kinds of food, tliat each of tlicm may take those whicli his 
stomach requires. So our Lord makes use of different para- 
bles, that he may suit the diverse tastes of his hearers.^ 

Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the 
house ; and when his disciples questioned him on the 
subject, he expounded to them the parable of the tares. 
He also, at the same time, added and explained to them 
the figurative meaning of the parables of the treasure hid 
in a field ; of the merchantman and the pearl ; and of the 
nets cast into the sea. From thence he came into his own 
country, and taught them in their synagogues, insomuch 
that all were astonished.'^ 

Ch. IX. Mary Magdalene — St. John heJieaded — Miracle of 

the loaves andjishes. 

"Wheis" our Saviour, invited by a Pharisee, was eating 
in his house, a woman, which was a sinner, began to 
wash his feet with her tears, as he sat at the table, and 
did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and anointed 
them with ointment. All the things that she had unlawfully 
made use of when leading a life of sin, she now in her 
repentant state sacrificed entirely to God ; all the seductions 
she possessed in herself, she now converted into offerings to 
heaven. The Pharisee, swelling with false righteousness, 
rebuked the sick woman for her infirmity, and the Physician 
for affording her relief. Hence arose the parable of the two 
debtors ; and the man was convicted by his own admission, 
like the madman who carries the cord with which he is to 
be bound. The Judge, to whose eyes the most secret 
things are naked and open, noted the deserts of the penitent 
sinner, and rebuked the wickedness of the unjust Pharisee. 
He then forgave the sins of Mary, because, as he himseli 
testified, she loved much ; saying to her : " Thy faith hath 
saved thee ; go in peace." ^ 

AVhile the Lord and his disciples were thus preaching, 
certain women, that is to say, Mary, called Magdalene, 
Joanna, the wife of Chusa, Herod's steward, and Susanna, 
with many others, inspired by God, followed him and minis- 

1 Matt. xiii. 24, 35; Mark iv. 26—33; Luke xiii. 18—21. 

2 Matt. xiii. 36—58; Mark iv. 34; vi. 1—6. 
^ Luke vii. 36 — 50; Hebrews iv. 13. 



28 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [bOOK I. 

tered unto Mm of their substance. It was a custom among 
the Jews, and was not considered wrong, for women, according 
to this national institution, to furnish their teachers with food 
and raiment. This custom, St. Paul tells us, he rejected, 
because he feared it might be an occasion of scandal to the 
Gentiles. Susanna signifies, a lily ; Joanna, tlie gracious^ 
or merciful, Lord ; Mary, the litter sea ; Magdalene, a tower. 
Erom the signification of these names, it may be clearly 
perceived what privileges are conferred upon the hand-maids 
of the Lord for their meritorious services.^ 

After this there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus 
went up to Jerusalem. He there healed, at the sheep- 
pool, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, a 
certain man, which had an infirmity thirty and eight years. 
In the water of this pool the priests washed the flesh of 
the victims which they offered in sacrifice to God, accord- 
ing to the law. This pool had five porches, in which lay 
a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, withered, 
waiting for the moving of the water. Eor an angel of the 
Lord went down (at a certain season) into the pool, and 
troubled the water ; whosoever then first, after the troubling 
of the water, stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever 
disease he had. At Christ's command, the man was imme- 
diately made whole, and took up his bed ; and on the 
same day was the sabbath. The Jews, therefore, beginning 
to murmur and blaspheme, Jesus, the wisdom of the Father, 
answering them, as St. John, the divine, relates, manifested 
the mysteries of his divinity in various ways, and bore a re- 
markable testimony to his shining light John, and to Moses.'^ 

At that time Herod, the tetrarch, heard of the fame of 
Jesus, and said unto his servants : " This is John the Bap- 
tist ; he is risen from the dead, and therefore mighty works 
do shew forth themselves in him!" For Herod had laid 
hold on John, and bound him, and put him in prison for 
the sake of Herodias, whom he had taken from his brother 
Philip, and had married, in spite of the remonstrances of 
John. This cunning and adulterous king would have put 
to death the herald of truth, but he feared the multitude, 
because they treated the prophet of God with great venera- 
tion. Herod was also afraid of John, because he knew him 
^ Matt, xxvii. 55; Mark xv. 40, 41; Luke viii. 1 — 3. ^ John v. 1 — i7. 



CHAP. IX.] JOH?^ THE BAPTIST BEHEADED. 29 

to be a just and lioly. man ; but he was overcome bj his 
passion for the woman, and God's righteous judgment so 
ordered it that the desire of the adulteress made him shed 
the blood of the holy prophet. Herod on his birth-day 
made a supper to his lords, high captains, and chief 
estates of G-alilee ; and when the daughter of Herodias 
came in, and danced, and pleased Herod and them that sat 
with him, the king promised with an oath to give her what- 
soever she would ask of him. She, being before instructed 
by her perfidious mother, requested that he would give her 
in a charger the head of John the Baptist. The cruel king 
sent an executioner, and commanded him to cut off the head 
of the messenger of Christ, which was brought in a charger 
to the young woman, who was to be thus rewarded for her 
talent in dancing, and the viands were thus polluted with 
blood at this impure festival. But the disciples of John 
buried his body in Samaria, and coming to Jesus, told him 
all that had happened. Our Saviour, when he heard of the 
execution of John the Baptist, his servant, departed, and 
crossing the sea of Gralilee, which is the sea of Tiberias, 
retired into a desert place apart ; not because he dreaded 
death, but because he wished to spare his enemies the crime 
of adding another murder to the one already committed, 
should the sight of his many miracles rouse their deadly 
zeal.^ He, therefore, chose to put off the day of his death 
until the time of the passover, and thus afford us an example 
of evading the sudden attacks of traitors. 

"When the people heard of his departure, they followed 
him on foot ; and Jesus, seeing a great multitude, was moved 
with compassion toward them, and he healed their sick. 
And when it was evening, he took five barley-loaves and two 
fishes, and, looking up to heaven, he blessed, and brake, and 
gave them to his disciples to set before the multitude, 
whom he had previously commanded to sit down on the 
green grass. The apostles ministered to the wants of five 
thousand men, beside women and children, who did all eat 
and were filled ; and they took up of the fragments that 
remained twelve baskets full.^ All these things are full of 
mysteries. Jesus leaves Judea, and comes into the desert 

1 Matt. xiv. 1—13; Mark vi. 14—32; Luke iii. 19, 20; ix. 7—10. 

" Matt.xiv, 13— 21; Mark vi. 33— 44; Luke ix. 11— 17; John vi. 1 — 13. 



30 OEDEKICTJS YITALIS. [bOOK I. 

of the Grentiles ; the people follow him ; moved with com- 
passion, he heals their sick ; he feeds them with the five 
barley-loaves of the Mosaic law, and with the two fishes, 
which are the figure of the prophets and of the psalms. He 
performed this miracle in the evening, signifying the close 
of time, when the Sun of righteousness set for us. 

Then those men, when they had seen the miracle 
that Jesus did, said : " This is of a truth that prophet that 
should come into the world." When Jesus, therefore, per- 
ceived that they would come and take him by force to make 
him a king, he constrained his disciples to get into a ship, 
and to go before him unto the other side of the sea ; and 
when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a 
mountain apart to pray. When the evening was come, 
the ship was in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves, 
and they toiled nearly the whole night in rowing, for the 
wind was contrary. In the fourth watch of the night, 
when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty fur- 
longs, he Cometh unto them walking upon the sea; and 
when they saw him, they were troubled, because they 
supposed it had been a spirit, and they cried out for fear ; 
but straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying : " It is I ; be 
not afraid." " Lord," said Peter, " if it be thou, bid me come 
unto thee on the water." And he said, " Come." And when 
Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked on the 
water, to go to Jesus. But when he saw the wind bois- 
terous, he was afraid ; and, beginning to sink, he cried, 
saying, " Lord, save me." And immediately Jesus stretched 
forth his hand, and caught him, because he called to him 
in the hour of danger, and said unto him : " thou of 
little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?" And when they 
were come into the ship, the wind ceased ; and those, who 
saw this worshipped him, and confessed that he was the Son 

of aod.^ 

It is necessary to remark that St. John describes the 
miracle of the loaves as having taken place near the time of 
the passover ; but St. Matthew and St. Mark relate that it 
happened immediately after the beheading of St. John the 
Baptist ; from which we may conclude that St. John was 
beheaded shortly before Easter, and that, in the year foUow- 
1 Matt. xiv. 22—33; Mark vi. 45—51; John vi. 14—21. 



CHAP. IX.] CHRIST FORSAKEN BT HIS DISCIPLES. 31 

ing, when tlie time of the passover was again at hand tlie 
mystery of the passion of our Lord was accomplished. 
Jesus with his disciples came into the land of Genne- 
sareth, where he was received with joy by the men of 
that place, and he healed their sick. For the merciful 
kindness of their Saviour drew them to him ; and they sent 
out into all that country round about, and brought unto 
him all that were diseased, and besought him that they 
might only touch the hem of his garment ; and as many as 
touched were made perfectly whole. ^ 

In the same place he had many disputes with the scribes 
and Pharisees, which came from Jerusalem, and refuted the 
superstitious traditions of the elders.^ 

The multitudes took shipping, and came to Capernaum, 
seeking for Jesus ; and he said to them : " Verily, verily, I 
say unto you: Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, 
but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled. 
Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat 
which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of man 
shall give unto you ; for him hath God the Father sealed." 
These, and many other like things about the bread from 
heaven and eternal life, said he in the synagogue, as he 
taught in Capernaum; but the Jews, whose heart was of 
stone, did not understand them. Thev therefore said : 
"This is an hard saying." Many of his disciples, blinded 
by malice, began to murmur against him, and were so 
offended at his words that they went back, and walked no 
more with him. Then said Jesus unto the twelve : " Will 
ye also go away ?" Simon Peter answered him : " Lord, to 
whom shall we go ? thou hast the words of eternal life. 
And we believe, and are sure that thou art Christ, the Son 
of God." ' ^ • 

After these things Jesus walked in Galilee ; for he 
would not walk in Jewry, because the Jews sought to kill 
him. Then, as the historian St. John relates, his relations, 
who, in compliance with the Jewish custom, were called 
"his brethren," invited him to go with them to the feast of 
tabernacles, that he might show himself openly to the 

^ Matt. xiv. 34— 3G; Mark vi. 53—56. 

2 Matt. XV. 1—9; Mark vii. 1—13. 

3 John vi. 22—69. 



32 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [bOOK T. 

world. And -when tliey, wlio souglit for worldly glory, set 
out on their journey, he abode still in Galilee. Now 
about the midst of the feast, Jesus went up, and taught 
in the temple, and all the Jews marvelled at his doctrine. 
The Pharisees heard that the people differed in opinion 
respecting him, and sent officers to take him ; but no man 
laid hands on him, because his hour was not vet come.^ In 
the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and 
cried, saying : " If any man thirst, let him come unto me, 
and drink. He that believeth on me, as the Scripture hath 
said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water." 
This spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on 
him should receive ; for the Holy Grhost was not yet given, 
because that Jesus was not yet glorified. Many of the 
people, when they heard this saying, said : " Of a truth this 
is the Prophet." Others said : *" This is the Christ." But 
some said ; " Shall Christ come out of Galilee ? Hath not 
the Scripture said that Christ cometh of the seed of David, 
and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was ?" So 
there was a division among the people because of him. 
But the officers, who had been sent by the chief priests 
and Pharisees to take Jesus, when they heard his sayings, 
forgot the purpose for which they were sent, and returned 
without anv accusation ag^ainst him, but full of admiration. 
When, therefore, the cruel magistrates harshly demanded of 
their officers why they had not brought the Teacher of life 
bound before them, they, taught by divine inspiration, bore 
true testimony concerning the doctrine of Christ ; for their 
answer to those who sent them was : " Never man spake 
like this man." And we must not be astonished at this, 
when we consider that he who spoke to them was both God 
and fhan. But as these proud rulers of the people endea- 
voured wickedly to suppress the truth, Nicodemus put a 
stop to their criminal efforts by the authority of the law ; 
so that, their designs being frustrated, they returned home, 
void of faith, and without deriving any benefit from this 
conference." 

Prom thence Jesus went unto the Mount of Olives ; 
and early in the morning he came again into the temple, 
where he sat down, and taught all the people that came 
^ John yii, ] — 30. 2 John vii. 37 — 53. 



CKAP. TX.] THE WOMA.-N- TAKEN^ IN ADULTERY. ' 33- 

unto him. And they brought unto him a woman taken in 
adultery, who, though condemned by strict justice, was 
absolved by the sweetness of his mercv. Pharisaic craft 
had reckoned on ensnaring Christ, and lowering him in the 
eyes of the people, by exhibiting him as either harsh, or 
disregarding the law. For if he had condemned the accused 
woman, in obedience to the lavv of Moses, they would have 
charged him with cruelty, and taunted him with forgetting 
to show that mercy which he was continually preaching ; 
and would thus have rendered him odious to the people by 
whom he was beloved. If, on the contrary, he had forbid- 
den them to stone the adulteress, from a love of clemency, 
they would have accused him of being an enemy to the law 
and of encouraging crime. But he, the true Wisdom, 
broke the snares of these wicked men like the threads of a 
spider's web, in virtue of his supreme authority. He said 
unto them : " He that is without sin among you, let him 
first cast a stone at her." In the first part of the sentence, 
we discover the feeling of a compassionate observer ; in the 
second, the sentence of a just judge. Stooping down, he 
wrote on the ground with his finger, and his word, as a two- 
edged sword, pierced the conscience of these insidious men : 
thus he completely satisfied the severity of justice and the 
gentleness of mercy. At last these crafty questioners, 
struck with shame at the equity of the sentence pro- 
nounced, left the adulterous woman, and, beginning at the 
eldest, went out one by one. Then the Supreme Judge 
kindly lifted up the accused woman, thus left alone with 
him: " Gro," he said unto her, "and sin no more." See 
how his mercy pardons past sins, while his justice forbids 
the presumption of sinning any more.^ 

In the treasury, Jesus spake unto them of his being the 
true light of the world, expatiated on the nature of liberty, 
on his own exaltation, on the servitude of sin, and on false- 
hood and truth. The enraged Jews, in answer to the 
blessed words of Christ, replied : " Thou art a Samaritan, 
and hast a devil." Notwithstanding, however, their inju- 
rious language, he replied with patience, instructed them 
with humility, and taught the knowledge of divine things to 
those who were to be saved. But they, becoming infuriated, 

^ John viii. 1 — 11. 
D 



34 OEDERICTJS TTTALTS. [bOOK I. 

collected stones to cast at him ; but Jesus hid himself, and 
went out of the temple.^ 

Ch. X. The pool of Siloam — Tlie iransfiguration. 

As he passed bj, seeing a man which was blind from 
his birth, he spat on the ground, and making clay of the 
spittle, anointed the eyes of the blind man, and said unto 
him : " Gro, wash in the pool of Siloam." He went his way, 
therefore, and washed, and came seeing. This was done 
on a sabbath-day ; and in consequence, a great division 
arose among the Jews. The man whose eyes were opened 
was cast out of the synagogue, because he bare witness to 
him from whom he had received his sight ; but was after^ 
wards recognized and received by him whom he loved with 
so much reason. Then Jesus related to them the parable 
of the door of the sheepfold, of the shepherd and his flock, 
and of the good pastor and the hireling. Many of the 
Jews received his words ; but a great number, on the con- 
trary, lightly rejected them.^ 

Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of 
Tyre and Sidon ; where a woman of Canaan earnestly 
entreated him that he would heal her daughter, who was 
grievously vexed with a devil. His disciples besought him 
[to send her away] ; but, after some hesitation, he granted 
her prayer, and having commended the faith and humi- 
lity of the mother, freed the daughter from the power of the 
demon.^ 

And departing from the coasts of Tyre, the chief city of 
the Canaanites, he came by Sidon, a town of Phoenicia, unto 
the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Deca- 
polis. He there took aside from the multitude one that was 
deaf, and had an impediment in his speech, and, putting 
his fingers into his ears, he spat, and touched his tongue, 
and looking up to heaven, he sighed, and said unto him : 
" Ephphatha," that is. Be opened. And straightway his ears 
were opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, and 
he spake plain. And those who were witnesses of this 
miracle were astonished, saying: "He hath done all things 

1 John viii. 12—59. = joj^ ix.; x. 1—21. 

3 .Matt. XV. 21—28; Mark vii. 24—30. 



CHAP. X.] MIHACLE OF THE LOAYES AND riSIIES. 35 

well ; he maketli both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to 
speak. "^ 

Jesus came nigh unto the sea of Galilee, and went up 
into a mountain, and taught the great multitudes that came 
unto him. And they cast at Jesus' feet those that were 
dumb, lame, blind, maimed, and many others, and he healed 
them ; insomuch that the multitude wondered, when they 
saw the dumb speak, the lame walk, and the blind 
see." In the same manner the Lord works spiritually in 
his holy church, and by his grace a multitude of sinners are 
saved every day. The dumb are those who refuse to sing 
praises to the Lord, and who do not confess a belief in him. 
The blind are those who do not understand, although they 
obey. The deaf are those who will not obey, even though 
they understand. The lame are those who neglect to fulfil 
the divine precepts, and walk through the devious paths of 
wickedness. Such are the men who are healed every day 
by the grace of Grod, and are guided into the way that leads 
to life eternal. Those who feared the Lord, and were eye- 
witnesses of these corporeal signs, magnified the King of 
sabaoth with joy. Now also the faithful rejoice in the con- 
version of sinners, and devoutly glorify the Lord God of 
Israel, who doeth all good things. 

Then Jesus called his disciples unto him, and said: "I 
have compassion on the multitude, because they continue 
with me now three days, and have nothing to eat ; and I 
will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the 
way." He then commanded the multitude to sit down on 
the ground, and taking seven loaves and a few little fishes, 
gave thanks, brake them, and gave to his disciples, and the 
disciples to the multitude. And they did all eat, and were 
filled ; and they took up of the broken meat that was left 
seven baskets full. And they that did eat were four 
thousand men, beside Momen and children. And he sent 
away the multitude, and took ship, and came into the coasts 
of Magdala or Dalmanutha,in the neighbourhood of Gennesa- 
reth. Here the Sadducees and the Pharisees, tempting him, 
desired that he would shew them a sign from heaven, for 
they made light of the great miracle he had performed in 
feeding four thousand men with seven loaves, and filling 
1 Mark vii. 31—37. 2 Matt. xv. 29—31. 

D 2 



36 OEDERICTIS TTTALIS. [bOOK I. 

seven baskets ^itli the fragments that remained. But he 
reproved their insolence ; and refusing to give them any 
other sign than that of the prophet Jonas, left them, and 
entering into the ship again, departed to the other side.^ 

At Bethsaida, they besought him to touch a blind man. 
And he took the blind man by the hand, and led him out of 
the town ; and when he had spit on his eyes, and put his 
hands upon him, he asked him if he saw aught. And he 
said: " I see men as trees walking." Jesus put his hands 
again upon his eyes, and he was restored, and began to see 
every thing clearly. Our Lord then said to him : " Gro unto 
thine house ; and if thou enter the town, thou shalt not 
tell it to any one."^ 

And Jerus went out, and came into the towns of Csesarea 
Philippi; and by the way he asked his disciples what 
men thouglit concerniug him ? And they answered : 
" Some say that thou art John the Baptist ; some, Elias ; 
and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets." He saith 
unto them: " But whom say ye that I am?' And Simon 
Peter answered and said : " Thou art the Christ, the son of 
the living God." And Jesus answered and said unto him : 
" Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood hath 
not revealed it unto thee, but mv Father which is in heaven. 
And I say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock 
I will build my church ; and the gates of hell shall not pre- 
vail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven ; and whatsoever thou shalt bind on 
earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt 
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." He then charged 
his disciples that they should tell no man that he was 
Jesus the Christ. From that time forth began Jesus to 
shew unto his disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusa- 
lem, and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests 
and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third 
day. Then Peter, taking him aside, from excessive love 
began to rebuke him, saying : " Be it far from thee. Lord ; 
this shall not be unto thee." But he turned, and said unto 

^ Matt. XV. 32—39; xvi. 1—4; Mark viii. 1—13. 

2 Mark viii. 22 — 26. We read in tft. Mark: " And he sent him awav 
to his house, saying, ' Neither go into the town, nor tell it to any in the 
town.'" 



CHAP. X.] THE TRANSFIGURATION. 37 

Peter : " Get thee behind me, Satan ; thou art an offence 
unto me, for thou savourest not the things that be of God, 
but those that be of men." After the Lord had shown to 
his disciples the mystery of his passion and resurrection, 
he exhorted them, as well as the people, to follow the 
example of his passion, and promised them the reward 
provided for those who suffer.^ 

After six days, Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his 
brother, and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart 
by themselves ; and he was transfigured before them. And 
his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment became as 
white as snow. And there appeared unto them Moses and 
Elias, talking with him ; aud, behold, a bright cloud over- 
shadowed them; and, behold, a voice out of the cloud, which 
said : " This is my beloved Son, in whom I am M'ell pleased ; 
hear je him." And when the disciples heard it, they fell 
on their face, and were sore afraid. And Jesus came and 
touched them, and said: "Arise, and be not afraid." And 
when they had lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, save 
Jesus only. And as they came down from the mountain, 
Jesus charged them, saying : " Tell the vision to no man, 
until the Son of man be risen again from the dead." Then, 
in answer to their inquiry, he told them that Elias was 
come already ; and they understood that he spake unto 
them of John the Baptist." 

On the next day, when he was come to the multitude, 
straightway all the people, when they beheld him, were 
greatly amazed, and, running to him, saluted him. Then a 
certain man of the company came to him, and threw him- 
self down on his knees, saying : " Lord, have mercy on my 
yon, for he is lunatic from his infancy, and sore vexed ; for 
ofttimes the devil hath cast him into the fire, and into the 
waters, to destroy him ; and I brought him to thy disciples, 
and they could not cure him." And when Jesus had com- 
manded the sick chiJ-d to be brought, while he was yet com- 
ing, the evil spirit threw him down and tare him ; and he fell 
on the ground, and wallowed foaming. Jesus rebuked the 
foul spirit, and charged him to come out of him, and to 
enter no more into him. And the spirit cried, and rent 

1 Matt. xvi. 13—28; Mark viii. 27—38; Luke ix. 18—27. 

2 Matt. xvii. 1 — 13; Mark ix. 2—13; Luke ix. 28—36. 



38 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [bOOK 1. 

him sore, and came out of him, and he fell on the ground 
as one dead, insomuch that many said that he was 
dead. But Jesus, took him by the hand, lifted him up, and 
delivered him whole to his father. Afterwards, when the 
disciples asked him privately why they could not heal him, 
he said unto them: "Because of your unbelief; for verily 
I say unto you. If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, 
ye shall say unto this mountain, Bemove hence, and it shall 
remove ; and nothing shall be impossible unto you. How- 
beit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting."^ 
And while they abode in Gralilee, Jesus said unto 
them : " The Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of 
men, and they shall kill him ; and the third day he shall 
rise again." And they were exceeding sorry .^ 

Ch. XI. The tribute money — The lahourers in the vineyard. 

AiSTD when they were come to Capernaum, the}^ that 
received tribute money came to Peter, and said: "Doth 
not your Master pay tribute?" He saith, "Yes." And 
when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented him, 
saving: : " Of whom do the kin^fs of the earth take tribute ? 
of their own children, or of strangers ?" Peter saith unto 
him : " Of strangers." Christ was the Son of a King, both 
according to the flesh and the Spirit, whether we consider 
him as born of the seed of David, or as the Word of the 
Almighty Bather. Therefore, as the son of a king, he was 
not obliged to pay tribute money ; but he who had taken 
upon him the humility of the flesh wished to fulfil all 
righteousness. In every kingdom, it is clear, children are 
free from taxation : Jesus saith unto Peter : " Then are the 
children free. Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, 
go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take the fish that 
first Cometh up ; and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou 
shalt find a piece of money ; that take, and give unto them 
for me and thee."^ This fish is the figure of Christ ; the 
sea represents mortal life ; the tribute money, or the two 
drachms, means confession, which is given for Peter as for a 

1 Matt. xvii. U— 21; Mark ix. 14—29; Luke ix. 37—42. 
^ Matt. xvii. 22, 23; Mark ix. 30—32. 
3 Matt. xvii. 24—27. 



CHAP. XI.] CnmST BLESSETH little CniLDKEN. 39 

sinner, but for Christ as for a Lamb without spot and 
guiltless. 

Then there arose a reasoning among the apostles, which 
of them should be greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And 
Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst 
of them, and said : " Verily I say unto you, Except ye be 
converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter 
into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever, therefore, shall 
liumble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in 
the kingdom of heaven;" adding other precepts, concern- 
ing humility and gentleness, avoiding to oiFend little children, 
and correcting a brother mildly. He then spoke to them of 
paternal kindness, and set before them the parable of the 
king who forgave his servant the debt of ten thousand 
talents, when he besought him, and of that same servant 
who refused to acquit a fellow servant who owed him an 
hundred pence. The discourse, after payment of the tribute, 
in commendation of humility and innocence, and teaching us 
how to correct and pardon, being ended, the righteous 
Teacher departed from Gralilee, and came into the coasts of 
Judea beyond Jordan ; and great multitudes followed him ; 
and he healed them there. ^ 

When the Pharisees asked him if it were lawful for a 
man to put away his wife, he referred to the fixed law of 
marriage, saying : " AVhat Grod hath joined together, let not 
man put asunder." " 

Then were there brought unto him little children, that 
he should put his hands on them, and pray : and his disci- 
ples rebuked those that brought them. But Jesus was 
much displeased, and said unto them : " Suffer the little 
children to come unto me, and forbid them not : for of such 
is the kingdom of heaven."^ 

A young man asked him, kneeling, the way to eternal 
salvation; when, after instructiug him in the command- 
ments of the law, he added: "If thou wilt be perfect, 
go, sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou 
shalt have treasure in heaven ; and come and follow 
me." But when he heard that saying, he went away 

1 Matt, xviii. 1— .35; xix. 1, 2; Mark ix. 33-49; Luke ix. 46—48 

• Matt. xix. 3-6; Mark x. 2-9. 

^ Matt. xix. 13, 14; Mark x. 13, 14; Luke xviii. 15, 16, 



40 ORDERICUS VITALIS. [bOOiK I. 

sorrowful, for he had great possessions. Then said Jesus : 
" Verily I say unto you, That a rich man shall hardly enter 
into the kingdom of heaven. It is easier for a camel to go 
through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter the 
kingdom of Grod." Peter, hearing what was said in praise of 
voluntary poverty, self-complacently said to the Lord : " Be- 
hold, we have forsakeii all, and followed thee ; what shall we 
have therefore ?" And Jesus said unto them : " Verily I say 
unto you, that ye which have followed me, in the regeneration 
when the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory, 
shall also sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes 
of Israel. And every one that hath forsaken houses, or bre- 
thren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or 
lands, for my name's sake, shall receive an hundred-fold, and 
shall inherit everlasting life. But many that are first shall 
be last ; and the last shall be first," ^ 

He then set before them the parable of the householder, 
who took labourers into his vineyard at different hours of the 
day, but gave to all of them the same hire, one penny, begin- 
ning from the last unto tlie first." These difterent hours of 
the day are understood to represent typically the past ages. 
Abel laboured at day -break, Noe at the third hour, Abraham 
at the sixth, and the lawgiver Moses at the ninth. At the 
" eleventh hour " Christ came, rebuked the Gentiles, because 
they stood idle in the great market-place of this world, and 
commanded them to work by faith in the vineyard of his 
church. Or, these difierent hours may also be likened to the 
several stages of a man's life. The morning represents 
childhood ; the third hour of the day, youth ; the sixth 
liour is emblematical of manhood ; the ninth, of old age ; the 
eleventh, of decrepitude, or superannuation. At all these 
ages conversions take place ; and the converts are rewarded 
with the penny of everlasting life. A modern poet thus 
sneaks of this similitude : — 

When the sun sinks in the west, 
And the vineyard-labourers claim 
V/ages due and grateful rest, 
Their reward is all the same; 

^ Matt. xix. ]G-3(); Mark x. 17—31; Luke xviii. 18—30. 
2 Matt. XX. 1—8. 



CUAP. XII.] LAEOURERS IN THE YINEYARD. 41 

Whether through the noontide heat 
Bending o'er the thirsty soil; 
Whether theirs, with lingering feet, 
Cooler hours and lighter toil. 
Tasks unequal — equal hire — 
Such the master's righteous will; 
All that justice can require, 
Thus both first and last fulfil. 
In the vineyard of the Lord, 
Young and old, and weak and wise, 
Taught by His most holy word, 
Surely gain the glorious prize. 

Ch. XII. Third year of Christ's ministry — Li Judea — 

After leaving Galilee. 

Thus far I have attentively examined, for a salutary 
exercise, as I have been able to gather from the writings 
of the evangelists, and endeavoured to relate briefly, the 
works which our Lord performed during the first two years 
of his mission. It is now my duty to search out the acts of 
his third year, and briefly to recount the important and 
memorable deeds of our Lord after his departure from Galilee 
into Judea, that he might accomplish in Jerusalem the 
mystery of his Father's dispensation, and reveal to us by 
his own ineftable operation the hidden things of the law and 
the prophets. He, indeed, at first taught in the eastern parts 
of Judea, beyond Jordan ; but afterwards on this side of it, 
when he went to Jericho and Jerusalem. For although 
the whole kingdom of the Jews was generally called Judea, 
to distinguish it from other countries, yet the southern part 
was more especially named Judea, as distinct from Samaria, 
Galilee, Decapolis, and the other districts of the same 
province. 

Jesus, on his way to Jerusalem, privately foretold his 
passion to his disciples. Then the mother of Zebedee's 
children desired him to grant that her two sons might 
sit, the one on his right hand, and the other on his 
left, in his kingdom. But he taught them to be patient 
and lowly, and he himself set an example of perfect righteous- 
ness for them to follows In answer to John's inquiry, 
he commanded him not to forbid any one to perform miracles 
in his name.^ 

1 Matt. XX. 17—28; Mark x. 32-45; Luke ix. 49, 50. 



42 OEDEKICTJS yiTALIS. [bOOK I. 

As lie was drawing nigli unto Jerusalem, lie sent 
messengers before his face into a village of the Samari- 
tans ; but they did not receive them. However, when 
James and John wished him to command fire to come down 
from heaven upon the heads of the men who had treated 
him with scorn, he rebuked his disciples, saying : " Ye 
know not what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son 
of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save 
them." ' 

After these things the Lord appointed seventy-two 
disciples, and sent them, two and two, into every city and 
place whither he himself would come, and gave them 
directions to whom and how they were to preach. He 
then upbraided the cities that would not believe in his 
name. And when the seventy-two disciples returned 
again with joy to him, the Lord charged them not to 
rejoice in this, that the spirits were subject unto them, 
but because their names were Avritten in heaven ; he 
referred all praise to his Father, and called the eyes of the 
disciples blessed, because they saw those things which 
many just men and kings before them had desired to see, 
but had not seen.^ 

"When a lawyer asked him a question, tempting him, 
he showed him what to do in order to inherit eternal life, 
and mentioned the case of the man who " went doi^ai from 
Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves," proving 
to them all that the Samaritan, who, when the priest and 
the Levite passed by on the other side, went to the 
assistance of the man who had been wounded by the 
thieves, was his neighbour, because he had compassion on 
him.^ 

In a certain village, a woman named Martha received 
Jesus into her house, and when she complained to him 
that her sister had left her to serve alone, and would not 
help her, he put a stop to her murmurs by asserting that 
Mary had " chosen the good part." * 

St. Matthew, in the Lord's prayer, gives the seven 

^ Luke ix. 51 — 56. 

^ Luke X. 1 — 24; we here read, " other seventy also." 

^ Matt. xxii. 34—40; Mark xii. 28—34; Luke x. 25—37. 

* Luke X. 38—42. 



CHAP. XII.] THE lord's PRATER. 

petitions in the following words:— Oe^r Father ivJiich art 
in heaven, Hallowed he thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy 
loill he done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our 
daily hread. And forgive ns our dehts, as tve forgive our 
dehtors. And lead us not into tem'ptation, hut deliver us from 
evil. Amen. In the first three petitions we pray for things 
"Eternal, but in the last four for things temporal, which 
are, however, necessary in order to acquire those that are 
eternal. 

Now St. Luke has but five requests, thus: — Our Father, 
Hallowed he thy name. Thy kingdom come. Give us day hy 
day our daily hread ; and forgive us our sins, for we also 
forgive every one that is indebted to us. And lead us not 
into temptation. Thus we see seven petitions, according to 
St. Matthew, reduced to five in St. Luke's gospel: for in- 
stance, the name of Grod is sanctified in the Spirit ; but the 
kingdom of God is to come in the resurrection of the flesh. 
He then adds three others, for the daily bread, for the 
remission of sins, and for avoiding temptation. All that 
man requires in this life and the next may be understood to 
be embraced by these petitions.' For this reason, when the 
disciples said to Jesus, "Lord, teach us to pray," he not 
only gave them a form of prayer, but taught them to pray 
frequently and with importunity. He admonished them to 
persevere constantly in their petitions to Heaven, and related 
to them the parable of the friend who requested the loan of 
three loaves at midnight. He advised them to " ask, seek, 
and knock;" he, therefore, exhorted them to ask for the 
bread of the word of God, by which the friend, that is to 
say, the soul, is nourished ; to seek for the friend who gives 
abundantly, that is to say, the Lord ; to knock at the door 
of divine mercy, through which they enter the treasury ot 
wisdom, where the celestial joys are kept. The word bread 
is understood to signify charity, Avith which the stone, that is 
to say, the hardness of avarice, is contrasted. The fish repre- 
sents the faith of invisible baptism, on account of the water 
used, or because it is caught in invisible places, and is im- 
perishable by the waves of this world that roar around 
it ; with this the venomous serpent is contrasted ; this last 
is the figure of perfidy or incredulity. The egg is the em- 
1 Matt. vi. 9—13; Luke xi. 1—13. 



4-Jfe OllDERICUS YITALIS. [bOOK I. 

blem of hope ; because the egg is not yet a perfect foetus, 
but we hope to see it become one by being hatched. Now 
despair is the reverse of hope; it has for its image the 
scorpion, which strikes the unwary with its envenomed 
sting from behind, and the secret puncture causes sudden 
death. 

Our Saviour accused the Pharisees of blasphemy and 
ingratitude for the acts of mercy which they witnessed. He 
took the illustration of the armed man who was overcome 
by a man stronger than himself, and spoke of the unclean 
spirit that returned into the man, with seven other spirits 
more wicked than himself.^ When a certain woman 
lifted up her voice, and said, that the womb that bare 
him was blessed, he answered that he who kept the 
word of God was blessed." AVhen he had healed the man 
on whom three miracles were performed at the same time 
(being blind he saw, dumb he spoke, possessed with a devil 
was freed), he, who was the truth itself, gave them many 
precepts conducive to salvation, repelled with the weapons 
of reason the Pliarisees who tempted him, told them that 
a lighted caudle was not to be put under a bushel, but on a 
candlestick ; and taught them that the eye ought to be 
single.^ 

When the Pharisee, who had besought him to dine with 
him, marvelled that he had not first washed before dinner, 
after the manner of the Jews, Jesus observed that external 
ablutions did not purify their inward parts, which were foul 
with sins, and repeating, "Woe to the Pharisees," six times, 
added a long list of their evil deeds.* 

He also charged his disciples to take heed of the leaven 
of hypocrisy, not to be afraid of them that can only kill 
the body; and, in the hour of persecution, to take no 
thought what they should say.^ 

When one of the company requested him to divide the 
inheritance between him and his brother, he related the 
parable of the rich miser. He then warned his disciples to 

^ Matt. xii. 31—45; Mark iii. 22—30; Luke xi. 15—26. 

^ Luke xi. 27, 28. 

3 ]yi3^t^ xii. 22—30; Mark iii. 22—30; Luke xL 14, 29—36. 

* Matt, xxiii. 13—38; Luke xi 37—52. 

* Matt. xvi. 6 — 12; Mark viii. 15; Luke xii. 1 — 12. 



CHAP. XII.] cheist's TEACniNa.; 45 

avoid, like the fowls of the air, being careful for meat 
and raiment.^ Having promised the kingdom to the little 
flock, he, commanded them to sell all that they possessed, 
and all they acquired, and to give alms ; telling them that 
their loins ought to be girded about, and their lamps burn- 
ing. He also commanded them to watch, mentioning the 
case of the two servants, the one good, the other bad ; and 
ieclared that the servant, which knew his lord's will, but did 
it not, should bo beaten with many stripes, while he that 
knew not should be beaten with few stripes.' 

He told them that he was come to send fire on the 
earth, by reason of their divisions ; that, as they could 
discern the face of the sky, they ought to discern the signs 
of the times ; and recommended them to consent to the 
demands of their adversary, while they were in the way.^ 

When he was told that Pilate had put to death some 
of the Galileans, Jesus, answering, said, that all should 
likewise perish, unless they repented ; or be like the eighteen 
who were crushed by the fall of the tower in Siloam. In 
the parable of the barren fig-tree, he warns those who 
defer the hour of repentance.^ 

He made straight on the sabbath-day a woman who had 
been bowed together eighteen years ; and when some of 
them murmured, because Jesus had healed on that day, he 
silenced them by saying that an ox must be led away to 
watering on the sabbath ; and all the people rejoiced for 
the glorious things that were done by him.^ 

Comparing the kingdom of God to a grain of mustard 
seed and to leaven, he spoke of the few that enter 
in at the strait gate, and said: "There are last which 
shall be first, and there are first which shall be last."^ The 
Lord then called Herod a " fox," a name by which heretics 
are desiraated, on account of the deceitful and insidious 
character of their conduct ; and reproved Jerusalem because 
it refused to seek the protection of his wings.' He 
healed, on the sabbath-day, a certain man which had the 

* Matt. vi. 25—34; Luke xii. 13—31. 

- Luke xii. 32 — 48. ^ Luke xii. 49 — 59. 

* Luke xiii. 1 — 9. ^ Luke xiii. 10 — 17. 
'' Matt. xiii. 31—33; Mark iv. 30, 31; Luke xiii. 18—30. 

■ ' Luke xiii. 31—35. 



46 ORDERICUS VITALIS. [bOOK I. 

dropsy, ridding him as it were of a fountain of humours ; 
and when the Pharisees objected, he confounded them by 
asking if they did not [on the sabbath-day] pull an ass or 
an ox out of a pit into which it had fallen. He taught 
them to practise humility, not seeking the first places at a 
feast ; and to bid to their table, not the rich, but the poor, 
who could not return their hospitality.^ 

Ch. XIII. JBarables and discourses of Clirist. 

The Lord Jesus Christ, employing various means to 
further the salvation of man, gives us the parable of those 
that were bidden to a supper; but, as they all sought to be 
excused, they were not considered worthy of such an honour. 
The first refused the invitation, because he had bought a 
piece of ground ; representing those who through love of 
worldly things, make no account of heavenly things. 
Another, who was prevented by his five yoke of oxen, is the 
type of those curious persons, who, influenced by the 
bodily senses, scrutinize external things only, and, while 
they remark the life of others, and neglect the care ot 
their own souls, refuse to take their place at the banquet 
of eternal salvation. The third, who refused to be present 
on account of his recent marriage, is the image of all persons 
who allow themselves to be caught in the meshes of carnal 
pleasure. Thus, while one ]nau is occupied with the cares 
of this world, another is tormented by incessantly thinking 
of the actions of his neighbours, a third allows his mind 
to be defiled by the pleasures of the flesh ; but aU equally 
disdain to hasten to the banquet of eternal life.'^ 

Our Saviour told the great multitudes that went with 
him, that they must not only give up all their connections, 
but their own life, and take up the cross and follow him. 
That they might not fail, he suggested that they ought to 
act like the man who, " intending to build a tower, sitteth 
down first and counteth the cost," and proposed the example 
of the two kings who were going to make war against each 
other.^ 

When they murmured because he kept company with 
sinners, he spake unto them the parable of the lost 
sheep, and of the piece of silver ; the owners of which 
1 Luke xiv. 1 — 14. ^ Luke xiv. 16 — 24. ^ Luke xiv. 25 — 32. 



CHAP. XITI.] THE PHODIGAL SOlS". 47 

were as joyful at finding them as they were sorrowful 
at having lost them. He told them that there would be 
likewise joy in the presence of the angels of God over 
the salvation of one sinner that repenteth. But true 
penitence consists in contrition for sins committed, and a 
resolution not to repeat what is now lamented. He who 
has done what is forbidden, ought also, in order to satisfy 
the will of God, to deny himself what is permitted.^ 

The Lord then gave them the parable of the frugal and 
prodigal sons, shewing them how the prodigal son returned 
to his lather, who received him with the greatest kindness, 
and kissed him ; how he put the best robe upon him, 
that is to say, the garb of innocence ; gave him the ring 
of sincere faith, and put shoes on his feet, that is to say, 
ordained him to preach the gospel. In thus adorning the 
hands and feet of the convert, the Lord typified good 
works and missions. The father, having killed the fatted 
calf, made a great supper. Now his elder son, that is to 
say, the Jewish people, as he drew nigh to the house from 
the field, which represents external observances, heard 
music and dancing, that is to say, remarked that the sons 
of the church, full of the Holy Ghost, preached the gospel 
with harmonious voice. Having obtained information 
respecting the cause of these signs of joy, he was angry with 
his father, complaining that he had killed the fatted calf 
for the son who had devoured his living with harlots, and 
had a greater regard for him than for himself.^ 

After this our Lord introduced the case of the unjust 
steward, w^ho, by a crafty device, reduced what was due to 
his lord.^ 

He declared that we cannot serve God and mammon ; 
rebuked the avaricious Pharisees, telling them that the law 
and the prophets were until John the Baptist; and then 
related the parable of the unmerciful rich man \^ho was 
clothed in purple, and the poor beggar, showing, from the 
fate of the merelv selfish, what will be that of such as live 
by robbery,* 

After saying, "Woe to the man by whom the offence 

^ Luke XV. 1-10. ^ Luke xv. 11—32. 

^ Luke xvi. 1 — 8. * Luke xvi. 13 — 31. 



48 OTIDT.ETCTTS TITALTS. [eOOK T. 



eometh," he commanded [Peter] to forgive a repentant 
brother " until seventy times seven." ^ 

The apostles, beseeching him to increase their faith, 
are tanght how they might remove a sycamine-tree ; and 
drawing a comparison between them and the servant plough- 
ing or feeding cattle, the Lord informs them that they 
must confess themselves " unprofitable servants," even 
when they shall have done all those things which were 
commanded." 

As Jesus went to Jerusalem, he passed through the 
midst of Samaria and Galilee. And as he entered into a 
certain village, he cleansed ten men that were lepers, but 
only one of them, and he a stranger, returned to give glory 
to God.^ 

It being enquired when the kingdom of God should come, 
Jesus answered that it would not come with observation, 
and he compared the advent of the Son of man to a flash of 
lightning. He told them that the day of judgment ought to 
be continually the object of the tlioughts of men, as it would 
come suddenly upon them ; and he likened that day to the 
days of Noe and Lot, when death unexpectedly came upon 
mankind. He also spake of the two persons, either in bed, 
or at the mill, or in the fitld, one of whom would be chosen 
and the other left. The bed is the figure of the church in 
a state of rest ; our Saviour speaks of two as of two persons ; 
but we must understand the expression to mean two states 
of the affections ; for he who, for God's sake, practices con- 
tinence, so that, living without any worldly cares, he may 
keep his thoughts bent upon the things that be of God, will 
be j^dmitted by him to happiness eternal. He, on the con- 
trary, who, from love of the praise of men, although free 
from the corruption of other vices, tarnishes the purity of 
the monastic life to which he is devoted, will be left to 
eternal misery ; as Jeremiah intimates in his Lamenta- 
tions, when he describes the fall of an idle and sinful soul, 
under the figure of Judea, in these words : " The adversaries 
saw her, and did mock at her sabbaths."* The two women 
grinding at the mill (in allusion to the revolutions of tem- 

^ Matt, xviii. 21, 22; Luke xvii. 1—4. 

■•* Matt. xvii. 20 ; Luke xvii. 5 — 1 0. 

^ Luke xvii 11—19. * Lament, i. 7- 



cuAr. XTii.] THE phahisee akd tue publican. 49 

poral affairs) , represent the vulgar wlio ought to be governed 
by their teachers, as women are by their husbands, and, 
by their labours in various arts, minister to the service 
of the church. One of them will be taken because she 
enters the wedded state only from a desire to have children, 
and makes use of her worldly substance to obtain heavenly 
;riches ; while she who marries for the sake of carnal enjoy- 
ment will be rejected. But whosoever shall ofi'er their earthly 
goods to the church or to the poor, in the name of our 
Lord's redemption, shall have them multiplied. The two 
men in the field represent the labourers in the ministry of 
the church, performing their duties as in the field of God. 
The one that shall have published the word of God sincerely 
will be chosen ; but he that shall have preached Christ im- 
perfectly and carelessly will be left.^ 

These three classes of persons constitute the church, 
which is divided into two distinct portions — the adopted 
and the rejected. Eor this reason the prophet Ezekiel 
saw three men delivered — Noah, Daniel, and Job,^ in 
whom are shadowed the preachers of the gospel, the conti- 
nent, and married people. Eor JN'oah guided the ark on the 
waters, and therefore represents those who govern ; Daniel, 
retaining the gift of abstinence even at the court of a 
king, showed how continent men live ; but Job, although 
united to a wife by the bonds of marriage, and obliged to 
take care of his own house, pleased God, and thus worthily 
represents the class of good married people. To teach that 
men ought always to pray and not to faint, the Lord spake 
the parable of the widow who importuned the unjust judge 
to avenge her of her adversary, and obtained, by incessant 
supplication and weariness of the judge, what she solicited 
with such pertinacity.^ 

By showing us how the Pharisee and the publican prayed 
in the temple, he teaches us not to extol our merits, but to 
confess our sins. The righteous pray without ceasing that 
they may be avenged of their enemies, so that all the wicked 
should perish. Now the wicked perish in two different ways ; 
by being converted to righteousness, or in losing by punish- 
ment the power to do wrong.* ^^"•■ 

1 Luke xvii. 20—37. = Ezek. xlv. 14. 

' Luke xviii. I — 8. * Luke xviii. 9 — 14. 

YOL. I. E 



50 OEDERICUS TITALIS. [bOOK I. 

The Lord then foretold that he was to be delivered to 
the Grentiles at Jerusalem, and suffer on the cross ; and 
when they were come nigh unto Jericho, he heard the 
cries of a blind man who sat bj the wajside, begging. 
Jesus stood still, and commanded him to be brought unto 
him ; and as soon as he had learned the request of the 
blind man, he mercifully restored his sight. ^ 

And as Jesus passed through Jericho, he saw Zae- 
cheus, the chief among the publicans, who had climbed 
up into a tree, and received hospitality at the house of this 
man, who wished very much to see him. And when the 
Jews murmured, saying that he was gone to be guest 
with a man that is a sinner, Zaccheus, in the sincerity 
of his faith, said unto the Lord : " Behold, Lord, the half 
my goods I give to the poor ; and if I have taken any- 
thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him four- 
fold." And Jesus said unto him: "This day is salvation 
come to this house, forasmuch as he also is a son of Abra- 
ham. For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that 
which was lost."^ 

He then spake the parable of a certain nobleman who 
went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom, 
and to return, after he had delivered ten pounds to his 
servants to trade with. AVhen he was returned, the first 
came, saying : " Lord, thy pound hath gained ten pounds." 
This first servant is the order of teachers sent to the circum- 
cised ; he received one pound for the purpose of trade, 
because he is commanded to preach " one Lord, one faith, 
one baptism, one God."^ Now this same pound hath gained 
ten pounds, for this reason — that he has, by preaching 
the word, dra\Mi to him the people living under the 
law. When he had been rewarded to his great satisfaction, 
the second came, saying: "Lord, thy pound hath gained 
five pounds." This servant represents the company of 
those who were sent to announce the gospel to the uncir- 
cumcised, and are deservedly, by a divine decree, placed 
at the head of those who, through their ministry, are con- 
verted to the worship of one God, having mortified the 
deeds of the flesh. On the other hand, the servant who, 

^ Matt. XX. 18, 19, 30—34; Mark x. 32—34, 46—52; Luke xviii. 31—43. 
2 Luke xix. 1 — 10. ' Ephes. iv. 5, 6. 



CHAP. XIV.] RAISING OF LAZARUS. 51 

when lie was commanded to trade with the money entrusted 
to him by his master, kept tlie pound laid up in a napkin, 
is the figure of those who, although they may be fit 
persons for preaching the gospel, in obedience to the 
Lord's commands, through the church, either decline to 
undertake that duty, or perform it unworthily. To tie up 
the money in a napkin, is to conceal the gifts we havt 
received in sloth and uselessness. By this parable, then 
we understand that the two faithful servants are th( 
teachers of both peoples ; that the ten pounds and th 
five pounds mean believers in Grod; that by the wicked 
servant are represented bad Catholics ; by the enemies, 
who would not allow the real heir to reign over them, 
the impiety of those who prefer never to hear the word oi 
truth, or corrupt it by false interpretations. By reaping 
where seed had not been sown,^ he means the separation of 
those who never heard the word of God. The whole human 
race that is to appear at the day of judgment, is certainly 
represented by these five persons. And when he had thus 
spoken, he went before, ascending up to Jerusalem.^ 

St. John alone mentions that, at the feast of the dedi- 
cation, in the winter, the Jews said to Jesus, who was 
walking in Solomon's porch : " How long dost thou make 
us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly." 
Taking advantage of this opportunity of teaching them, he 
answered : " I and my Father are one ; " and uttered many 
other sublime words. Tor this reason the Jews, blinded 
by malice, took up stones to stone him [but he escaped 
out of their hand]. After this, he went away again be- 
yond Jordan, into the place where John at first baptized; 
and there he abode. And many resorted unto him, and 
believed on him there. ^ 

Ch. XI Y. Lazarus restored to life. 

A CEETAiisr man, named Lazarus, was sick at Bethany; 
and his sisters, Mary and Martha, sent unto Jesus, saying : 
" Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick." When 
Jesus heard that, he said : " This sickness is not unto 
death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God 

•^ Luke xix. 21. ^ ^[.^^^^ j.^y i4_3o. Luke xix. 11—20. 

3 John X. 22—42. 

E 2 



52 OEDEEICrS YITALIS. [bOOK I. 

migHt be glorified thereby." Then be abode two days in 
the same place, and after that went into Judea again, 
and found that Lazarus had lain in the grave four days 
already. Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was 
coming, being strong in faith, went and met him, and said : 
" Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died." 
She who loudly lamented the loss of her brother, spoke to 
our Lord with composure, and after a short conference with 
Christ, during which she made a true confession of faith, 
that is to say, acknowledged him to be the Son of God, the 
life and the resurrection, she called Mary her sister, saying 
to her in a low voice : " The Master is come, and calleth for 
thee." Mary arose quickly, and went out of the town to 
the place where Jesus had stopped ; and when she saw him, 
she fell down at his feet, saying : " Lord, if thou hadst been 
here, my brother had not died." He — an inexhaustible 
fountain of pity — wept, in the midst of her friends weeping,, 
the death of the friend they had lost ; but his tears caused 
them ineffable joy. Jesus, groaning in himself, came to the 
grave, and commanded them to take away the stone from 
the mouth, and then, with a loud voice, called him who, in 
four days, had become putrid: "Lazarus, come forth." And 
straightway he came forth, bound hand and foot with grave- 
clothes ; and the Lord immediately ordered his disciples to 
loose him and let him go. After the performance of this 
glorious miracle, which ought to be celebrated to the 
end of time, they did not all believe in Jesus, but many of 
the Jews who came to Mary and Martha to comfort them, 
and saw the unhoped-for resurrection of Lazarus, confessed 
their belief in Christ.^ 

There is no doubt but that the Lord raised several per- 
sons from the dead ; however, in the holy Grospel, by reason 
of a certain mystery, we read of three resurrections only. 
By the daughter of the chief of the synagogue, who was re- 
stored to life in her father's house before a small number of 
witnesses, those sinners are signified, who shut up their sinful 
propensities within their conscience, and do not sufier them to 
break out. These are often raised to spiritual life by a divine 
influence, which recalls them by secret checks from a de- 
praved will. The son of the widow, who was carried beyond 

^ John XL 1—45. 



CKAP. Xiy.] EAISIXa OF THE DEAD. 53 

the gates of the city, and restored to life by Christ before 
a multitude of witnesses, represents those guilty persons, 
who, after consenting to perpetrate a crime, go forth, and, 
as it were, draw death from the darkest recesses of their 
soul ; so that what was hidden in a secret corner, at last 
appears before the whole world. Such men are often admo- 
nished to their salvation, and restored to life in a divine 
manner by the remedy of a true conversion, as many 
know to their great joy. In Lazarus, already buried, already 
in a state of putrefaction, we have a figure of those sinners 
who are fettered with the bonds of depraved habits, to such 
a degree that wickedness has become so familiar to them, 
that it does not allow them to become sensible of the 
heinousness of the sin that they are committing ; for which 
reason they often excuse the evil they do ; and are already 
crushed, as it were, under the immense weight of theii 
guilt. They presume to be angry when they are reproved, 
and are continually depraved by false praise, while their 
neighbours, observing them, are also injured. Lastly, those 
who, in the opinion of the world, are considered worthy of 
condemnation, are nevertheless internally vivified by the 
grace of Grod, and are afterwards absolved through the 
agency of the priest. 

Or in other words, every man is born in a state of death 
brought on us by original sin. The first day of death is that 
which witnesses his birth ; the second day, when, as he in- 
creases in stature, the boy becomes a man ; arriving at years 
of discretion, he begins to find innately in his own heart the 
law which naturally teaches men not to do unto others what 
they would not have others do unto them: but, unfortu- 
nately, they often venture to transgress this law. The third 
day of death takes place when the written law is given to 
man, but this also he despises. After all Christ came; 
brought with him the Gospel, preached the kingdom of 
heaven, threatened all sinners with the torments of Gre- 
henna, but promised eternal life to the righteous. The 
Gospel itself is despised, and this is the fourth day of death, 
as Lazarus lay in the tomb. Or again, we might say, 
that the four steps that lead a sinner to destruction, and 
bring him to the grave in which he decays, are : firstly, in- 
clination of the heart ; secondly, consent ; thirdly, action ; 



54 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [bOOK I. 

fourthly, habit. But the grace of God recalls those who 
have been removed far from him by sin, and restores to life 
those vrho were sinking imder the weight of their sins. 

When the wonderful miracle of the divine power was 
published abroad by the reports of many witnesses, who, to 
satisfy their curiosity, had examined on the spot by what 
unknown law Lazarus issued from the grave, the chief 
priests and the Pharisees gathered a council to conspire 
against Christ ; and when they heard what Caiaphas pro- 
phesied, they took counsel together to put him to death. 
Jesus, therefore, went thence unto a country near to the 
wilderness, into a city called Ephrem, and there conti- 
nued with his disciples. Now, both the chief priests 
and their accomplices had given a commandment that if 
any man knew where he was, he should make it known, 
that they might take him : for they were afraid that all 
men would follow him, and that the E/Omans would come 
and take away the kingdom from them.^ 

Then Jesus, six days before the passover, came to Bethany, 
and there they made him a supper ; and Martha served, 
but Lazarus sat at the table. Then took Mary a pound of 
omtment of spikenard [unr/itentum nardi jnstici], very 
costly, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped them 
with her hair. Spikenard is a kind of aromatic. JPistis 
[_'7rtartg] in Greek, Jldes in Latin, means faith ; for that 
reason the ointment is called pisticum, that is to say, faith- 
ful, because a corpse, when anointed with it, is preserved 
from putrefaction. The house was filled with the 
odour of the ointment, as the church is perfumed by the 
good report of a religious life. When the traitor Judas, 
who was a thief, and had the bag, smelt the sweet odour 
with which the house was filled, he was ofiended, and re- 
buked this faithful and devoted woman for what she had 
done. But the Lord mildly answered his harsh upbraid- 
ings ; " Let her alone, for she hath wrought a good work 
upon me. Verily I say unto you, in the whole world shall 
this, that this woman hath done, be told for a memorial of 
her."2 

Many Jews who went to Bethany, drawn thither by their 

1 John xi. 46 — 57. 

^ Matt. xxvi. 6— 13j Mark xiv. 3 — 9; John xii. 1—8. 



CHAP. XV.] CnmST's entry into JERUSALEM. 53 

curiosity, saw Lazarus eating at the same table as Christ, 
and joyfully bore witness to the miracle. The jealous 
Pharisees consulted that they might, therefore, put the 
resuscitated man to death ; but in vain did they endeavour 
to oppose the almighty power of Christ.^ 

Ch. XY. Ckrisfs triumpliant entry into Jerusalem—- 
Teaclies in the Temple. 

On the next day much people who ^"cre come to the 
feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jeru- 
salem, took branches of palm-trees, and went forth to meet 
him. As the hour of his immolation drew nigh, the Lamb of 
God proceeded towards the spot that was to witness his 
passion. "When he was come to Bethphage, unto the 
Mount of Olives, Jesus sent forth two of his disciples, say- 
ing : " Gro into the village over against you, and straightway 
ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her : loose them, and 
bring them unto me." And the disciples went and brought 
the ass and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and 
they set him thereon, that it might be fulfilled which was 
spoken by the prophet long before: "Behold, thy king 
cometh unto thee," — not sitting in a golden chariot arrayed 
in splendid purple, nor does he mount a fiery steed, to take 
the lead in discord and strife, — but is sitting upon an ass, 
that loves tranquillity and peace. He is not surrounded 
with glittering swords, but he cometh unto thee, meek ; not 
to be dreaded for his power, but to be loved for his gentle- 
ness. And a very great multitude spread their garments 
in the way ; others cut down branches from the trees, and 
strawed them in the way. And the multitudes that went 
before, and that followed, cried, saying: "Hosanna to the 
Son of David ! Blessed is he that cometh in the name of 
the Lord ! Blessed be the kingdom of our father David ! 
Hosanna in the highest!" Some of the Pharisees said 
unto him, " Master, rebuke thy disciples ;" but he answered 
and said unto them, " I tell you, that if these should hold 
their peace, the stones would immediately cry out."^ And 
when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over 
it, and, as he foreknew every thing that was to happen, 

' John xii. 9 — 11. 

2 Matt. xxi. 1—9; Mark xi. 1— 10; Luke xix. 29—40; John xii. 12—15. 



56 - OKDEEICTJS YITALI3. [eOOK I. 

foretold all the ills tliat threatened it, because it knew not 
the time of its visitation. And when he was come into 
Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying : " "Who is 
this ?" And the multitude said, " This is Jesus, the pro- 
phet of Nazareth of Galilee." Jesus went into the temple 
of Grod, and cast out all them that sold and bought, 
and overthrew the tables of the money-changers, and the 
seats of them that sold doves, saying : " It is written, My 
house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have 
made it a den of thieves."^ And the blind and the lame 
came to him in the temple, and he healed them. And 
when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things 
that he did, and the children crying, with signs of grateful 
joy: "Hosanna to the Son of David!" they were sore 
displeased, and, filled with bitter envy, they said unto him : 
" Hearest thou what these say ?" Jesus answered, " Yea, 
have ye never read. Out of the mouth of babes and suck- 
lings thou hast perfected praise ?"' 

And when Jesus had looked round about upon all things, 
he left these evil-disposed inhabitants of the city, and went 
out unto Bethany with the twelve, and lodged there. Now 
in the morning, as he returned into the city, he hungered, 
and coming to a fig-tree that stood by the wayside, and 
finding nothing thereon but leaves only, he cursed it, say- 
ing: "Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever." 
And presently the fig-tree withered away I This tree was 
the true figure of the synagogue, which had the letter of 
the law, but bore no fruit.^ 

In the temple, they asked him by what authority he 
did such wonderful things ; but instead of answering their 
question, he inquired of them whether the baptism of 
John was from heaven or of men. Christ by this short 
question baffled their crafty designs, and stopped their 
mouths ; for malice prevented their confessing the truth, 
that it came from heaven, and they were not bold enough 
to deny it openly, because they feared the people. 

He then laid before them the parable of the two sons, 

1 Isa. Ivi. 7 ; Jer. vii. 11; Matt. xxi. 10 — 13; Mark xi. 15 — 17; Luke- 
xix. 41 — 46; John ii. 13 — 16. 

2 Matt, xxi. 14—16. 

» Matt. xxi. 17—19; Mark xi. 11—14, 20. 



CHAP. XT.] TIllBUTE-MONEY. 57 

whom their father sent to work in his vinevard ; and who 
began and ended their day so differently ; for one obeyed 
the will of his father, not in word, but in deed ; while the 
other disobeyed him, and showed his contempt of his father's 
authority not by word of mouth, but by his actions.^ 

The Lord also added the parable of the householder 
which planted a vineyard, and let it out to husbandmen, 
and went into a far country. Now these men took the 
servants whom he had sent to receive the fruits of the 
vineyard, and beat one, as Jeremiah ; killed another, as 
Isaiah ; stoned another, as Naboth and Zacharias ; and, 
lastly, crucified the Son of God. The servants suc- 
cessively sent typify the law, the psalms, and the pro- 
phecies ; by whose teaching men might learn to do 
right. But the messengers are beaten and driven away, 
when the word is despised, or, what is worse, blasphemed. 
He who tramples under foot the Son of Grod, and does 
despite unto the Spirit of grace, kills, as far as he is 
able, the heir to the vineyard. When the wicked hus- 
bandman is destroyed, the vineyard is given to another ; 
while the proud lose the gift of grace, the humble receive 
it." 

Jesus spake a third parable unto them, of a certain 
king which made a marriage for his son; and when they 
that were bidden to the wedding made light of it, he sent 
forth his armies, and punished them.^ 

The Pharisees with the Herodians tempted him, by 
asking if it were lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or 
not. When they had brought unto him a penny, Jesus 
answered : " Eender unto Ca?sar the things that are Caesar's, 
and unto God the things that are God's." * 

The Sadducees also attempted to make him fall into 
a snare, by describing the case of the woman who had 
seven husbands, and asking him : " In the resurrection, 
whose wife shall she be of them?" Jesus answered: 
" Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of 
God. For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are 

> Matt. xxi. 23—32; Mark xi. 27—33; Luke xx. 1—8. ^^ 
2 Matt. xxi. 33-»41 ; Mark xii. 1—9; Luke xx. 9-16. 
' Matt. xxiL . — 7. 
* Matt. xxii. 15—21; Mark xii. 13—17; Luke xx. 20—25. 



58 ORDERICUS YITALIS. [bOOJv I. 

given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven." 
In this manner the good Master inspires the children of 
the church vrith confidence, that, at the resurrection, they 
will enjoy the vision of Grod, unspotted by corruption/ 

When he was questioned by the doctor of the law as to 
which was the great commandment in it, he said : " Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy Grod with all thy heart, and with all 
thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great 
commandment. And the second is like unto it: Thou 
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two com- 
mandments hang all the law and the prophets." He now 
asked the Pharisees whose son Christ was ; and confounded 
them, showing them that he was the Lord of David, and thus 
put them to silence so effectually, that no man " durst, 
from that day forth, ask him any more questions;" but 
now they began openly to take steps to deliver him into the 
hands of the E-omans.' Then spake Jesus to the multitude, 
and to his disciples : " The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in 
Moses' seat; all, therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, 
that observe and do ; but do not ye after their works : for they 
say and do not. For they bind heavy burdens, and grievous 
to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders ; but they them- 
selves will not move them with one of their fingers. But 
all their works they do to be seen of men ; they make broad 
their phylacteries, and enlarge tlie borders of their gar- 
ments, and love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the 
chief seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the markets, 
and to be called of men, Eabbi. But be not ye called 
Kabbi; for one is your Master, and all ye are brethren. 
And call no man your father upon the earth; for one is 
your Pather, which is in heaven. Neither be ye called 
masters ; for one is your Master, even Christ. But he that 
is greatest among you shall be your servant. And whosoever 
shall exalt himself shall be abased ; and he that shall humble 
himself shall be exalted. Woe unto you. Scribes and 
Pharisees, hypocrites, who shut up the kingdom of heaven 
against men ; for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer 
ye them that are entering to go in." In this manner Jesus 
uttered many things for the benefit of mankind, teaching 

^ Matt. xxii. 23—30; Mark xii. 18—27; Luke xx. 27—36. 
2 Matt. xxii. 34—46; Mark xii. 28—37; Luke xx. 41 — 44. 



CHAP. XY.] DESTRUCTION^' OF THE TEMPLE FOEETOLD. 59 

the simple, but confounding the hypocrites. He spoke 
of those who swear by the temple, and by the gold that 
is in the temple ; of the altar, and the gifts that are 
thereon; of the divine mercy, which had sent unto them 
prophets, and wise men, and scribes, and of the cruelty 
of the Jews, which was exhibited in the various kinds of 
death which they inflicted upon those who were sent from 
God. He mourned over Jerusalem, lamenting, not the 
buildings, but the inhabitants. Twice he repeated, in a 
sorrowful tone : " O Jerusalem, Jerusalem ! which slew the 
prophets, and would not repent of her wickedness." ^ 

On Jesus departing from the temple, and his disciples 
pointing to the magnificent buildings, he answered : 
" There shall not be left one stone upon another, that 
shall not be thrown down." And as he sat upon the 
Mount of Olives, his disciples privately questioned him, as 
Matthew and Mark affirm, about the time and the signs 
of this predicted destruction. To their inquiry as to when 
the end of the world should be, he answered that many 
great calamities would come to pass before that day, v/ars 
between nation and nation, earthquakes in divers places, 
pestilences, and famines ; fearful sights from heaven, and 
great signs. He foretold many things relating to the per- 
secutions they would have to suffer, and to his own coming 
on the earth ; warning the faithful, when they were delivered 
up, to take no thought beforehand what they should speak, 
but in their patience to possess their souls. He predicted 
that Jerusalem would be compassed with an army, and then 
woe unto them that are with child ; that they would fall 
by the edge of the sword, or be led away captive into all 
nations ; that there would be signs in heaven ; and that 
they would see him coming in a cloud with power and great 
glory. " Then look up," said he, " for your redemption 
draweth nigh." Porbidding drunkenness and the cares of 
this life, he exhorted them to watch and to pray always. 
He rebuked the scribes for their pride, and declared that 
the widow who threw two mites into the treasury had cast 
in more than they all.^ 

In the parable of the fig-tree, he teaches us how the end 

^ Matt, xxiii.; Mark xii. 38—40; Luke xx. 45 — 47. 

2 ^latt. xxiv.; Mark xii. 38 — 44 j xiii.; Luke xx. 45 — 47 J xxi. 1 — 36. 



60 OEDEEICTJS TTTALIS. [bOOK I. 

of the world will come. He relates the parables of the ten 
virgins, and of the householder who left his servants in 
charge of his goods, and went into a far country ; describes 
the advent of the Son of man in his glory, and all the holy 
angels with him ; speaks of the sheep that are to be set on 
his right hand, separated from the goats that are to be 
placed on his left ; of the retribution of the wicked, who 
are to go away into everlasting punishment ; and of the 
reward of the righteous, who are to go away into life 
eternal.^ 

Ch. XYI. The Jioly supper instituted — Ohrisfs discourse. 

Now, the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, 
the disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him : " Where 
wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the Pass- 
over?" And he said unto Peter and John: "Go ye into 
the city, to a certain man, whom one bearing a pitcher of 
water shall point out to you; follow him into the house 
where he entereth in, and say ye to the good man of the 
house : Where is the guest-chamber, where I shall eat the 
Passover with my disciples ? And he will shew you a large 
upper room furnished ; there make ready." And they went 
forth, and found as he had said unto them ; and they made 
ready the Passover. And in the evening, he came with the 
twelve, and as they sat he said unto them : " With desire I 
have desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. 
Por I say imto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be 
fulfilled in the kingdom of Grod."^ According to St. John,^ 
the supper being ended, the devil having now put into the 
heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray him ; Jesus, 
knowing that the Pather had given all things into his 
hands, and that he was come from Grod and went to Grod, 
rose from supper, and laid aside his garments, and took 
a towel, and girded himself. After that, he poured water 
into a basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to 
wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded. After 
he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and 
was set down again, he said unto them : " Know ye what I 

1 Matt. xxiv. 32, 33 ; xxv.; Mark xiii. 28, 29 ; Luke xix. 11—27. 
■■* Matt. xxvi. 17 — 20; Mark xiv. 12 — 17; Luke xxii. 7 — 16. 
'^ John xiii. 1 — 20. 



CHAP. XVI.] THE LAST SUPPEE. 61 

have done to you ? Yc call me Master and Lord, and ye 
say well ; for so I am. If I, then, your Lord and Master, 
have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's 
feet." And so on, until he says: "He that receiveth me, 
receiveth him that sent me." 

Saint Matthew relates that, as his disciples did eat, Jesus 
said : " Yerily I say unto you, that one of you shall 
betray me." And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began 
every one of them to say: "Lord, is it I?" And he 
answered and said : " He that dippeth his hand with me in 
the dish, the same shall betray me." And, as they were 
eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and 
gave it to the disciples, and said : " Take, eat ; this is my 
body." And taking the cup, he gave thanks, and gave it to 
them, saying : " Drink ye all of it ; for this is my blood of 
the New Testament, which is shed for many for the remis- 
sion of sins. But I say unto you : I will not drink hence- 
forth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink 
it new with you in my Father's kingdom."^ 

The Lord, on the night when he was delivered up, prayed 
three times ; to show us that we should pray to be par- 
doned for our past sins, to be protected from present 
evils, and to be warned against future perils ; addressing 
all our prayers to the Father, and the Son, and the Holy 
Ghost. It is also to be remarked that as the temptation 
of desire is triple, so is also the temptation of fear : lust 
of the flesh, lust of the eyes, worldly ambition; fear of 
death, fear of shame, fear of pain. Against all which he 
teaches us that we ought to fortify ourselves by prayer. 
For which reason we understand why the Lord prayed three 
times on account of the triple temptation of his passion. 

That great divine, St. John, relates that Jesus, after he 
had washed the feet of Peter, who reluctantly submitted, 
and the other apostles, obscurely pointed out his betrayer by 
referring to the mysterious prophecies contained in Scrip- 
ture, saying : " He that eateth bread with me will lift up 
his heel against me." Afterwards, when he had determined 
to make him better kno^\ii, he was troubled in spirit, and 
testified, and said: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that 
one of you shall betray me." Then the disciples looked 
1 Matt. xxvL 21—29; Mark xiv. 18—25; Luke xxii. 17—23. 



OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [bOOK I. 

one on anotlier, doubting of whom he spake. And Simon 
Peter beckoned to John, who was leaning on Jesus' 
bosom, and John asked him: "Lord, who is it?" Jesus 
answered : " He it is to whom I shall give a sop, when I 
have dipped it." And when he had dipped the sop, he 
gave it to Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon. And after the 
sop, Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus unto him . 
'• That thou doest, do quickly." Now no man at the table 
knew for what intent he spake this unto him. He then 
went immediately out ; and it was night. Therefore, when 
he was gone out, Jesus said: "Now is the Son of man 
glorified, and God is glorified in him." And many other 
words of deep meaning spake Jesus, concerning the true 
love of Grod and of one's neighbour, the unity of the Tri- 
nity, Peter's denying him thrice, and the coming of the Hoi}'' 
Grhost to comfort them ; on the observance of G-od's com- 
mandments, and the rewards prepared for the righteous ; of 
the persecutions of the faithful, and the inevitable condem- 
nation of the wicked ; the dispersion of his disciples ; and his 
own passion, now nigh at hand. 

When Jesus had finished this incomparable discourse, he 
lifted up his eyes to heaven, and audibly addressed a com- 
passionate prayer to his Pather on behalf of his disciples and 
all those that should believe in God through their word. 
In this prayer the merciful speaker implored his Father to 
grant us much more than our human frailty would ever 
presume to ask.^ 

Then, according to St. Luke, there was a strife among his 
disciples, which of them should be accounted the greatest ; 
but their heavenly Teacher recalled them to a sense of 
humility by his example and sayings. He thus kindly put 
a stop to the contention among his weak-minded disciples, 
declaring that his love for them led him to be their servant. 
He also promised a kingdom to those who had continued 
with him in his temptations ; and, after further discourse 
he said to Peter, when rashly boasting : " Simon, behold, 
Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as 
wheat ; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not ; 
and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren." 
And he said unto him : " Lord, I am ready to go with thee, 

* John xiii. 18 — xvii. 26. 



CHAP. XYII.] CUEIST AEEESTED. 63 

both into prison and to death." Jesus answered: "I tell 
thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this day before that 
thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me." And he said 
unto them : " When I sent you without purse, and scrip, 
and shoes, lacked ye anything?" And they said: "No- 
thing." Then said he unto them : " But now, he that hath 
a purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip ; and he that 
hath no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one." 
And they said : " Behold, here are two swords." And ho 
said : " It is enough."^ 

Ch. XYII. Christ arrested — Arraigned hefore the 
Sanhedrim — and hefore Herod and PiJate. 

AifD when they had sung an hymn, as Mattliew and 
Mark relate, they went out to the Mount of Olives. 
Then saith Jesus unto them : " All ye shall be offended 
because of me this night." And they came to a place 
called Gethsemane, which signifies the valley of fat things, 
or of fatness ; and he saith unto the disciples : " Sit ye 
here, and pray, lest ye enter into temptation." And he 
taketh with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and 
began to be sore amazed and sorrowful, and very heavy. 
And he was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast, and 
kneeled down and prayed, saying : " Father, if thou be 
willing, remove this cup from me ; nevertheless, not my will, 
but thine, be done." And there appeared an angel unto 
him from heaven, strengthening him ; and being in an agony, 
lie prayed more earnestly ; and his sweat was, as it were, 
drops of blood, falling down to the ground. We under- 
stand that on the other side of the brook Cedron, there 
was a garden, into the which ho entered, and his disciples. 
Judas also knew the place ; so, having received a band of 
men and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, he 
came thither with lanterns, and torches, and weapons. And 
forthwith he came to Jesus, and said : " Hail, master ; and 
kissed him." Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus, 
and took him. Then Jesus, as St. John informs us, said 
unto them: "Whom seek ye?" They answered him: 
"Jesus of Nazareth." As soon as he had said: "I am 

1 Luke xxii. 24—38. 



64< ohdeeicus vitalis. [book i. 

he," they went backward, and fell to the ground, and so 



on.^ 



St. Luke tells us that, when they which were about him 
saw what would follow, they said unto him : " Lord, shall 
we smite with the sword ?" Then Peter smote the high 
priest's servant (Malchus), and cut oiF his right ear. 
Jesus answered their question by saying : " Suffer ye thus 
far." And he immediately added, addressing Peter, who 
had made use of the sword, as St. Matthew records : " Put 
up again thy sword into his place ; for all they that take the 
sword shall perish by the sword. Thinkest thou that I 
cannot now pray to my Pather, and he shall presently give 
me more than twelve (thousand) legions of angels ? But 
how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must 
be?" "We may add to these words what St. John tells 
us he said also in this place : " The cup w^hich my Pather 
hath given me, shall I not drink it ? " Then, as St. Luke 
says, he touched the ear of Malchus, and healed him. In 
that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes : " Are ye 
come out, as against a thief, with swords and staves for to 
take me ? I sat daily with you teaching in the temple, and 
ye laid no hold on me. But this is your hour and the 
power of darkness." Then all the disciples forsook him and 
lied. One young man followed him having a linen cloth cast 
about his naked body ; and when they laid hold on him, he 
left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked. The captain, 
with his band, and the officers of the Jews, came among the 
crowd, and they bound our Saviour, and led him away to 
Annas first, for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, and high 
priest that same year.^ 

But Peter followed him afar off, unto the high priest's 
palace, and went into the hall, to see the end, and there he 
sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the fire, for it 
was cold. Now this fire was kindled in the midst of the 
hall, and when the servants had seated themselves round 
it, Peter placed himself among them. St. Peter is to be 
regarded with great veneration for following the Lord in 

^ Matt. xxvi. 30—50 ; Mark xiv. 26—46 ; Luke xxii. 39—48 ; John 
xviii. ] — 9. 

^ Matt. xxvi. 51 — 57 J Mark xiv. 47—53; Luke xxii. 49 — 54; John 
xviii. 10 — 14. 



CHAP. XYIT."] PETEE's DENIAL OF CHKIST. 65 

spite of his fear. It was natural for him to fear ; his follow- 
ing his Master was a token of devotion ; his denial, of deceit ; 
his repentance, of faith.^ 

Now the chief priests and all the council sought false 
witness against Jesus, to put him to death ; but found none, 
though many false witnesses came. "When Jesus held his 
peace, the high priest said unto him : " I adjure thee, by 
the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, 
the Son of God." Jesus said unto him : " Thou hast said." 
Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying: " He hath 
spoken blasphemy ; what further need have we of witnesses ? 
Behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy. What think 
ye ? " They answered : " He is guilty of death." Then did 
they spit in his face, and strike him with the palms of their 
hands ; some began to cover his face, others buffeted him, 
saying : " Prophesy unto us, thou Christ ; who is he that 
smote thee ? " AV'e understand that the Lord suffered all 
these things during the night he passed in the house of 
the chief priest, into which he was first led; there, also. 
Peter was tempted, while all these insults were offered to 
the Lord. According to St. Mark, the triple denial of St. 
Peter was begun before the first crowing of the cock, and 
finished before the cock crew again. The three other evan- 
gelists relate that, before the first crowing, St. Peter had 
showed all these signs of grief and fear. Then Peter 
called to mind the word that Jesus said unto him : " Before 
the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice." And he went 
out, and wept bitterly.'^ 

The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples and his 
doctrine. Jesus answered him : *' I spake openly to the 
M'orld, I plainly taught in the synagogue and in the temple, 
whither the Jews always resort ; and in secret have I said 
nothing. "Why askest thou me ? Ask them which heard 
me, what I have said unto them ; behold, they know what 
I said." And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers 
which stood by struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, 
saying : " Answerest thou the high priest so ? " Jesus 
answered him : " If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the 

^ Matt. xxvi. 58; Mark xiv. 54; Luke xxii. 54 — 62; John xviii. 15, 18. 
* Matt. xxvi. 5.9—75; Mark xiv. 55—7-; Luke xxii. 56—65; John 
xviil 17, 25-27. 

TOL. I. S 



66 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [bOOK I. 

evil ; but if well, why smitest thou me ? " Now Annas had 
sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest.^ 

"When the morning was come, as Matthew relates,* 
all the chief priests and elders of the people took counsel 
against Jesus to put him to death ; and when they had bound 
him, they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius 
Pilate, the governor. St. Luke^ has given an account of 
what happened to our Lord about dawn, when the men 
that held him mocked him and smote him; and when 
they had blindfolded him, they struck him on the face ; and 
many things blasphemously spake they against him. And 
as soon as it was day, the elders of the people, and the chief 
priests, and the scribes came together, and led him into 
their council, saying : " If thou art the Christ, tell us." And 
he said unto them : " If I teU you, ye will not believe ; and 
if I also ask you, ye wiW not answer me, nor let me go. 
Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of the 
power of Grod.'' Then said they all : " Art thou, then, the 
Son of God ? " And he said unto them : " Ye say that I 
am." And they said : "What need we any further witness ? 
for we ourselves have heard of his own mouth." And 
the whole multitude of them arose, and led him unto 
Pilate. Luke has recounted these circumstances; but 
Matthew and Mark have related all that befell our Lord 
until morning; afterwards they return to their account 
of Peter's denial ; and when this is finished, they go back to 
what took place early in the morning, and continue their 
narrative of all that happened to our Saviour from that 
time. 

St. John* says: then led they Jesus to Caiaphas,* 
unto the hall of judgment [pragtorium] : and it was early; 
and they themselves went not into the judgment-hall, lest 
they should be defiled, but that they might eat the passover. 
But the base crowds assembled there, bringing the Lord 
with them, as if he were already convicted, and, with the con- 
sent of Caiaphas, to whom it had before appeared expedient 
that Jesus should die, no delay was allowed to intervene 
before he was delivered to Pilate to be condemned. 

^ John xviii. 19 — 24. ^ Chap, xxvii. 1, 2; Mark xv. 1. 

^ Chap. xxii. 63 — xxiii. 1. * John xviii. 28. 

^ According to St. John, from Caiaphas. 



CHAP. XYII.] CHEIST AERAIGNED BEFOEE PILATE. 67 

St. Matthew ^ is the only evangelist who mentions the 
death of the traitor Judas, which he does in these words : 
" Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw tliat he 
was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the 
thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, saying: 
* I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood.' 
And they said, ' AVhat is that to us ? see thou to that.' And 
he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, 
and went and hanged himself. The chief priests took the 
silver pieces, and said : ' It is not lawful for to put them 
into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.' And 
they took counsel, and bought with them the potter's field, 
to bury strangers in. Wherefore that field is called, ' Acel- 
dama,' that is, the field of hlood, unto this day. Then 
was fulfilled all that had been foretold long before."^ 

And now the holy evangelists take pains to describe, in 
regular order, all that happened to our Lord before Pilate ; 
facts which the studious reader ought himself to investigate 
with diligence, and put each in its proper place. During 
the passion of Christ, many things were said, and many 
questions answered, as Augustine, bishop of Hippo, judi- 
ciously remarks, in the third book of his work, called : " The 
Harmony of the Evangelists," from which each of the holy 
writers selected what seemed to him expedient, and inserted 
in his history what, in his judgment, sufficed. Matthew 
relates that Jesus stood before the governor, who, asking 
him if he were the king of the Jews, he answered: "Thou 
sayest." Pilate then went out, as we read in the gospel 
according to St. John, to those who would not enter 
the judgment-hall, and said : " "What accusation bring 
you against this man ? " They answered : " If he were 
not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto 
thee." Then said Pilate unto them: " Take ye him, and judge 
him according to your law." The Jews said unto him : " It 
is not lawful for us to put any man to death." Then Pilate 
entered into the judgment-hall again, and called Jesus, and 
said unto him : "Art thou the king of the Jews ? " Jesus 
answered : " Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others 

1 Chap, xxvii. 3—9; Acts i. 18, 19. 

^ St. ^Matthew quotes Jeremiah, in whose prophecy no such passage is 
extant. See Zachar. xi. 12, 13. 

F 2 

■ 



68 OEDEKICUS TITALIS. [bOOK I. 

tell it tliee of me ? " Pilate answered : " Am I a Jew ? 
Thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered thee 
unto me. What hast thou done ? " Jesus answered : " My 
kingdom is not of this world ; if my kingdom were of this 
world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be 
delivered to the Jews ; but now is my kingdom not from 
hence." Pilate therefore said unto him : " Art thou a king, 
then ? " Jesus answered : " Thou sayest that I am a king. 
To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the 
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every 
one that is of the truth heareth mv voice." Pilate saith 
uuto him : " AVhat is truth ? " And when he had said this, 
he went out again unto the Jews, and saith unto them : " I 
find in him no fault at all." Then, as Luke relates, the Jews, 
becoming furious, began to accuse him, saying : " We found 
this fellow perverting the nation, and forbidding to give 
tribute to Caesar, saying that he himself is Christ a king." 
And when, as Matthew says, he was accused of the chief 
priests and elders of the people, he answered nothing ; 
so great was his meekness ! Then said Pilate unto him : 
" Hearest thou not how many things they witness against 
thee?*' And he answered him never a word; insomuch 
that the governor marvelled greatly. When Pilate was 
sat down on the judgment-seat, his wife sent unto him, 
saying : " Have thou nothing to do with that just man ; for 
I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of 
him." St. Luke writes that, when Pilate said : " I find no 
fault in this man," the Jews were the more fierce, saying : 
" He stirreth up the people, teaching throughout all 
Jewry, beginning from G-alilee to this place." AVhen Pilate 
heard of Galilee, he asked whether the man were a G-alilean; 
and as soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod's juris- 
diction, he sent him to Herod, who himself also was at 
Jerusalem at that time. And when Herod saw Jesus, he 
was exceeding glad ; for he was desirous to see him of a long 
season, because he had heard many things of him, and he 
hoped to have seen some miracle done by him. Then he 
questioned with him in many words ; but he answered him 
nothing. And the chief priests and scribes stood, and 
vehemently accused him. And Herod, with his men of war, 
set him at naught, and arrayed him in a white robe, and 



CHAP. XVII.] CHRIST BEFORE HEROD. 69 

sent him again to Pilate. And tlie same day Pilate and 
Herod were made friends together, for before they were at 
enmity between themselves. 

And Pilate, when he had called together the rulers and 
the people, said unto them : " Ye have brought this man. 
unto me, as one that perverteth the people ; and, behold, 
I, having examined him before you, have found no fault in 
him, touching those things whereof ye accuse him. No, nor 
yet Herod; for I sent you to him, and, lo, nothing worthy 
of death is done unto him. I will therefore chastise him 
and release him." For he knew that for envy they had 
delivered him. Now at that feast the governor was wont 
to release unto the people a prisoner, whom they would. 
Therefore, when they were gathered together, he said unto 
them : " Whom will ye that I release unto you ? Barabbas, 
or Jesus which is called Christ ? " But the chief priests 
persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas, 
and destroy Jesus. Now Barabbas was a notable prisoner, 
who for a certain sedition made in the city, and for murder, 
vv'as cast into prison. The governor said unto them: 
" Whether of the twain will ye that I release unto you ? " 
They said: "Barabbas." Pilate saith unto them: "AVhat 
shall I do then with Jesus, which is called Christ ? " They 
all said unto him : " Let him be crucified." And the governor 
said : " Why ? what evil hath he done ? " But they cried out 
the more, saying : " Let him be crucified." When Pilate saw 
that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was 
made, he took water, and washed his hands before the mul- 
titude, saying : " I am innocent of the blood of this just 
person ; see ye to it." Then answered all the people : " His 
blood be on us, and on our children." Then released he 
Barabbas unto them, and took Jesus, and scourged him." 
iSt. John informs us, that the soldiers platted a crown of 
thorns, and put it on his head, and they put on him a 
purple robe, and coming up to him, said : " Hail, King 
of the Jews ! " And they smote him with their hands. 
Pilate went forth again, and saith unto them : " Behold, I 
bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no 
fault in him." Then came Jesus forth, wearing the crown 
of thorns and the purple robe. And Pilate saith unto 
them : " Behold the man ! " When the chief priests, there- 



(70 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [bOOK I. 

fore, and officers saw him, tliev cried out, saying : " Crucify 
him, crucify him." Pilate saith unto them : " Take ye him, 
and crucify him ; for I find no fault in him." The Jews 
answered him : " We have a law, and by our law he ought 
to die, because he made himself the Son of Grod." "When, 
therefore, Pilate heard that saying, he was the more afraid ; 
and went again into the judgment-hall, and saith unto 
Jesus: "Whence art thou?" But Jesus gave him no 
answer. Pilate therefore said unto him : " Speakest thou 
not unto me ? Knowest thou not that I have power to 
crucify thee, and have power to release thee ? " Jesus 
answered : " Thou couldest have no power against me, except 
it were given thee from above; therefore, he that hath 
delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin." Erom thence- 
forth Pilate sought to release him ; but the Jews cried out, 
saying : " If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's 
friend : whosoever maketh himself a king, speaketh against 
CsBsar." 

Ch. XYIII. Christ sentenced — Orucijied — And hiiried. 

WHETf Pilate, therefore, heard that saying, he brought 
Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment-seat, in a 
place that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, 
" Gi-abbatha." And it was the preparation of the Passover, 
and about the sixth hour ; and he saith unto the Jews : 
" Behold your king ! " But they cried out : " Away with 
him, away with him, crucify him." Pilate saith unto them: 
" Shall I crucify your king ? " The chief priests answered: 
" We have no king but CsBsar." Then delivered he him 
therefore unto them to be crucified.^ 

Such is the account John gives us of what Pilate 
said and did; things that Matthew and Mark, omitting 
at first, afterwards recollected. Thus Matthew says: 
" Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the 
common hall, and gathered unto him the whole band; 
and they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe. 
And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it 
upon his head, and a reed in his right hand; and they 
bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying: " Hail, 

^ Matt, xxvii. 11—26; Mark xv. 1—15; Luke xxiii. 1—25; Johu 
xviii. 28—40. 



CHAP. XYIII.] THE CETJCIFIXIOU". 71 

King of the Jews ! " And they spit upon him, and took 
the reed, and smote him on the head. And after that they 
had mocked him, they took the robe (or the purple, accord- 
ing to St. Mark) oft" from him, and put his own raiment 
on him, and led him away to crucify him. John relates 
that Jesus, " bearing his cross, went forth into a place 
called Golgotha," or Mount Calvary. " And they laid hold 
upon one Simon, a Cyrenian, coming out of the country, 
the father of Alexander and Eufus," a fact mentioned by 
three evangelists ; " and on him they laid the cross, that he 
might bear it" to the place just named. 

They crucified Jesus in (lolgotha, between two malefac- 
tors, and gave him wine mingled with myrrh ; and set up 
over his head his accusation written : " This is Jesus, the 
King of the Jews." And this title was written in Greek, 
and Latin, and Hebrew.^ 

Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took 
his garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part ; 
and also his coat: now the coat was without seam, woven 
from the top throughout. They said therefore among them- 
selves : " Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose it 
shall be ;" that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which saith: 
" They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture 
they did cast lots." ^ 

The rulers and the scribes railed on him as he hanged 
on the cross, wagging their heads, and saying : " Ah ! 
thou that destroyest the temple of Grod, and buildest it 
in three days, save thyself.^ If thou be the Son of God, 
come dovm from the cross." 

"We learn from Luke that one of the malefactors which 
were hanged, railed on him, saying : " If thou be Christ, 
save thyself and us." But the other rebuked him, saying : 
"Dost thou not fear God, seeing thou art in the same 
condemnation ? And we indeed justly, for we receive the 

1 Matt, xxvii. 27—33; Mark xv. 16—22; Luke xxiii. 26; John xix. 17. 

'* Matt, xxvii. 34—38; Mark xv. 23, 25—27; Luke xxiii. 32, 33, 36, 38- 
John xix. 17—20. ' 

^ Psalm xxi. 19; Matt, xxvii. 35; Mark xv. 24; Luke xxiii. 34- John 
xix. 23, 24. 

* We follow here the text of the Bible and Duchesne. The MS. of 
Saint-Evroult reads destrnit et recedijicat in the third person. Matt xxvii 
38—44; Mark xv. 27—32. 



72 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [bOOK: I. 

due reward of our deeds ; but this man hath done nothing 
amiss." And he said unto Jesus: "Lord, remember me, 
when thou comest into thy kingdom." And Jesus said 
unto him : " Verily I say unto thee : To-day shalt thou be 
with me in Paradise."^ 

Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his 
mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleopas, and Mary Mag- 
dalene. AVhen Jesus, therefore, saw his mother, and the 
disciple standing by whom he loved, he saith unto his 
mother: " AVoman, l)ehold thy son." Then saith he to the 
disciple: "Behold thy mother." And from that hour that 
disciple took her unto his own home.'' 

From the sixth hour there was darkness over the whole 
land until the ninth hour, and at the ninth hour Jesus 
cried with a loud voice, saying : " Eli, Eli, lama-zababdani ?" 
that is to say : " My Grod, my Grod, why hast thou forsaken 
me ? " After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now 
accomplished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, saith : 
" I thirst." ]N"ow there was set a vessel full of vinegar; and 
they filled a sponge with vinegar, and put it upon hyssop, 
and put it to his mouth. And when Jesus had cried with a 
loud voice, according to Luke, he said : " Father, into the 
hands I commend my spirit." ^ 

At last, according to John, when Jesus had received 
the vinegar, he said: "It is finished;" and he bowed his 
head, and gave up tlie ghost. And, behold, the veil of the 
temple w^as rent in twain from the top to the bottom ; and 
the earth did quake, and the rocks rent; and the graves 
were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept, 
arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and 
went into the holy city, and appeared unto many. Now 
when the centurion and they that were with him, watching 
Jesus, saw the earthquake and those things that were done, 

1 Luke xxiii. 87, 39—43. 

2 John xix. 25—27. 

3 ]Matt. xxvii. 45—49 ; INIark xv. 33 — 36 ; Luke xxiii. 44 — 46 ; John 
xix. 28, 29. The words which Jesus Christ pronounced when upon the 
cross : Eli, Eli, lama sabachtani ! belong to the Syro-Chaldaic dialect, 
which was spoken at Jerusalem at that period. We find them in Hebrew 
in the twentv-second psalm, ver. 1 : Eli, Eli, lama azabtani ! It seems 
to have been the author's intention to have given them in this latter 
form. 



CKAP. XIX.] THE BUEIAL OF CHEIST. 73 

thej feared greatly, saying : " Truly this was the Son of 
Grod." And many women which followed Jesus from 
Galilee, ministering unto him, stood afar off; among whom 
were Mary Magdalene, and INIary the mother of James and 
Joses, and the mother of Zebedee's children. And all the 
people that came together to that sight, beholding the things 
which were done, smote their breasts, end returned.^ 

AVhen the even was come, Joseph of Arimathea, an 
honourable counsellor, a good man and a just, who also 
himself waited for the kingdom of Grod (being a disciple of 
Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews), went boldly unto 
Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus ; and the governor, when 
he knew of the centurion that he was already dead, gave 
Joseph leave to take it. Joseph came, therefore, and 
took the body of Jesus, and having bought fine linen, he 
wrapped him in the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre. 
And there came also Nicodemus, and brought a mixture of 
myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound weight. Then 
took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen clothes 
with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury. Now 
in the place where he was crucified there was a garden, and 
in the garden a new sepulchre, hewn out of a rock, wherein 
was never man yet laid. There laid they Jesus, therefore, 
because of the Jews' preparation day ; for the sepulchre was 
nigh at hand. The women, whose names we have already 
mentioned, and whose afiection for him was the most ardent, 
sat over against the sepulchre, and beheld where he was 
laid.2 

Now the next day, the priests and Pharisees falsely 
reported to Pilate some of the words of the Lord, and 
liaving obtained his consent, they sealed the stone, and 
placed soldiers all round to keep watch over the sepulchre.^ 

Cn. XIX. Our Lord's resurrection — Harmony of the 
accounts of the evangelists, from St. Augustine. 

We read in the evangelical narrative an account of 

^ Matt, xxvii. 50 — 56; Mark xv. 37—41; Luke xxiii. 46 — 49; John 
xix. .30. 

* Matt, xxvii. 57—61; Mark xv. 42—47; Luke xxiii. 50—55: John 
xix. 3i{— 42. 

3 Matt, xxvii. 62—66. 



74 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [bOOK I. 

several circumstances which took place at the resurrection 
of our Lord, which would appear to be irreconcileable, 
unless the order in which they happened is carefully con- 
sidered. It may, therefore, be well to consult what Augus- 
tine, an enlightened commentator on the holy Scriptures, 
says upon this subject, in the third book of his " Harmony 
of the Evangelists," which I shall quote in his own words. 
Thus, after discussing several questions, he makes this de- 
claration : " I will endeavour, by God's help, to collect in 
one continuous narration all the facts immediately con- 
nected with our Lord's resurrection, according to the 
testimonies of the several evangelists, so far as they can be 
arranged." ^ 

They all agree in the coming [of the women] to the 
sepulchre, as it began to dawn on the first day of the week ; 
before which, however, the facts which Matthew alone 
relates had occurred, viz., the great earthquake, the rolling 
back of the stone, the consternation of the keepers, some of 
whom lay near the spot like dead men. According to John, 
Mary Magdalene came, no doubt with the other women 
who ministered to our Lord, but her affection for him was 
more ardent ; and therefore, with good reason, John makes 
particular mention of her, passing over in silence the names 
of those who, according to the statements of the other 
evangelists, were with her. She came, therefore, and when 
she saw the stone taken away from the sepulchre, before 
she had examined anything attentively, not doubting that 
the body of Jesus was removed, as John tells us, she ran 
to announce to himself, as well as to Simon Peter, what 
she had seen. This John was the disciple whom Jesus 
loved. And they both began to run towards the sepulchre, 
and John, coming first to the place, stooped down, and 
saw the linen clothes lying, yet went he not in. Then 
cometh Peter following him, and went into the sepulchre, 
and seeth the linen clothes lie, and the napkin that was 
about his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but wrap- 
ped together in a place by itself. Then John went in also, 
and saw and believed what Mary had said, that they had 

^ St. Augiist., de Consens, Evangel., iii. 69. The quotation from St. 
Augustine continues to the end of the first paragraph in page 83 here 
following. 



CHAP. XIX.] THE EESTJEEECTT0T5". 75 

taken away the Lord out of the sepulclire ; for as yet they 
knew not tlie scripture, that lie must rise again from the 
dead. Then the disciples went away again unto their own 
home. But Mary stood without at the sepulchre, weeping, 
that is to say, before the spot where the tomb had been 
hewn out of the rock, although within the space where the 
women had already entered. Now in that place there was 
a garden, as John informs us. They then saw on their 
right hand the angel who had rolled back the stone from 
the door of the sepulchre ; and was sitting upon it. Of this 
angel Matthew and Mark speak in the following terms: 
" Then said he unto the women : ' Fear not ye : for I 
know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. He is not 
here ; for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where 
the Lord lay. And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he 
is risen from the dead; and, behold he goeth before you 
into Galilee; there shall ye see him: lo, I have told you.'" 
What Mark relates does not diifer from Matthew's narra- 
tive. 

As Mary wept on hearing these words, she stooped 
do^\'n and looked into the sepulchre, and, as John informs 
us, " saw two angels in white, sitting, the one at the head, 
and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had 
lain. They say unto her: 'Woman, why weepest thou?' 
She saith unto them : ' Because they have taken away my 
Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.' " "We 
must understand that the angels had risen, and that they 
were seen standing, as Luke mentions, when they said to 
the women who were afraid, and bowed down their faces to 
the earth : " Why seek ye the living among the dead ? he 
is not here, but is risen. Eemember how he spake unto you 
when he was yet in Gralilee, saying that the Son of man 
must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be cru- 
cified, and the third day rise again." And they remembered 
his words.^ 

After this, Mary turned herself back, and saw Jesus 
standing, as John tells us, and knew not that it was Jesus, 
Jesus saith unto her : " Woman, why weepest thou ? Whom 
seekest thou?" She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith 

^ Matt, xxviii. 1 — 7; Mark xvi. 1—7; Luke xxiv. 1 — 8; John xx. 1 — 
13. 



76" OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [bOOK I. 

unto him : " vSir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where 
thou hast laid him, and I will take him away." Jesus saith 
unto her: " Mary." She turned herself, and saith unto him 
"E-abboni," which is to say, " Master." Jesus saith unto her 
" Touch me not ; for I am not yet ascended to my Father 
but go to my brethren, and say unto them : ' I ascend unto my 
Father, and your Father; and to my Grod, and your Grod.' " 
She then departed from the sepulchre, that is to say, the 
place where the garden lay before the cave in the rock, ac- 
companied by the other women, who, as Mark informs us, 
"trembled, and were amazed, neither said they anything 
to any man." And as they went, behold, Jesus met them, 
saying : " All hail." And they came, and clung to his feet, 
and worshipped him. From these statements we gather, 
that, during their visit to the tomb, they were twict 
addressed by the angels, as well as by the Lord himself; 
that is to say, the first time when Mary supposed him to 
be the gardener, and afterwards when Jesus came to meet 
them in the way. By appearing twice before these women, 
he confirmed their faith, and allayed their fears. He then 
said unto them : " Be not afraid ; go, tell my brethren, 
that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me." 
Mary Magdalene, therefore, came and told the disciples 
that she had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken these 
things unto her; and not only unto her, but also to the 
other women who are mentioned in the gospel of Luke. 
They told these things unto the eleven disciples, and to 
all the rest ; and their words seemed to them as idle tales, 
and they believed them not. Mark attests these facts. Indeed, 
after he has described the state of these women, who went 
out of the sepulchre trembling and amazed to such a degree 
that they did not say anything to any man ; he adds that, 
when the Lord was risen he appeared first — early the first 
day of the week — to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had 
cast seven devils ; and that she went and told them that had 
been with him, as they mourned and wept, who, when they 
had heard that he was alive, and had been seen of her, 
believed not. Matthew inserts this additional circumstance 
in his narrati^ e, that, after the departure of the women 
who had seen and heard all these things, some of the watch, 
who had fallen to the ground as dead men, came into the 



CHAP. XIX.] CKRIST APPEARS TO HIS DISCIPLES. t7 

city, and shewed unto the chief priests all the things that 
were done, that is to say, all that they had seen and known. 
When the priests were assembled with the elders, and had 
taken counsel, they gave large bribes unto the soldiers to 
induce theui to say that his disciples had stolen him away 
while they slept; promising at the same time to secure them 
from the anger of the governor, who had placed them there 
to guard the tomb. The soldiers took the money, and did 
us they were taught ; and this saying is commonly reported 
among the Jew^s until this day. Luke is the only evangelist 
who does not say that our Saviour appeared to the women, 
but only the angels. IN'ow Matthew asserts that Jesus met 
them on their return from the sepulchre. Mark also assures 
us, as well as John, that he appeared first to Mary Magda- 
lene, but does not tell us how he appeared to her, while 
John explains this.^ 

As the four evangelists agree, in their faithful narratives, 
on all that the Almighty Emmanuel did before his passion ; 
so they relate, in harmony with each other, his resurrection 
and ascension, and inform us that the Lord was seen by 
mortal eyes on ten occasions after he had risen from the dead : 
once by the women at the sepulchre ; again, by these same 
women in the way as they returned from the tomb ; the 
third time he appeared to Simon Peter ; and if the evan- 
gelist has not informed us when or where the meeting took 
place, he plainly declares that it did occur. The fourth 
time, he appeared to the two disciples who were going to 
a village called Emmaus, but in another form, that they 
might not know him ; he accompanied them in the way as 
a traveller, and inquired of them the cause of their sadness 
and of their complaints. AVhen he heard the lamentation of 
Cleopas concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet 
mighty in deed and word before God and all the people, and 
how they delivered him to be condemned to death, he 
gently reproved them for being slow of heart to believe all 
that the prophets had spoken ; and beginning at Moses 
and all the prophets, he expounded unto them the Scrip- 
tures. And they constrained him to accept of their 
hospitality ; and, as he sat at meat with them, he took 

^ Matt, xxviii. 8 — 15; Mark xvi. 8 — 11 ; Luke xxiv. 9 — 12; John xx. 
14—18. 



78 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [bOOK I. 

bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them. And 
while he was breaking the bread, he opened their eyes, that 
they might know him ; and as soon as they had recognized 
him, he vanished out of their sight. His fifth appearance 
was at Jerusalem when several of the disciples were assem- 
bled in the evening, as Luke and John inform us, but 
Thomas was not among them. Jesus entered the place, 
although they had shut the doors ["for fear of the Jews"], 
shewed unto them his hands and his side, took a piece of 
a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb, and did eat before 
them. He then breathed on them, and said unto them : 
"Eeceive ye the Holy Ghost." The sixth time that he 
appeared was after eight days, when Thomas saw him, and 
said: "My Lord and my Grod." The seventh time he 
shewed himself at the Sea of Tiberias, when seven of his 
disciples, who were fishing, saw him in the morning, after a 
night's toil, and ate bread and fish with him on the shore, 
after the miraculous draught of 153 fishes. The eighth 
time he appeared on a mountain in Gralilee, according to 
Matthew; and when they saw him they worshipped him, but 
some doubted. He then said unto them : " All power is 
given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye, therefore, 
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost ; teaching 
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded 
you ; and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the 
world." His ninth visit, Mark tells us, was when he 
appeared for the last time unto the eleven as they sat at 
meat, and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness 
of heart. It is called the last time, because they were not 
to be with him any longer on the earth. His tenth appear- 
ance, as we read in the narrative of Mark and Luke, took 
place on the same day : the disciples saw him not here below, 
but as he was ascendiug into heaven, taken up in a cloud. 
Such was the number of times, that our Saviour is said in 
the writings of the evangelists, to have been seen of man 
before he ascended into heaven ; that is to say, nine times 
on earth, and once as he rose through the air; but, 
as John says, all his acts are not recorded. And, indeed, 
they had many opportunities of being in company with 
him during the forty days that preceded his ascension, 



CHAP. XX.] THE ASCENSION. 79 

although he did not remain with them throughout the 
whole time. John informs us that, between the first day ot 
his resurrection and his next appearance, there was an 
interval of eight days. In this manner, appearing during 
those forty days, as often as he would, to whom he would, and 
as he would, he confirmed his disciples in the belief of his 
resurrection.^ 

Ch. XX. CJirisfs last appearances upon earth — Sis ascen- 
sion — TJie eleven apostles — Matthias elected. 

JNIaek and Luke mention our Lord's two last appear- 
ances, and relate all that was said and done. We read in 
Mark that he upbraided the doubtful, for their hardness of 
heart, but said unto those who were strong in the faith : " Gro 
ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. 
He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved ; but he 
that believeth not shall be damned. And these signs shall 
follow them that believe ; in my name shall they cast out 
devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall take 
up serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not 
hurt them ; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall 
recover." So then after the Lord Jesus had spoken 
unto them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on the 
right hand of God. Moreover Luke at the end of his 
Gospel says : " And he led them out as far as to Bethany, 
and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them. And it came 
to pass, while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and 
carried up into heaven." * Again in the opening chapter of 
the Acts of the Apostles, he speaks of the ascension in 
these words : " And being assembled together with them, he 
commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusa- 
lem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, said he, 
' ye have heard of me ; for John truly baptized with water, 
but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, not many 
days hence.' When they, therefore, were come together, 
they asked of him, saying : ' Lord, wilt thou at this time 
restore again the kingdom to Israel ? ' And he said imto 
them : ' It is not for you to know the times or the seasons 

1 Matt, xxviii. 16—20; Mark xvi. 12—19; Luke xxiv. 13 — 49; John 
XX. 19; xxi. 

■^ Mark xvi. 15 — 19; Luke xxiv. 50, 51, 



80 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [buOK I. 

which the Fathei- hath put in his own power, but ye shall 
receive power after that the Holy Grhost is come upon you ; 
and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and 
in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts 
of the earth.' And when he had spoken these things, while 
they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out 
of their sight. And while they looked stedfastly toward 
heaven, as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in 
white apparel, which also said: 'Ye men of Gralilee, why 
stand ye gazing up into heaven ? this same Jesus which is 
taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner 
as ye have seen him go into heaven.' Then returned they 
unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is from 
Jerusalem a sabbath-day's journey." There, as Luke testi- 
fies, these faithful disciples rejoiced greatly in the triumph 
of their heavenly Master, continued with one accord in 
prayer and supplication, both in the temple and in an 
upper room, and waited with confidence for the promise of 
the Father, as Jesus had commanded them.^ All that they 
had heard him say was fully proved to them by the miracles 
which they saw performed before their own eyes. And, 
indeed, as they had often heard from his own lips that he 
should have to endure the most cruel sufierings during his 
passion, and that he should rise again in triumph on the 
third day ; now they rejoiced to see the immortal Giver of 
life overcome the sharpness of death, and triumph because 
he is exalted above the heavens, and sits at the right hand 
of the Father. Angels also appeared in white apparel, and, 
addressing the men of Gralilee, while filled with admiration 
they looked steadfastly toward heaven, pointed out to them 
the great joy both of angels and of men, and announced 
that Jesus would re-appear at the end of the world to j udge 
all nations.^ 

Peter and John, James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, 
Bartholomew and Matthew, James the son of Alpheus, 
Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James, who 
remained with the Lord Jesus unto the end, were called by 
him the salt of the earth and the light of the world ; and 
justly so, for they despised this world, in order to follow his 
steps, and were rewarded by being appointed by Glod rulers 

* Luke xxiv. 52, 53; Act. Apost. i. 1 — 14. * Acts i. 10, 11. 



CHAP. XX.] ELECTION OF MATTHIAS. 81 

and judges of the earth. When this venerable company 
was returned to Jerusalem, Peter, who was the first called 
and the greatest in dignity among the apostles, stood up in 
the midst of the disciples, who were about an hundred and 
twenty in number. He began his address to them by 
speaking of the fate of the traitor Judas, who, having hung 
himself between heaven and earth, burst asunder in the 
midst, and his bowels gushed out because he was unworthy 
of a place in either ; this happened after he had purchased 
with the reward for betraying Christ, a field called 
"Aceldama," that is to say, The Ji eld ofhlood. He then 
reminded them that thev were, as David had foretold, 
to ordain another apostle in his room, that he might take 
part in this heavenly ministry and apostleship. All, there- 
fore, adopted the proposal of their president, and in order to 
complete the sacred number of the apostles they appointed 
two, Joseph, surnamed Justus, and Matthias ; and they gave 
forth their lots, after Peter had offered up a prayer, which 
the rest confirmed, and the lot falling upon Matthias, he was 
numbered with the eleven apostles.^ 

These twelve apostles represent the hours of the day, and 
the twelve months of the entire year, and had been often 
signified long before in dark sayings of the prophets 
and patriarchs. They are held in reverence by all the nations 
of the faithful, and justly regarded as the senators of heaven, 
and the glorious princes of the church; because they are 
grafted as fruitful branches into Christ, the true vine. In 
the Lord's field, they faithfully followed his steps among 
men, more especially by voluntary poverty ; and having, as 
companions and partakers of the same mysteries, shone 
with the effulgence of miraculous powers, they now sit 
together on celestial thrones, the righteous judges of the 
twelve tribes of Israel. And as, while they were on earth, 
they had without ceasing contended for the prize set before 
them, and indefatigably laboured in the church, as Christ's 
faithful vicars and witnesses, so now they shine as his 
blessed co-heirs in heaven. 

1 Acts i. 3, 15—26. 



VOL. I. 



82 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [bOOK I. 

Ch. XXI. Descent oftlie Holy Gliost at Ventecost. 

XXI. And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, 
and the faithful disciples were all with one accord in one 
place, at the third hour of the day, suddenly there came 
a sound from heaven, and the Holy Grhost descended in 
the form of tongues, like as of fire, and sat upon each of 
them, filling them with all wisdom and heavenly gifts. 
how quick and skilful is the heavenly Artificer, the sweet 
and vivifying helper of those souls which desire his unction ! 
This celestial fire, which did not consume, but illumine, 
came down to infiame fully the hearts of the disciples, 
and free them from the attractions of carnal pleasures, and 
from the dread of punishment. It suddenly taught them 
to speak with other tongues, strengthened their minds 
by authority, and raised them to the summit of virtue, 
against all the wdles of the enemy. The apostles spake 
of the wonderful works of Grod in divers tongues, so 
that strangers out of every nation under heaven were 
amazed that these Galileans, who had never quitted their 
native land, should speak so fluently in every language. 
The Jews, full of envy, and confounded by this miracle, 
and accustomed as they were to put a WTong construction 
upon the words and works of Christ, asserted that these 
men, who were showing forth the mighty works of God, 
were full of new wine, which made them talk like madmen. 
But Peter, who was indeed intoxicated with spiritual drink, 
rose up against these perfidious men, spoke to them the 
words of saving wisdom, treated eloquently of the in- 
carnation, the passion, and the resurrection of Christ, 
and, with the help of the Holy Spirit, confounded the 
multitude of the malicious. As he had once smitten 
with the sword Malchus, and had cut off" the ear of this 
servant of the high priest, so with the spiritual word of 
God he pierced the hearts of those who were carnally 
slaves to the letter of the Mosaic law, and commanded the 
neophytes to banish from their minds the recollection 
of the ancient ceremonies and observances. These same 
Jews who, shortly before, had so cruelly persecuted 
the Messiah to death, were exhorted by St. Peter, in 
a fervent address, to repent and to be baptized in 



CHAP. XXII.] THE DAT OF PENTECOST. 83 

the name of Jesus Christ; and as he had been hitherto 
accustomed to take fish from the sea by means of his net, 
so now, by performing the sacred duties of a preacher, he 
drew the wandering sinner from the depths of ignorance, 
to set his feet on the solid ground of faith. In one day 
he baptized three thousand of those who were converted, 
and, putting on the new man, had cast off the old things 
of a carnal life.^ 

Ch. XXII. Hecapitulation of preceding twenty-one chap- 
ters — Continuation of History proposed. 

And now, by God's help, I have compiled a plain narrative 
of all that passed from the birth of Christ to the coming of 
the Holy Ghost the Comforter; and have collected and briefly 
arranged our Lord's miracles from the writings of the evan- 
gelists, as well as my feeble powers enabled me, or I have 
gained from the accounts given by the fluent Augustine'^ 
and other doctors of the church. I have endeavoured in 
this work to be useful to my fellow creatures and to myself; 
wishing especially to be of some service to those who dis- 
like the perusal of those learned and extensive works ; for 
M^hich purpose I have collected the accounts of our Lord's 
miracles, which are spread over four books, and comprised 
them within the limits of a small volume. Moreover, I have 
generally been anxious to adopt the very words 1 found 
in the authentic books ; and although, for brevity's sake, I 
have been frequently compelled to alter their language, 
yet I have made every eftbrt to arrive at the precise 
truth, and have never voluntarily deviated from received 
opinions. 

And now, purposing to continue this history, in order 
that the reader may clearly understand the chronology, 
I shall insert some information, which the ancient fathers 
have given upon the subject in their work^. For Eusebius 
of Cesarea, Bt. Jerome, who understood three languages, 
the Spanish philosophers Orosius and Isidore of Seville, 

1 Actsii. 1—41. 

2 As our author here states, he has principally drawn the materials for 
the twenty-one preceding chapters, occupied with the life of Jesus Christ, 
from St. Augustine's treatise on the " Harmonv of the Evangelists." 

G 2 ' 



ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.I. Cll.XXlIf. 

and several others, have written at large on the course 
of former events, and especially Beda, the priest, in his 
book entitled, "De Temporibus."^ He is the latesf^ of 
the English writers, and carefully studied to imitate the 
style of the ancients. 

Ch. XXIII. Series of em'perors of Rome and Constan- 
tinople, from Tiberius to Leo the Isaurian. 

Tiberius, the step-son of Octavianus Augustus, being 
the son of Livia his wife by a former husband, reigned 
twenty-three years. In the twelfth year of his reign, he sent 
Pilate into Judea, as procurator of that province. Herod 
the tetrarch, when he had been in possession of this prin- 
cipality twenty-four years, founded the cities of Tiberias 
and Libias, in honour of the emperor Tiberius and his 
mother Livia.^ 

In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, our 
Lord Jesus, after his baptism, as was foretold by St. John, 
preached the kingdom of heaven to the world, four thousand 
years after the creation, according to the Hebrews, as is 
proved by Eusebius, in his Chronicles ; we must here notice 
that the fifteenth year of Tiberius corresponds with the com- 
mencement of the eighty-first Jubilee among the Jews^ if 
we consult these same Chronicles, which Eusebius himself 
compiled, as he thought best, from the two editions extant,* 
we find five thousand, two hundred, and twenty-eight 
years. 

1 It is not the work of Bede, "De Temporibus," but the one bearing 
the title, " De Sex .^tatibus Mundi," which our author has followed, for 
the most part literally, through most of the historical and chronological 
notices that occupy the remaining portion of this book. 

' Bede, however, died a.d. 735. 

' Pilate succeeded in the government of Judea a.d. 26 or 27, of which 
he was dispossessed in the year 37. Tiberias appears to have been founded 
in the year seventeen of Jesus Christ, which does not correspond with the 
twenty-fourth, but with the nineteenth or twentieth year of the reign of 
Herod Antipas. The town called, in honour of Livia, sometimes Libias, 
sometimes Julias (Livia herself having taken the name of Julia after she 
had been adopted by Augustus in his will), already existed under the name 
of Beth-Haram, or Beth-Ramphta. 

* That is to say, from the text as it was before Origen, and that which 
had been corrected by him. The first was called Editio Vulgaris ; the 
second, Editio Hexaplaris. 



A.D. 32 42.] TIBERIUS AND CALIGULA. 85 

In the eighteentli year of tlie reign of the Emperor Tiberius, 
our Lord redeemed the world by his passion, and rising 
again victoriously from the dead on the third day, showed 
himself openly to his faithful disciples, and on the fortieth day 
ascended into heaven before their eyes. Agrippa, surnamed 
Herod, whose father was Aristobulus, son of King Herod, 
went to Rome, to impeach Herod the tetrarch, but was 
thrown into prison by order of Tiberius,^ where he made 
himself many friends, especially Caius (Caligula), son of 
Germanicus. 

Caius, surnamed Caligula, reigned three years, ten months, 
and eight days. He gave the kingdom of Judea to his friend 
Herod Agrippa, whom he had liberated from confinement. 
This prince held the sceptre for the space of seven years, 
that is to say, until the fourth year of the reign of Claudius, 
when "the angel of the Lord smote him," and his son 
Agrippa [II.] succeeded in the government, and reigned 
twenty-six years, until the extermination of the Jews. He, 
as well as Herod the tetrarch, was persuaded by Herodias to 
go to Eome, to conciliate the friendship of Caligula, but 
being there accused by Agrippa, he lost even his tetrarchate, 
and escaping by flight into Spain, with Herodias, died there 
of grief. Pilate, who had pronounced sentence of death 
on Christ, received so many affronts from Caligula, that he 
killed himself with his own hand. This emperor, to honour 
his gods, polluted the holy places of the Jews, by placing in 
them these impure idols. ^ 

Claudius governed the empire thirteen years, eight 
months, and nineteen days. He himself, in the fourth year 
of his reign, during a dreadful famine, of which St. Luke 

* In the month of September, a.d. 37, about six months before the 
death of Tiberius. 

2 He did not give Judea to Herod Agrippa, as our author states, 
according to Bede, but Batanea and the Trachonitis. Claudius, A. u. 41, 
added to them Judea and Samaria. The death of this king happened in 44. 
Agrippa II. never possessed Judea, but other territories, with the superin- 
tendence of the Temple, and the right of appointing the high-priest. It 
was in the year 39 that Herod Antipas, accused of entertaining a treason- 
able correspondence with the Parthians, was banished with Herodias to 
Lyons ; from whence, it appears, they were subsequently removed to Spain. 
Pilate, according to a tradition, was sent to Vienne in Dauphiny, where he 
killed himself in a fit of despair, a.d. 40. 



86 ORDEHICUS YITALIS. [b.I. CH. XXIII.' 

makes mention in the Acts of the Apostles, passed over into 
Britain, where no army had dared to land either before or 
after Julins Caesar, and, without fighting any battles or 
shedding blood, within the space of a few days, received the 
proffered submission of the greater part of the island. He 
also added the Orkney Islands to the Boman empire, and 
returned to his capital, whence he had been absent alto- 
gether somewhat less than six months. In the ninth year 
of his government, he drove the rebellious Jews out of Rome, 
as we read in the Acts of St. Luke. In the following year 
a dire famine afflicted the Romans.' 

Nero filled the imperial throne for the space of thirteen 
years, seven months, and twenty-eight days. In his second 
year, Festus succeeded Felix as procurator of Judea, and sent 
Paul in chains to Rome. Albinus succeeded Festus in the 
government of Judea, and was followed by Gressius Florus. 
The Jews were not long able to bear the dissolute manners, 
the avarice, and the other vices of Florus ; for which reason 
they rebelled against the Romans. Vespasian was sent 
against them at the head of an army, and took several of 
their towns. Nero's greatest crime, and he committed 
many, was his having given the order for the first persecu- 
tion of the Christians, the most distinguished leaders of 
whom he commanded to be put to death at Rome ; St. Peter 
was crucified, and St. Paul fell by the sword. This emperor 
did not venture to undertake any wars, and was very near 
losing Britain ; for during his government, two towns of 
great importance were captured and destroyed.^ 

^ The conquests of the Romans in Britain commenced vmder A. 
Plaiitius. A.c. 43. The expedition of Claudius into England, where he 
remained only sixteen days, took place in the third year of his reign. 
There was, indeed, at the same period a famine at Rome ; but the one 
our author speaks of, and of which St. Luke makes mention in the 
Acts of the Apostles (xi. 28), belongs to the next year. The conquest of 
the Orkneys did not happen under this prince, but under Vespasian. The 
expulsion of the Jews from Italy (Acts xviii. 2) must be referred to the year 
49, and the second famine to the year 51. 

- The expedition of Vespasian into Judea took place in the year 
67. Festus had succeeded Felix in 60, and consequently not in the 
second, but in the sixth year of the reign of Nero. — St. Peter and St. 
Paul appear to have suffered martyrdom on the 29th of June, a.d. 66. — 
The Roman power in Britain was almost stationary under Aulus Didius 
and Varanius, the immediate successors of Ostorius; indeed, it is said that 



.A.D. GO — 79.] VESPASIAN. 87 

Vespasian held the reins of government for the space of 
nine years, eleven months, and twenty-two days. He was 
in Judea when he was proclaimed emperor by the army, and, 
leaving the direction of the war to his son Titus, he 
returned to Eome by the way of Alexandria, and, after the 
murder of Vitellius, took possession of the throne. Titus, 
within the space of two years, overthrew the kingdom of 
Judea, and razed the temple to the ground one thousand 
and eighty-four years after its first erection. This war 
was terminated in four years ; it was carried on for two 
years during the life of .Nero, and w'as continued for two 
years after his death. Vespasian, among other great actions 
'\\hile he was yet a subject, signalized himself in Germany, 
and afterwards in Great Britain, whither he had been sent 
by Claudius, and where he fought thirty-two pitched battles 
with the enemy ; he added to the Roman empire two powerful 
nations, twenty towns and the Isle of Wight on the coast 
of Britain. It was during his reign that the colossus [of 
JIhodes] was erected ; its height was a hundred and seven 
feet.^ 

The emperor Titus reigned two years and two months ; a, 
man whose character was so admirable on account of his 
being endowed with every virtue, that he was called the love 
iind delight of mankind. He completed the amphitheatre 
at Rome, when five thousand animals were killed at the 
dedication.' 

the Emperor Nero seriously entertained the thought of abandoning the 
island, but the next governor, Paulinas Suetonius (a.d. 59 — 61) revived 
the spirit of the Romans. He conquered the island of Mona, now 
Anglesey. Boadicea, widow of King Prasutagus, and queen of the Iceni, 
who were joined by the Trinobantes, rebelled against the Romans, laid 
waste with fire and sword the colony of Camalodunum (Colchester), and 
took London and Verubim by assault, massacring the inhabitants. The 
Britons, however, were afterwards defeated by Suetonius with tremendous 
loss, and Boadicea put an end to her existence by taking poison. This 
revolt took place a.d. 61. 

^ The Temple at Jerusalem was destroyed by fire, Aug. 10, a.d. 70, 
and consequently one thousand and seventy-two years after its first con- 
struction. — The colossal statue, executed by Zenodorus in marble, was 
erected in the year 75; it was 110 or 120 feet high (Pliny), and was 
originally intended to represent Nero, but ha\'ing suffered in the fire which 
destroyed the Domus Aurea, or Golden House, it was repaired by Vespa- 
sian, and by him converted into a statue of the sun. 

- A destructive fire and a dreadful plague happened at Rome, a.d. 79. 



88 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.I. CILXXIIT. 

Domitian, the younger brother of Titus, governed the 
empire fifteen years and five months. He commenced 
the second persecution of the Christians, Nero's being the 
first, and shortly afterwards received his reward for thus 
fighting against Grod, being slain in the senate-house.^ 

JSTerva held the imperial sceptre one year, four months, 
and eight days. His first edict recalled all those who were 
banished. The apostle St. John regained his liberty by this 
general amnesty, and took advantage of it to return to 
Ephesus.^ 

Trajan filled the throne nineteen years, six months, and 
fifteen days. He began the third persecution of the Chris- 
tians, and ordered the most eminent servants of God to be 
tortured to death. Pliny the younger, born at Como, lived 
during this reign ; he is regarded as a great orator and his- 
torian : many of his works, proofs of his remarkable talent, 
are still extant. The Pantheon at Eome, built by Domitian, 
was destroyed by lightning ; it was so named, because it was 
consecrated as the temple of all the gods. The Jews, who 
excited seditions in every part of the world, were slaughtered 
in great numbers, a punishment they deserved. This 
emperor extended far and wide the bounds of the Homan 
empire, which, since the time of Augustus, had been rather 
defended than added to by any remarkable conquest.^ 

Hadrian, cousin of Trajan, reigned twenty-one years. 
Being enlightened by the books written on the Christian 
religion by Quadratus, a disciple of the apostles and bishop 
of Athens, Aristides, an Athenian full of faith and wisdom, 

The Flavian Amphitheatre, afterwards called the Colosseum, was com- 
pleted and dedicated by Titus in the ye;ir 80. Not nine thousand, but 
(according to Dion. Cassius) five thousand animals were killed during the 
festival, which lasted a hundred days. 

^ Domitian persecuted the church a.d. 95, the year before his death. 

2 The persecution appears to have ceased before the death of Domitian. 
Nevertheless St, John did not return from banishment before Nerva 
recalled the exiles. 

' The third persecution took place a.d. 117. The measures taken to 
punish the Jews were begun the year before. — The first burning of the 
Pantheon happened a.d. 80, and the second a.d. 1 10. — Pliny the Younger 
(Caius Csecilius Plinius Secundus) was born at Como about a.d. 52, and 
died about the year 102. The passage relating to him is borrowed from 
St. Jerome, who, as well as our author, appears to have confounded him 
with Pliny the Elder, his uncle. 



A.D. 98 — 117,] EMPEEOR HADRTAN.- 89 

and Serenus Granianus, proconsul [of Asia], he wrote a letter 
commanding that the Christians should not be condemned 
unless accusations were preferred against them. This 
emperor subdued a second time and finally, with great 
slaughter, the Jews who had again rebelled ; he even deprived 
them of the permission to enter Jerusalem, which he care- 
fully rebuilt, and surrounded with walls ; commanding that 
it should be called ^lia, after his own name. Being perfect 
master both of Greek and Latin, he founded at Athens a 
library of admirable architecture. Mark was the first 
gentile bishop of Jerusalem ; those who preceded him having 
been all Jews. Their names were : James the brother 
of our Lord, Simeon the son of Cleophas, Justus, Zaccheus, 
Tobias, Sixtus (Benjamin), John, Matthias, Philip, Seneca, 
another Justus, Levi, Eftrem, Joseph, and Judas. These 
bishops, fifteen in number, who were of the circumcision, 
governed the Christian church at Jerusalem, from the time 
of our Lord's passion until the reign of --JElius Hadrian, a 
space of nearly one hundred and seven years ; rendering 
themselves illustrious by their sanctity, their faith, and their 
learning. Their successors of gentile origin, were Mark, 
Cassianus, Publius, Maximus, Julian, Caius, another Julian, 
Capiton, Valens, Dolician, JNTarcissus, Alexander, Maza- 
banes, Hymenseas, Zabdas, Hermon, Macharius, another 
MaximAis, Cyrill, and John.^ 

Antoninus, surnamed Pius, with his two sons, by adoption, 
Marcus Aurelius and Lucius (Yerus), reigned twenty-two 
years and three months. Justhi the philosopher presented 
to Antoninus a book he wrote in favour of the Christian 
religion, which induced the emperor to treat the Christians 

1 The initiation of the Emperor Hadrian into the mysteries of Eleusis in 
126 had excited the persecution which induced St. Quadratus, bishop of 
Athens, St. Aristides, and Serenus Granianus, proconsul of Asia, to present 
to the emperor apologies for the Christian religion, which induced him to 
put an end to the persecution. Jerusalem was retaken, and reduced to ashes 
by Julius Severus in the month of August, 135. Its conversion into a 
Koman colony, under the name of Colonia yElia Capitolina, was already 
effected in 138, the period of the ordination of the patriarch Mark. Seven 
names are missing in the list which Ordericus gives of the successors of this 
bishop, to the commencement of the sixth century. The foundation of the 
library of Alexandria belongs to the early part of the year 1 35. 



90 ORDEUICUS YITALIS. [b.I. CH.XXIIT. 

with kindness. Not long after, however, he lost his life for 
Christ's sake, during the persecution excited by Crescens 
the Cynic, in the time of Pope Pius I. Hermes wrote 
a book entitled, " The Pastor," which contains the precept of 
an angel, that Easter should be kept on the Lord's day. 
Polycarp, on his arrival at B-ome, reclaimed from their 
heresy many who had been recently corrupted by the 
doctrines of Valentine and Cerdo.^ 

Marcus Antoninus Yerus, and his brother [by adoption] 
Lucius Aurelius Commodus, reigned nineteen years and two 
months. The government was now for the first time 
administered by them jointly, hitherto there having been 
sole emperors. They afterwards made war against the 
Parthians with distinguished courage and success. During 
the persecution of the Christians in Asia, Polycarp and 
Pionius suffered martyrdom. In Gaul, also, Pothinus, bishop 
of Lyons, and several other Christians gloriously shed their 
blood for Christ. Not long after, the plague, that avengeu 
of crime, depopulated many provinces of the Roman empire, 
above all Italy, and Rome itself. On the demise of his 
brother Commodus, Antoninus took his own son Commodus 
as his colleague in the government. Melito, bishop of 
Sardis, in Asia, wrote an apology for the Christians, ad- 
dressed to the emperor Antoninus. Lucius, king of Britain, 
sent a letter to Eleutherius, bishop of Rome, soliciting 

1 Justin MartjT, born a.d. 103, at Neapolis (Sicham), drew up his 
first Apology about the year 140. Crescens, a philosopher, caused 
him to be apprehended with six of his companions, when they were all 
beheaded in 167, in the pontificate of Anicetus, and not during that of 
Pius I., who died ten years before (July 11, 157); consequently he does 
not belong to this reign, but to that of Marcus Aurelius. St. Hermas, 
and not Hermes, the father of Pius I., wrote the book called "The Pastor,'* 
translated into English by Archbishop Wake in 1710. Many are of 
opinion that he was the disciple of St. Paul, of whom mention is made in 
Romans xvi. 14. The book does not contain anything relative to the time 
of celebrating Easter. Polycarp, a disciple of St. John, who is supposed 
to be the " angel of the church of Smyrna" (Rev. IL 8), undertook a 
journey to Rome in 158, to confer with Pope Anicetus on this subject. 
He was burnt at the stake, a.d. 167. The heretical opinions of Valentine 
and Cerdon had been condemned several years before. 

This passage, like most of those which precede and follow it, is borrowed 
literally from Bede. 



A.D. ISO — 192.] COMMODUS. 91 

admission into the Christian church. Apollinaris of Hiera- 
poKs in Asia, and Dionysius of Corinth, are ranked amongst 
the most illustrious bishops of this age.^ 

After the death of his father, Lucius Antoninus Corn- 
modus reigned thirteen years. He was successful in his 
war with the Grermans. In all other respects he did not 
inherit his father's virtues, being addicted to every species 
of debauchery. Irenaeus, bishop of Lyons at this time, had 
gained great celebrity. The emperor Commodus having 
ordered the head of the Colossus to be taken off, replaced it 
by one taken from his own statue.^ 

Helvius Pertinax reigned only six months ; he was assas- 
sinated by Didius Julian, who, after a reign of only seven 
months, was vanquished and killed, during the civil war, 
by Severus, near the Milvian bridge. Victor, bishop of 
Eome, by a decree which was widely dispersed, ordered the 
feast of Easter to be celebrated, as his predecessor Eleu- 
therius had done, on the Sunday between the 14th and 
the 21st day of March, which was then reckoned the 
first month of the year. Theophilus, bishop of Csesarea, 
in Palestine, adopted this decree, and in conjunction with 
other bishops, present at a council, wrote a synodical 
and valuable epistle, against those who persisted in cele- 

^ Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, born at Rome, a.d. 121, married Faus- 
tina, daughter of Antoninus Pius, and died of a pestilential disease in 
the fifty-ninth year of his age. By consulting the dates given before, it 
will be apparent that his reign lasted only nineteen years and ten days ; 
Bede having reckoned nineteen years and one month. The war against 
the Parthians, begun in 161, was brought to a successful issue in 165. L. 
Verus, in the year 166, on his return from the East, carried the plague to 
Rome. Polycarp and Justin both suffered martyrdom in the same year 
(167), and Pothinus in 177. Our historian is in error as to Pionius, who 
was burnt in the persecution of Decius, a.d. 250. Commodus was raised 
to the dignity of Caesar in the year 177. Melito, bishop of Sardis in 
Lydia, addressed his Apology for Christianity to Marcus Aurelius in the 
year 175; it was followed in 177 by another from the pen of Apollinaris, 
bishop of Hierapolis, whose writings are all lost. — The demand of the 
British king, Lucius, to Eleutherius, bishop of Rome, for a Christian 
missionary, must have been between the years 177 and 193, when that 
pope filled the see. Only a few fragments of the letters of Dionysius, 
bishop of Corinth, have been preserved. 

- The expedition against the Germans took place in September, 177. 
Irenaeus was, indeed, contemporary with Commodus, but he did not sutler 
martyrdom before the year 202. 



02 OllDEEICTJS YTTALTS. [e.T. CH. XXIII. 

brating this festival like the Jews, on the fourteenth day 
of the March moon.^ 

Severus Pertinax held the reins of government for seven- 
teen years, firmly, but not without difficulty. He ordered 
a cruel persecution of the Christians. Clemens, a priest of 
the church of Alexandria, and Pantaenus, a stoic philo- 
sopher, distinguished themselves by their theological dis- 
cussions. Narcissus, bishop of Jerusalem, Theophilus of 
Csesarea, Polycarp and Bacchiolus, Asiatic bishops, were also 
illustrious. In different parts of the empire, a great number 
of Christians received the crown of martyrdom. Clodius 
Albinus, who had assumed the title of Caesar in Graul, 
having been slain near Lyons, Severus transferred the war 
into Britain. In order to secure the conquered provinces 
from the incursions of the barbarians, he ordered a wide 
ditch to be dug, and a very strong wall to be raised ; which 
was additionally fortified, at unequal distances, by a number 
of towers ; these works very nearly extended from sea to 
sea, being about one hundred and thirty -two thousand paces 
long. This emperor died at York.^ 

^ Our author seems, in imitation of Aurelius Victor, to have confounded 
Didius Julianus with his grandfather, the famous jurisconsult, Salvius 
Julianus. However, Eutropius affirms that Didius also was well versed 
in jurisprudence. It was not Didius who was defeated by Septiniius 
Severus near the Milvian Bridge, but Maxentius by Constantine, a century 
and a half afterwards. The truth is that Didius was beheaded, by order of 
the senate on receiving the news of the election of Septimius Severus, after 
a short reign of sixty-six days. — The Council of Caesarea in Palestine, 
convoked for the discussion of the great question of those times, the 
proper day for the celebration of Easter, which so long disturbed the 
church, was held in the year 196, and consequently in the reign of 
Septimius Severus. 

^ The surname of Pertinax was given to Severus by the soldiers at the 
moment when they proclaimed him emperor. Bede asserts that he reigned 
eighteen years : this comes nearer to the truth than our author's number. 
The fifth persecution of the Christians began in 201 or 202, and continued 
until the death of this prince, — Clemens of Alexandria [Titus Flavius 
Clemens], one of the doctors of the church, was obliged to seek refiige in 
Cappadocia during the whole time it lasted. He died in 217, one year 
after Pantaenus, whose disciple and successor he was, and who, as early as 
179, was master of the famous school of Alexandria. — Narcissus, bishop or 
patriarch of Jerusalem, presided at the Council of Csesarea, convoked by 
Bishop Theophilus in 196. — Instead of Polycarp, read Polycrates, bishop 
of Ephesus. Bacchyolus was not bishop of a see in Asia, but of Corinth. 
It appears that there is here an omission in the passage of St. Jerome 



A,D. 211 222.] CARACALLA ELAGABALUS. 93 

Antoninus, surnamed Caracalla, the son of Severus, 
reigned about seven years. Alexander, bishop of Cappa- 
docia, having gone to Jerusalem, drawn thither by his desire 
of visiting the holy places, during the lifetime of Narcissus, 
bishop of that city, who had attained a very great age, 
he was ordained to succeed him, the Lord having, by re- 
velation, suggested this choice. TertuUian, an African, son 
of a proconsular centurion, is celebrated in all the churches.^ 

Macrinus reigned one year, and was massacred near 
Archelais, during a mutiny of the soldiers, as well as his 
son Diadumenianus, who had assisted him in usurping the 
throne. 

Marcus Aurelius Antoninus reigned four years. The 
town of JSTicopolis, in Palestine, before called Emmaiis, was 
founded during this recess ; Julius Africanus, a writer of that 
day, having successfully promoted the building. Emmaiis 
is the place which our Lord vouchsafed to sanctify with his 
presence, after his resurrection, as we read in the gospel of 
St. Luke. Bishop llippolytus, the author of many works, 
has brought down to this period the chronological canon 
which he composed. He tells us that, by finding the return 
of Easter to the same day, after the lapse of a certain 
number of years, he furnished Eusebius with the idea of his 
paschal cycle,^ 

transcribed both by Bede and Ordericus, and that we must restore it by 
inserting the words "bishop of Corinth," after Bacchyolus. — The defeat of 
Clodius Albinus, the governor of Britain, on the plains of Trevoux, took 
place the 19th of February, 197; the expedition of Septimius Severus into 
Great Britain in the year 208; the building of the great wall in 210 • 
and the death of that prince on the 4th of February, 211. The wall was 
about eight feet thick, and twelve high to the base of the battlements. 
There were added, at unequal distances, a number of stations or towns, 
eighty-one castles, and three hundred and thirty castelets or turrets. The 
ditch was about thirty-six feet wide, and from twelve to fifteen deep. 

^ Narcissus died in 212, at the age of one hundred and six years. He 
was indeed succeeded by Alexander, bishop of Cappadocia, who h<ad 
assisted him for several years before his death. The illustrious TertuUian 
flourished during this neriod. as our author intimates. Born about a.d. 
160, he died about 245. 

* This prince, on being raised to the throne, changed his name of Elaga- 
balus, taking those which our author here gives. He was murdered by his 
guards. — The establishment of the town of Nicopolis at Emmaiis, in con- 
sequence of the request made by Julius Africanus in the name of the 
inhabitants, took place in the year 221. — Hippolytus, a saint whom Gaul 



94 OEDEEICTJS VITALIS. [b.I. CH.XXIII. 

Aurelius Alexander reigned thirteen years. His singular 
love for his motlier Mammaea gained him the affection of 
every one. Urban, bishop of Eome, brought over to the 
Christian faith, and led to martyrdom, a great number of 
persons belonging to noble families. Origen of Alexandria 
gained so great a reputation throughout the world, that 
Mammaea, the mother of Alexander, wished to hear him, 
and having invited him to Antioch, loaded him with 
honours.^ 

Maximinus reigned three years. He directed a violent 
persecution against the priests of the churches, the clergy, 
and doctors, the principal motive for which was the hatred 
he bore to the Christian family of Alexander, his predecessor, 
and his mother Mammaea; and more especially on account 
of Origen the priest.^ Pontiauus and Anterus, bishops of 
E-ome, received the crown of martyrdom, and were interred 
in the cemetery of Callistus.^ 

Gordian reigned six years. Julius Africanus holds a con- 
spicuous place among ecclesiastical writers. He relates in 

appears to have a right to claim, and who was a disciple of Irenaeus, 
suffered martyrdom about a.d. 240. — His canon begins, instead of ending, 
with 242, as our author asserts here. VHistoire Litt6raire de la France, 
tome i., may be consulted with respect to it and the other works of 
Hippolytus. Our author has misquoted Bede, and added to the obscurity 
of the passage, which runs thus: " Qui etiam scdecennalcm Paschce ctrcu- 
lum reperiens, Eusebio qui super eodem Pascha dccennovalem circulum 
composuit, occasionem dedii.'^ 

^ St. Urban became pope in 223, and died May 25, 230. It does not 
appear that he could have led to execution a great number of distinguished 
Christians, as there was no persecution under his pontificate; and we must 
even consider the violent death of his predecessor, St. Callistus, and some 
other Christians, as the fortuitous result of popular tumults. Nevertheless, 
the church venerates him as having himself suffered martyrdom, and 
having led to it St. Cecilia, and Valerian her betrothed, with Tibertius his 
brother,- and Maximus, prefect of the imperial palace. — The interview 
between Julia Mammaea and Origen at Antioch, must have taken place in 
218. 

^ This famous doctor of the church, bom at Alexandria about 185, died 
in 253. 

^ The sixth persecution began with the reign of Maximin in 235. 
St. Pontian, banished to the island of Sardinia, died there in the same year, 
after having governed the church for five years. St. Anterus, his successor, 
filled the see for the short space of one month and thirteen days. They 
were both buried in the cemetry of St. Callistus by the pious care of St. 
Fabian. 



A.D. 244—249.] PKTLTP. 95 

the Chronicles he wrote, that he hastened to Alexandria, 
attracted by the widely-spread reputation of Heraclea, of 
whom fame spoke as very learned in divinity, philosophy, 
and all the knowledge of the Greek school.^ 

Philip, with his son of the same name, governed the 
empire for the space of seven years. He was the first 
emperor who embraced Christianity, after having lent an 
attentive ear to the exhortations of that faithful soldier of 
Christ, Pontius. The third year of his reign witnessed the 
completion of the year one thousand from the foundation 
of Rome. The doors of the pagan temples having been 
closed, the holy church freely opened hers with joy for the 
celebration of Grod's praise ; and this year, more august than 
any that had preceded it, was kept with magnificent games 
by a Christian emperor. Origen, son of the martyr Leo- 
nidas, instructed in the divine philosophy of Christianity, 
at Caesarea of Palestine, two young brothers, Theodore 
surnamed Gregory, and Athenodore, who afterwards became 
illustrious bishops of Pontus. His reply to a certain Celsus, 
an epicurean philosopher, who had written against us, filled 
eight volumes. In short, such was his diligence in writing, 
that St. Jerome savs somewhere that he had read five 
thousand books of which Origen was the author.^ 

Decius reigned one year and three months. Having put 

^ Gordianus Pius, whose reign is here confounded with that of his pre- 
decessors, the Gordians of Africa, Maximus and Balbinus, reigned in reah'ty 
but five years and about eight months, having been assassinated in the east 
at the instigation of Philip. It was before this reign, and about a.d. 23 1, 
that Julius Africanus went to Alexandria to take lessons of Heraclea, wlio 
at that time had succeeded Origen in the functions of catechist, and after- 
wards became patriarch of that church. 

* The acts, evidently apocryphal, of St. Pontius, may be seen in the 
MisceUayiea of Baluze. He appears to be quite an imaginary personage; 
and indeed Bede has not mentioned his name. We do not read anywhere 
that Philip ordered the temple to be closed, nor that the secular games by 
which he celebrated, in 247, the year 1000 of Rome, had a Christian 
character. It is true that a few temples and idols were destroyed at 
Neocesarea, in Pontus, but this was an eiitirely local act, brought about bv 
the zeal of St. Gregory Thaumaturgus, one of the pupils of Origen men- 
tioned here. It does not appear why our author asserts that this orator 
of the church gave lessons during this reign, which Bede more suitablv 
places under Gordian the Pious. Origen died, as already stated, in 253; 
and his treatise against Celsus, being the last of his writings, might very 
well have been composed in the time of Philip. ■ 



I)G ORDEHICUS YITALIS, [B.I. CH.XXITI.- 

to deatli the two Philips, father and son, he carried the 
hatred he bore them so far as to order the Christians to be 
persecuted ; pope Fabian then received the crown of mar- 
tyrdom, and left the episcopal see to Cornelius. Alexander, 
bishop of Jerusalem, also received the martyr's crown at 
Csesarea in Palestine, and Babylas at Antioch.^ 

Grallus, with his son Volusian, reigned two years and four 
months. Dionysius, a priest of Alexandria, relates that the 
commencement of the reign of this prince was most prospe- 
rous, and that everything succeeded according to his mind, 
but that, having persecuted the holy men who offered up 
prayers to the supreme Grod for the tranquillity of the 
empire, his own peace and prosperity vanished. Origen 
died before he had quite completed his seventieth year, 
and was buried in the city of Tyre. At the request of 
Lucina, a Eoman matron, the pope, Cornelius, raised from 
the catacombs, during the night, the bodies of the two 
apostles, which had been deposited there, and interred that 
of St. Paul on the road to Ostia, where he had been beheaded, 
and that of St. Peter near the spot which had witnessed his 
crucifixion; among the bodies of the holy bishops, where 
formerly stood the temple of Apollo, on the Vatican 
Mount, and Nero built a palace. The bodies were translated 
on the third of the calends of July,' (the 29th of June). 

^ The seventh persecution, which took place under this prince, in which 
a great number of martyrs perished, began a.d. 2j0. St. Fabian, the pope, 
was one of the first victims, as well as St. Babylas and St. Alexander. St. 
Cornelius, who was not elected until after a vacancy of six months (June 
4, 251), suffered martyrdom under Gallus, in 252, 

2 We are not aware that St. Cornelius effected the two removals here 
attributed to him. It was he himself who was buried by Lucina in a crypt 
near the cemetery of St. Callistus. On the pretended removals mentioned 
in this paragraph, Baronins may be consulted, under the year 221. 
There are few questions more obscure and perplexed than those of the 
interments and translations of the bodies of SS. Peter and Paul. If we 
believe St. Gregory the Great, the corpses of these two princes of the 
apostles were, immediately after their execution, taken away by those 
among their disciples who were Greeks and who wished to carry them 
away to their own country, but re-taken, when at a distance of two miles 
from Rome by the Latin Christians, who placed them provisionally in the 
catacombs situated near the spot ; later they were deposited, one in the 
Vatican, the other in the church of St. Paul extra muros; then Pope St. 
Xystus, transferred them once more to the catacombs on the 29th of 
June, 258. In the days of Liberius (354 — 366), the relics of St. Paul 



A.D. 253 — 270.] YALERIAN — CLAmUS II. 97 

Valerian and his son Grallienus reigned fifteen years. 
Having raised a persecution against the Christians, Yalerian 
was soon afterwards taken prisoner by Sapor, king of the 
Persians, and being deprived of his sight, wore out his 
days to old age a wretched captive. Gallienus, terrified at 
such a manifest judgment of Grod, gave orders that the 
Christians should not be molested. Nevertheless, either 
as a punishment for his own licentiousness, or for his 
' father's hostility to God, the incursions of the barbarians 
caused the greatest calamities throughout the Roman empire. 
During this persecution, Cyprian, bishop of Carthage, 
whose very learned Avorks are still extant, suffered martyr- 
dom. Pontius, one of his deacons, has left us an admirable 
volume, describing his life and death, having suffered exile 
with him up to his last moments. Theodore Gregory, bishop 
of INTeocaesarea, in Pontus, was eminently distinguished 
by the performance of miracles ; he gave a proof of this 
power, when, by his prayers, he removed a mountain in 
order to have sufficient room for the foundations of a church 
which he intended to raise. Stephen and Sixtus, bishops of 
Borne, suff'ered martyrdom.^ 

Claudius (II.) reigned one year and nine months. He 
vanquished the Goths, who, for fifteen years, had been 
ravaging Illyricum and Macedonia ; for this service rendered 
to the state, the senate heaped honours on his memory ; 
a golden shield was hung up in the senate-house, and a 
statue of the same metal erected in the Capitol. Marcion, 
a very eloquent priest of the church of Antioch, who taught 
rhetoric in that city, disputed with Paul of Samosata, bishop 
of Antioch, who held that Christ was of the nature common 
to man ; his discourse, which was taken down in writing 
by the notaries, is still extant.^ 

hail been already taken back to his church, but those of St. Peter still 
remained in the catacombs, whence they did not return to the Vatican until 
some time between the epoch of this pope and that of St. Jerome. 

^ Valerian was made prisoner A.D. 260, while the eighth persecution 
began as early as 256. St. Cyprian, bishop of Carthage, was beheaded in 
September, 258; St. Stephen, pope, August 2, 257; and St. Sixtus, his 
successor, August 6, 258. Our author here again calls St. Gregory 
Thaumaturgus, Theodore Gregory. 

^ M. Aureiius Claudius, surnamed Gothicus, descended from an obscure 
family in Illyria, upon the death of Gallienus, was proclaimed his successor. 

VOL. I. H 



98 ORDERICUS YITALIS. [b.I. CH.XXIIT. 

. Aureliau governed the E-oman empire for five years and 
six months. Having excited a persecution against us, a 
thunderbolt fell before him to the great consternation of all 
present ; and not long after this he was massacred by the 
soldiers half way on the road leading from Constantinople 
to Heraclea. Eutychian, the pope, was martyred at Eome, 
and interred in the cemetery of Callistus, where he had 
buried three hundred and thirteen martyrs with his own 
hands. ^ 

Tacitus reigned six months. Having lost his life in 
Pontus, riorian seized the empire which he held eighty- 
eight days, and was killed at Tarsus. Anatolius, a native of 
Alexandria, and bishop of Laodicea, in Syria, well versed in 
all the learning of the philosophers, is highly spoken of; we 
may judge of his genius by his work on Easter, and his ten 
books on arithmetic. About this time the insane heresy 
of the Manicheans and Sabellians commenced.^ 

Probus, during his reign of six years and four months, com- 
pletely delivered Gaul from the barbarians, who for a long 
time had occupied that country, but whom he routed in 
many bloody battles. Archelaus, bishop of Mesopotamia, 
composed, in the Syrian language, a book on his con- 
He defeated the Goths, who had crossed over into Greece with an army of 
32,000 men, in the years 269 and 270, nearly destroying their vast force; 
a pestilence carried him off at Sirmium. The statue erected in honour 
of Claudius in the Capitol, by the senate, was ten feet high. — The refuta- 
tion of the errors of Paul of Samosata by Marcion took place in the third 
council of Antioch, over which Hymeneus, patriarch of Jerusalem, presided 
at the commencement of the year 270. The acts of this public disputation 
no longer exist. 

^ This persecution was the ninth, and happened not before but after the 
fall of the thunderbolt mentioned by our author. St. Eutychian did not 
suffer martyrdom, and he died as late as December, 283. He is said to have 
interred as many as three hundred and forty-two martyrs with his own hands. 
^ ^larcus Claudius Tacitus, a Roman, was elected emperor by the senate 
after the death of Aurelian, when in his seventieth year. During a short 
reign of about six months he not only repelled the barbarians who had 
invaded the territories of Rome in Asia, but he prepared to make war 
against the Persians and Scythians. He died in Cilicia, during the 
expedition, of a violent distemper, or, according to some, was assassinated, 
on the 13th of April, a.d. 276. Bishop Anatolius flourished about the 
year 270. The heresy of the Manichees began in 277; that of the Sabel- 
lians dates as far back as the year 250. 



A.D. 2S2 — 305.] CARUS — DIOCLETIAN. 99 

troversy with Manes of Persia ; this work, translated into 
Grreek, is in the hands of a great many readers.^ 

Cams reigned, jointly with his sons Carinus and Nu- 
merianus, two years. Grains, bishop of Eome, shone illus- 
triously as the head of that church, but suffered martyrdom 
under Diocletian. Pierius, a priest of Alexandria, during 
the patriarchate of Theonas, instructed the people with 
the greatest success ; his sermons and divers treatises, 
still extant, are written in so elegant a style, that he was 
called Origen the younger ; a man surprisingly frugal, and 
affecting voluntary poverty ; he spent the remainder of his 
days after the persecution at Eome.^ 

Diocletian reigned jointly with Heracleus Maximian 
twenty years. Carausius having assumed the purple, took 
possession of Britain.^ Narses, king of the Persians, 
invaded the east. The Quinquegentians infested Africa. 
Achilleus made himself master of Egypt. To face so 
many enemies, Diocletian admitted into the government 
the Caesars Constantius and Galerius Maximian. The 
first married Theodora, the step-daughter of Heracleus, by 
whom he had six children, who were the brothers [and 
sisters] of Constantine. Galerius obtained the hand of 
Valeria, daughter of Diocletian. Ten years afterwards, 
Asclepiodotus, the praetorian prefect, recovered Britain. 

In the nineteenth year of this reign, Diocletian in the 
east, and Heracleus , Maximian in the west, ordered the 
churches to be plundered, and the Christians to be tor- 
mented and put to death. In the second year of this 
persecution, Diocletian laid down the purple in Nicomedia, 

^ The dispute between Archelaus and Manes took place in 277. 

■•^ Caius, or Gains, elected pope September 17, 283, suffered martyrdom 
under Diocletian in 296. Theonas was patriarch of Alexandria from 282 
until the 23rd of August, 300. What our author says of Pierius is quite 
true. He must have undertaken his voyage to Rome when the persecution 
had ended in 311. We are not informed of the date of his death. 

^ Carausius, by birth either a Belgian or a Briton, it is not very certain 
which, was a bold and skilful naval commander ; the legions and aux- 
iliaries in Britain bestowed on him the imperial purple, a.d. 288, which he 
retained until the year 297, when he was murdered at York by Allectus, a 
Briton. The names he assumed were, Marcus, Aurelius, Valerius, Carau- 
sius. Narses invaded the east in 297. The Quinquegentians or Quinque- 
gentana?, committed their ravages in Africa during 292. The revolt of 
Achilleus belongs to the same date, and lasted more than five years. 

H 2 



b 



100 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [e.I. CH.XXIII. 

and compelled his colleague Maximian, at the same time, 
to abdicate the government at Milan. However, this per- 
secution, having once commenced, continued to rage until 
the seventh year of the reign of Constantine. 

Constantius (Chlorus), a prince of a mild disposition, and 
of great affability, died at York, in Britain, in the sixteenth 
year of his reign. The persecution of the Christians was 
urged forward with such cruelty and fury, that in the course 
of a month they reckon eighteen thousand martyrs, who 
had suffered death for Christ. Having passed the limits 
of the ocean, it shed the precious blood of Alban, Aaron, 
Julius, and many other persons of both sexes, in Britain. 
Then also Pamphilus suffered martydom; he was the 
particular friend of Eusebius, bishop of Cesarea, who him- 
self has given, in three books, the history of the life of this 
holy priest. 

In the third year of the persecution, Constantius quitted 
this world, and Maximinus and Severus received the title of 
Caesar from Gralerius Maximian;^ this Maximian added to 
his many misdeeds and adulteries, the crime of persecuting 
the Christians.^ At that time, Peter, bishop of Alex- 
andria, and several other bishops in Egypt, were put to 
death, as well as Lucian, a priest of Antioch, remarkable for 
his good morals, continence, and erudition j with many other 
servants of Christ.^ 

^ Constantius Chlorus [to whom Britain fell in succession on the resig- 
nation of Diocletian and Maximian] and Galerius were created Caesars, 
and taken as colleagues in the government, March 1st, 292. The two 
marriages mentioned above were also celebrated in the same year. Con- 
stantius had three sons and three daughters by his mfe Theodora. 
Asclepiodotus, an officer of Constantius Chlorus, recovered Britain in 300, 
having defeated and slain Allectus, who had reigned about three years. 

^ The tenth persecution against the Christians began on the 23rd of Fe- 
bruary, 303. The abdication of the two emperors took place May 1, 305. 
The edict that put an end to the persecution appeared in the spring of 311 
(fifth year of Constantine). Constantius Chlorus died at York, July 25, 
306, in the fifteenth year of his association to the empire as Caesar. The 
number of martyrs who perished in one month is only 17,000 in Bede 
(Ecclesiastical History, i. c. 7). St. Pamphilus was put to death, Feb. 13, 
309. 

' Maximin and Severus were raised to the rank of Csesar on the 1st of 
May, 305, by Diocletian and Maximian, at the moment of their abdication. 
Peier, patriarch of Alexandria, suffered martyrdom, Nov. 25, 311, and 
St. Lucian, Jan. 7, 312, the persecution having recommenced almost 



A.D. 306—337.] COKSTANTINE. 101 

Constantine, the son of Conslantius, by Helena his con- 
sort, was proclaimed emperor in Britain ; he reigned 
thirty years and ten months. In the fourth year of 
the persecution, Maxentius,^ son of Heraclius Maximian, 
was proclaimed Augustus at E-ome, and Licinius, who had 
married Constantia, the sister of Constantine, was created 
emperor at Carnuntum. Constantine, after having been a 
persecutor, became a convert to Christianity, and endeavoured, 
to the utmost of his power, to exalt the church of Grod.'"^ 
The catholic faith was defined at the council of Nice. The 
emperor ordered a number of churches to be built for divine 
worship : he had one constructed at Rome, in honour of St. 
John the Baptist, in which he was baptized, which was 
called the church of Constantine, after the founder's name ; 
another on the site of the temple of Apollo, dedicated to St. 
Peter ; and a third on the road to Ostia, to St. Paul ; he 
raised a chapel in the Sessorian palace, to which he gave the 
name of Jerusalem, and placed in it a fragment of our 
Saviour's cross. At the request of his daughter, he dedicated 
a church to St. Agnes the Martyr, and another to St. 
Lawrence the Martyr, on the road to Tibur, on the land of 
Yeranus. He also built a church on the Lavican way, 
between two laurels, in honour of the holy martyrs Marcel- 
linus and Peter, and a mausoleum, where he laid the remains 
of his mother in a sarcophagus of porphyry. He, besides, 
ordered the construction of a church, to be dedicated to 
the memory of the holy apostles, Peter and Paul, and St. 
John the Baptist, near Ostia, the port of Eome. Churches 

immediately with fresh fury in those countries which were under the 
dominion of Maximin. 

^ Maxentius seized the purple at Rome, Oct. 23, 306. Licinius 
obtained the title of Augustus, Nov. 11, 307, at Carnuntum in Pannonia, 
on the Danube, and not at Chartres (Carnutura), as Zozimas has asserted. 
He married, in 31.3, Constantia, sister to Constantine. 

2 Constantine v/as proclaimed emperor at York, 2.5th July, 306, and 
died 22nd May, 337. The council of Nice lasted from the 19th of June 
until the 25th of August, 325. The foundation of Helenopolis at Drespana 
in Bithynia, took place in 317, and the building of Constantinople began 
Nov. 2G, 329. Constantine was baptized, not at Rome but in the neigh- 
bourhood of Nicomedia, a few weeks before his death. This prince rather 
forbade sacrifices than closed the temples. His principal edict on this 
subject was made in 323. On the churches built by Constantine, consult 
the third volume of the Vetera Monimenla of Ciampini. 



102 OEDEBICUS YITALIS. [s.I. CH. XXIII. 

were also built to the memory of St. John in the towns of 
j^Jbano aud Naples. This same emperor rebuilt Drepana, a 
town in Bithynia, in honour of the martyr Lucian, who was 
buried there, and called it Helenopolis, after the name of 
his mother. But he founded in Thrace a town which was to 
bear his own name, and wished it to become the seat of the 
Eoman government, and the capital of all the east. He 
also commanded that the pagan temples should be closed 
without further effusion of human blood. 

Constantius [II.] with his brothers Constantino and 
Constans, reigned twenty-four years, five months, and 
thirteen days. James was acknowledged bishop of Nisibis, 
a town which was often delivered by his prayers from the 
perils that threatened it. The Arian heresy, upheld and 
protected by the emperor, at first caused the persecution 
of Athanasius, and afterwards of all the bishops who were 
not of that sect ; who had to sufl^er banishment, imprison- 
ment, and all kinds of punishment. Maximin, bishop of 
Treves, was one of the most illustrious prelates of that 
period ; he sheltered with honour Athanasius, bishop of 
Alexandria, when Constantino sought to punish him. 
Anthony, the monk, died in his hermitage, at the age of 
a hundred and five. Constantius, having returned to Bome, 
the Christians at Constantinople received the bones of 
Andrew the apostle, and of Luke the evangelist, with great 
exultation. Hilary, bishop of Poictiers, who had been sent 
an exile into Phrygia by the Arians, after having repaired 
to Constantinople to present his petition to Constantius, 
was allowed to return to Gaul.^ 

^ St. James, bishop of Nisibis, in Mesopotamia, is said by his prayers to 
have saved three times this town from being taken by Sapor, in 338, 34 6, and 
350. The banishment of St. Athanasius to Treves, took place in the year 
335, and consequently in the reign of Constantine ; the motive for it 
was a political denunciation by the partisans of Eusebius before this 
prince, and not a point of doctrine. St. Maximin, a native of Si]6, in 
Poitou, bishop of Treves at the time when he received St. Athanasius, 
appears to have died, Sept. 12, 349, and St. Anthony on the 17th 
of January, 356. The removal of the relics of SS. Andrew and Luke to 
Constantinople was performed on the 3rd of March in the same year, 
before the journey of Constantius to Rome, which did not take place 
before the 28th of April, 357. St. Hilary, bishop of Poic.iers about 350, 
was banished to Phrygia in 356, presented nis petition to Constantius, and 
returned to Poictiers in 360. 



A.D. 861— 3G3.J JULIAN. • 103 

Julian reigned two years and eight monfclis. He had 
been baptized, had taken holy orders, as far as the 
rank of deacon ; ^ but having left the church, he adopted 
the profession of arms, made himself master of the empire, 
and returning to the worship of idols, became a persecutor 
of the Christians. Then tlie pagans took possession of the 
tomb of John the Baptist, at Sebaste, a town of Palestine, 
and scattered his bones about the country ; they then col- 
lected them together again, and burned and dispersed them 
over a wider tract. But, by the providence of God, a few 
monks came from Jerusalem, and mixing with the crowd, 
who were collecting these remains, gathered up what they 
could, and carried them to their superior, Philip. Convinced 
that it would be beyond his power, with the means at . 
his disposal, to preserve a treasure of such importance, he 
immediately sent them to Athanasius, the most illustrious 
bishop of that age, confiding them to the care of his deacon, 
Julian. The bishop, as soon as he had received them, 
enclosed these relics in a cavity which he caused to be made 
in the wall of the sanctuary, in the presence of only a few 
witnesses, and with a prophetical spirit dedicated them to 
future generations. What he foresaw was fulfilled under 
the emperor Theodosius by Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria, 
who, having destroyed the tomb of Serapis, consecrated on 
that same spot a church to St. John.^ 

Jovian reigned eight months. Meletius and his adherents 
called together a council at Antioch, which condemned the 
doctrine of Macedonius, who blasphemed the Holy Ghost.^ 
The emperor, having concluded with the Persians a truce for 
twenty-nine years, re-entered the territory of the Eoman 
empire. Warned by the fall of his predecessor Constantius, 
he wrote to Athanasius the most respectful and kind letters, 

' Julian never was a deacon, an addition of our author to the text of Bede, 
but only a reader, a lower order in the church. He was proclaimed emjieror 
by the army in the spring of 360. 

^ The destruction of the temple of Serapis at Alexandria, and the 
erection of a church dedicated to St. John the Baptist on its site, 
took place a.d. 339. 

^ The council of Antioch here mentioned, was held in the month of 
October, 363; and in the course of the same nionth, St. Athanas^ius met 
the emperor in the same city. He did not die in Cilicia, but in Bithynia, 
on the borders of Galatia, in the right of the 16th or 17th of February, 364. 



104i ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.I, CH,XXIIJ. 

and received from him tbe orthodox creed, and rules for 
the better government of the churches. Unfortunately, a 
premature death, which carried him off in Cilicia, did not 
allow his pious and happy principles to bear fruit. 

Yalentinian reigned jointly with his brother Valens eleven 
years. Apollinaris, bishop of Laodicea, wrote several works 
favourable to our doctrines, but having afterwards swerved 
from the faith, he founded the heresy which bears his name. 
Damasus, bishop of Eome, built a church near the theatre, 
in honour of St. Lawrence, and another over the catacoD^bs, 
where lay the bodies of the holy apostles, Peter and Paul ; 
and decorated the pavement which covered them with in- 
scriptions in verse. Yalens, after being baptized by Eu- 
doxius, an Arian bishop, persecuted the orthodox. Gratian, 
son of Valentinian, was raised to the imperial dignity at 
Amiens, in the third year of his father's reign. At Con- 
stantinople a church was dedicated to the apostles who had 
suffered martyrdom. Auxentius at length dying, Ambrose 
was raised to the bishopric of Milan, and by his preaching, 
converted to the faith of Christ the whole of Cisalpine 
Gaul.^ 

Valens reigned four years with Grratian and Yalentinian, 
the sons of his brother Yalentinian. Yalens, having made 
a decree that monks should be subject to military service, 
ordered all those who refused to be beaten to death. The 
Huns, who up to that time [a.d. 375] had been confined 
to their inaccessible mountains, driven by a sudden fit of 
rage, fell with fury upon the Groths, who, being attacked 
in different quarters, were expelled from their ancient seats 
[a.d. 376]. Having passed the Danube, the Groths were 
received in their flight by Yalens, who did not require them 
to lay down their arms ; but soon afterwards, experiencing 

^ The errors of Apollinaris, bishop of Laodicea, already censured several 
times since the year 362, were definitively condemned in the oDcumenical 
council of Constantinople in 381. He died soon after. Damasus filled 
the holy see from the autumn of 366 until the 2nd of December, 384. The 
emperor Valens was baptized bv Eudoxius at the commencement of 367, 
and Gratian received from his father Valentinian the title of Augustus at 
Amiens, on the 24th of August in the same year. The church of the 
Apostles at Constantinople was consecrated in 370. Auxentius, an Arian, 
usurped the see for almost twenty years. St. Ambrose was raised to the 
episcopal dignity in 374. 



A.D. 378—383.] GRATTAN. 105 

all tlie horrors of a famine, through tlie avarice of Maximus, 
the E/oman general, they were compelled to take up arms 
aginst the Komans, and having defeated the emperor's 
troops, they overran Thrace, plundering and destroying 
evervthiufj with fire and sword. 

After the death of Yalens, Gratian and his brother 
A''alentinian [II.] reigned six years. ^ Theodosius, created by 
Gratian emperor [of the east], vanquished in many great 
battles those powerful nations which had emigrated from 
Scythia, that is to say, the Alans, Huns, and Goths. The 
Arians, displeased at seeing the harmony that existed 
between these two princes, at last gave up the churches 
which they had retained possession of by violence during forty 
years. A council of one hundred and fifty fathers assembled 
at Constantinople under Damasus, bishop of Eome, against 
Macedonius." Theodosius took his son Arcadius as his 
colleague in the empire. In the second year of the reign 
of Gratian, when he, as well as Theodosius, was consul for 
the sixth time,^ Theophilus compiled his Easter tables. 
Maximus, a valiant and good man, and worthy of the title 
of Augustus, if, contrary to his oath, he had not aspired 
to the empire, was, almost against his will, proclaimed em- 
peror by the army in Britain [a.d. 383] ; he passed over into 
Gaul, where, near Lyons, he treasonably killed the emperor 
Gratian, whom he had drawn into a snare, and drove his 
brother Yalentinian out of Italy. He nevertheless justly 
suffered the punishment of being banished with his mother 
Justina, for both were infected with the impure heresy of 
Arius, and he had shamefully persecuted Ambrose, the 
glorious bulwark of the catholic faith, and did not desist 
from his impious projects until the relics of the blessed 

^ Gratian was named Augustus as early as 367, as we have just observed, 
and he succeeded his father on the 1 7th of November, 375. Theodosius 
was raised by him to the empire of the east, January 19, 379. 

^ The Arians were compelled, by an imperial edict, dated Jan. 10, 381, 
to give up the churches to the catholics. Damasus did not preside over 
the council of Constantinople of the same year. 

' The paschal table of Theophilus the archdeacon, and afterwards 
patriarch of Alexandria, begins with the year 383, when Gratian and 
Theodosius were, it is true, consuls, but the first for the fifth and not the 
sixth time. 



106 OEDEEICTJS VITALTS. [b.I. CH.XXIIT.' 

martyrs, Gervase and Protase, were discovered by a divine 
revelation. 

Theodosius, who during the lifetime of G-ratian had 
already governed the east for the space of six years, reigned 
eleven years after the death of the latter. He and Yalentinian, 
whom he had kindly received at his court after his expulsion 
from Italy, caused the tyrant Maxim us to be put to death, 
near the third milestone from Aquiieia.^ As this usurper 
had withdrawn from Britain nearly all the troops and all 
the youth capable of bearing arms, who followed his standard 
to Graul but never again returned home, those barbarous 
nations beyond the straits, the Scots from the north-west, 
and the Picts from the north, seeing the island defenceless 
and deprived of its soldiers, crossed over and harassed it 
many years with ruin and plunder.^ Jerome, the interpreter 
of sacred history, brought down the book he wrote on the 
illustrious men of the church to the fourteenth year of the 
reign of Theodosius.^ 

Arcadius, son of Theodosius, with his brother Honorius, 
reigned thirteen years. The bodies of the holy prophets 
Habakkuk and Micah were discovered in consequence of 
a divine revelation. The Groths attacked Italy [a.d. 400], 
while the Yandals and the Alans penetrated into Graul 
[Dec. 31, A.D. 406]. Innocent, bishop of Rome, dedicated 
a church to the blessed martyrs, Gervase and Protase, built 
with the funds left in her will by an illustrious woman 
named Vestina. Then Alexis, a servant of Christ, quitted 
this world. Pelagius, a Briton, impugned divine grace.* 

Honorius with Theodosius the younger, his brother's son, 

^ Maximus, after being defeated several times by the two emperors in 
the neighbourhood of Aquileia, was taken prisoner in that town, and put 
to death by the soldiers on the 2b"th of August, 388. 

2 Our author, A^ith Bede, whom he always follows, places these incur- 
sions of the Scots and Picts too soon. They did not take place until after 
the revolt and expedition of the usurper Constaiitine, in the year 407, as 
indeed Bede himself informs us, Ecclesiastical History, i. 12. 

' St. Jerome composed this work in 392. 

* The remains of the prophets here mentioned were discovered during 
the last years of the reign of Theodosius. Innocent I. filled the holy see 
from 402 until the 12th of March, 417; under his pontificate, about the 
year 404, the Pelagian heresy began to spread itself, and the very suspicious 
legend of Alexis is placed. 



A.D. 408—423.] noNOKius. 107 

reigned sixteen years. Alaric, king of the Gotlis, took 
possession of Rome, and set fire to it, on the 9th of the 
calends of September [24th of August], a.tj.c. 1164, quit- 
ting it and carrying off an immense booty, six days after he 
entered it.^ 

Lueian, the priest, to whom Grod, in the seventh year of 
the reign of Honorius, revealed the spot where lay the 
tombs that enclosed the remains of St. Stephen, the first 
martyr, and of Gramaliel and Nicodemus, of whom we read in 
the Grospel and in the Acts of the Apostles, wrote this 
revelation in Grreek, and addressed it to the heads of all the 
churches. Avitus, a priest of Spanish extraction, translated 
this work into Latin, and adding an epistle to it, gave it to 
the western world through the instrumentality of the priest 
Orosius. This same Orosius, who, on his arrival at the 
holy places, where Augustine had sent him to learn what 
was good for his soul, received the relics of St. Stephen, 
and returning to his own country, was the first to carry 
them into the west.^ 

The Britons, no longer able to bear the exterminating 
inroads of the Scots and Picts, sent envoys to Eom.e im- 
ploring aid against these enemies, and offering to submit to 
the Roman government. A legion was immediately sent to 
their relief, which put to the sword an immense number of 
the barbarians, drove the rest beyond the frontiers of Britain, 
and, on the eve of returning home, advised their allies to 
raise a wall across the island, from sea to sea, to check the 
incursions of their enemies. 

This rampart, constructed without regard to the rules of 
art, and in which more turf than stone was used, was of no 
service to those who built it ; for as soon as the Romans 
had turned their backs, their old enemies re-appeared in 
their boats, and cut down, trampled under foot, and devoured, 
everything they could find, like a ripe field of corn. The 

^ Alaric took Rome, 24th of August, a.d. 409. Here our author 
returns, probably from inattention, to the chronological system of 
Dionysius the Little, which he had quitted when giving the date of 
the birth of Jesus Christ, as he refers this event to the year 1164 from 
the foundation of Rome, that is to say, 409 years after 754, and not 752. 

* The relics of St. Stephen were discovered in 415, the year of Orosius's 
voyage to Palestine. 



108 OEDEEICUS VITALTS. [b.I. CH. XXHI. 

Britons again applied to theEomans for succour, who hastened 
to their assistance, defeated the barbarians, and drove them 
across the sea ; they then, with the assistance of the natives, 
raised between the towns which they had built in their 
alarm a wall, from sea to sea, not as before of loose earth, but 
of solid stones. On the southern shore of the straits also, 
as incursions were apprehended in that quarter, they erected 
at intervals watch-towers, commanding extensive views. 
The Romans then took leave of their allies, never to return 
again. Boniface, bishop of Bome, erected a chapel in the 
cemetery of St. Felicitas, and ornamented her tomb and that 
of St. Sylvanus. Jerome, the priest, died at the age of 
ninety-one, in the twelfth year of the reign of Honorius, the 
2nd of the calends of October [30th of September].^ 

After the death of Honorius, Theodosius the younger, 
son of Arcadius, reigned twenty-six years. Yalentinian the 
younger, the son of Constantius, was created emperor at 
Bavenna ; while his mother Placidia had received the title 
of Augusta some time before. Those fierce nations, the 
Vandals, Alans, and Goths, crossing over into Africa from 
Spain, ravaged the country with fire and sword, and polluted 
it by the impiety of the Arian heresy.' St. Augustine, bishop 
of Hippo, an eminent doctor of the church, was saved from 
seeing the ruin of his city by being translated to the Lord 
during the third month of the siege it was then undergoing, 
on the fifth of the calends of September [28th of August], 
having lived seventy-six years, of which he had spent near 
forty as clerk or bishop. About the same time, the Vandals, 
after taking Carthage, passed over into Sicily, and com- 
pletely devastated it. Paschasinus, bishop of Lilybea, men- 
tions the captivity of its inhabitants in a letter which he 
^^'rote to Pope Leo concerning the period for the celebration 
of Easter.^ 

Palladius, ordained by Pope Celestine the first bishop 

* Boniface was pope from a.d. 418 to 422, St. Jerome, born about 
342, died, Sept. 30, 420. 

2 The Vandals crossed over into Africa in May, 429. St. Augustine 
died on the 28th of August, 430. Carthage was captured in 438, and 
Sicily in 440. 

^ Paschasinus, bisliop of Lilybea (now Marsala), was himself taken 
prisoner, as he mentions in his letter tc Pope Leo. 



A.D. 4-19.] THE SAXONS LAND IX BEITAIN. 100 

of the Scots who had been converted to the faith of Christ, 
was sent over in the eiglith year of Theodosius. "When the 
Roman army was withdrawn from Britain, the Scots and 
Picts, knowing that they would not return, re-appeared, 
and wrested from the natives the whole island from the 
north, as far as the wall. The guards of the rampart were 
quickly killed, taken prisoners, or put to flight, the w^all it- 
self was broken through, and the country on the other side 
of it savagely plundered. A letter full of grief and trouble 
was sent to Aetius, who had the command of the Eoman 
troops in the twenty-third year of the reign of Theodosius, 
and was now consul for the third time, imploring succour 
in vain. Meanwhile a dreadful and memorable famine 
afflicted the fugitives, and caused some of them to go 
over to the enemy, while the remainder, retiring to the 
mountains, caverns, and forests, made a desperate resist- 
ance, and inflicted great loss on the invaders. The Scots 
returned to their homes, intending shortly to renew their 
incursions ; but the Picts retained possession of the ex- 
treme part of the island, which they now for the first time 
determined to inhabit. The famine, just spoken of, was 
followed by a great abundance of the fruits of the earth, 
with its natural consequences, extravagance and careless- 
ness ; a pestilence ensued, to which was shortly added a 
plague still worse, the arrival of the English, who were new 
enemies, in the country. The Britons in a general assem- 
bly under their king Yortigern, unanimously agreed to in- 
vite them over to assist in the defence of the country; 
but they soon discovered that the English were their oppres- 
sors instead of their defenders. 

Sixtus, bishop of Eome, dedicated to St. Mary, the mother 
of our Lord, the building which the ancients called the 
church of Liberius. Eudosia, the wife of Theodosius, returned 
from Jerusalem, bringing with her the relics of the blessed 
St. Stephen, the first martyr, which were exposed to the 
veneration of the faithful in the church of St. Lawrence. 
Bleda and Attila, his brother, who governed several powerful 
nations, devastated Illyricum and Thrace.^ 

1 Palladius was sent into Scotland in 428, according to the Roman 
annilists. The abject prayer, entitled " The Groans of the Britons," was 
addressed to Aetius in 446. The year following Vortigern invited the aid 



110 OKDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.I. CH. XXIII. 

Marcian and Yaleiitiuian reigned as joint emperors 
seven years. The Angles, or Saxons, who crossed over 
the sea in three long ships, now landed in Britain.^ Their 
countrymen at home, hearing reports that their voyage 
had been prosperous, sent over a stronger force, which, 
combining with the former band, soon overcame the resistance 
of the enemy. They then turned their arms against their 
allies, and ravaged nearly the whole island from the east 
to the west with fire and sword, under pretence that the 
Britons had not sufficiently remunerated those who had 
fought for them. 

John the Baptist revealed to two eastern monks, who had 
travelled as pilgrims to Jerusalem, the place where his 
head was concealed, near the palace which once belonged to 
King Herod ; this head was afterwards carried to Emesa, in 
Phcenicia, where it received due honour.^ 

AVhen the heresy of Pelagius disturbed the faith of 
the Britons, they implored assistance from the bishops 
of Gaul, and found defenders of the truth in Grermanus, 
bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus, bishop of Troyes, both con- 
fessors of the apostolic grace. ' These illustrious champions 
of our Lord strengthened the faith by the w^ord of truth, as 
well as by signs and miracles ; and the attack made on 
the Britons at this time by the combined forces of the 
Saxons and Picts, was by divine help defeated. For Ger- 
manus taking the command himself, put the hosts of the 
enemy to flight, not by the sound of the trumpet, but with 
shouts of " Hallelujah," the whole army raising their 
voices to heaven.^ After this, he went to Eavenna, where 

of the Anglo-Saxons, who first came over a.d. 449. St. Sixtus III., more 
properly called St. Xystus (July 31,432 — Aug. 18,440), probably rebuilt 
and decorated with the mosaics now existing, the church of Sta. Maria 
Maggiore, founded by Liberius, one of his predecessors. The person here 
mentioned was Eudocia the empress, and not her daughter Eudoxia. 

^ The Anglo-Saxons landed in the Isle of Thanet. In 455, they began 
their attacks upon the Britons. 

Marcianus I., son of an obscure but respectable man, was born either in 
Thrace or Illyricum, about a.d. 391 ; married the celebrated Pulcheria, 
widow of Theodosius II.; died in the midst of universal popularity after a 
reign of six years, on the 26th of June, 457, in his sixty-ninth year. 

'^ The inhabitants of Emesa still believe that they possess the head of 
John the Baptist. 

^ Both Bede and Ordericus fall into an anachronism in making the 



A.D. 420 — 448.] FIRST KINGS OF THE FRANKS. Ill 

he was received with the greatest respect by Yalentinian 
and Placidia, and then departed in the Lord. His body 
was carried to Auxerre, with honourable attendance and 
working of miracles. The patrician Aetius, the saviour 
of the western part of the empire, and once the terror of 
Attila himself, was put to death by Yalentinian. With 
him fell the western empire, which was never restored.^ 

About this time the kingdom of the Franks was founded. 
For Ferramund [Pharamond], the son of Francus, duke of 
Sens, during the reign of Theodosius the younger, son of 
Arcadius, and when Celestine was pope, was the first king 
of the Franks. He reigned five years ; and on his demise, 
was succeeded by Clodion, whose reign lasted seven years. - 

Then the devil appeared to the Jews in the island of 
Crete, in the form of Moses, and promised that he would 
conduct them dry-shod across the sea to the land of 
promise ; but several lost their lives, and the remainder were 
converted to the Christian faith. 

In the second year of Marcian and Yalentinian, Merove, 
king of the Franks, died after a reign of thirteen years, and 
was succeeded by Childeric his son, who governed the 
Franks twenty-three years.^ 

Leo [I.] was emperor seventeen years. After the council 
of Chalcedon he addressed a circular letter to all the ortho- 
dox bishops throughout the world, requesting them to let 
him know their individual opinions respecting the decisions 
of that assembly. The answers he received from them all, 
on the true nature of the incarnation of Christ, agreed as if 



Saxons parties in the war which resulted in the victory of Germanus, who 
arrived in Britain about the year 429, returned again in 446, accompanied 
by Severus, bishop of Treves, when he procured the banishment of the 
leaders of the Pelagians from the island. He died at Ravenna, July 31, 
448, one year before the arrival of the Saxons in this country. 

^ In transcribing this passage from Bede, Ordericus forgot that the 
empire of the west had then been re-established more than three centuries. 

* Seven or eight years are attributed to the reign of Pharamond. As 
for Clodion, a much better authenticated personage, he reigned twenty 
years (427—448). 

' The year 456 is commonly considered as the time of the death of 
Merovd, which is here referred to the interval between Aug. 25, 451, 
and Aug. 24, 452. Childeric his son reigned about twenty-five years 
(456—481). 



112 OUDERICIJS YITALIS. ]"b.]. CH.XXTTI. 

they were written at the same moment and dictated hj the 
same person.^ 

Theodoret, bishop of Cyra, which took its name from its 
founder Cyrus, king of the Persians, wrote a treatise on the 
true nature of the incarnation of our Saviour against 
Eutiches, and Disocorus, bishop of Alexandria, who denied 
the human nature of Christ. Besides this, he composed an 
Ecclesiastical History, from the end of the Chronicle of 
Eusebius, to his own time, that is to say, the reign of the 
Emperor Leo, during which he departed this life. Victorius, 
in obedience to the orders of Pope Hilary, composed his 
Paschal Canon, of five hundred and thirty-two years.^ 

Zeno reigned seventeen years. The body of the apostle 
Barnabas, and the Gospel of St. Matthew, copied by him, 
were discovered, by a revelation made by himself.^ Odoacer, 
king of the Goths, made himself master of Eome, which 
the kings of that nation held for some time. 

On the death of Theodoric, son of Triarius, another 
Theodoric, surnamed Walamir, became king of the Goths. 
This prince ravaged both Macedonia and Thessaly, set on 
fire several quarters of the imperial city, aud invaded and 
occupied Italy. Huneric, king of the Vandals, an Arian, 
banished or drove out more than three hundred aud thirty- 
four Catholic bishops in Africa, closed their churches, and 
tortured the people in various ways, chopping off their 
hands and cutting out their tongues, but he could not pre- 
vent the Catholic faith from being openly confessed.* 



^ [a.d. 457 — 454.] The emperor Leo addressed his circular letters to 
the metropolitans a.d. 457, and received their answers in 458. 

- Theodoret, born about a.d. 387, bishop of Cyra in 423, died about 458. 
His Ecclesiastical History is not brought down to the reign of Leo (a.d. 
457), nor later than the year 429. Victorius composed his Paschal Canon 

in 457. 

' The tomb of St. Barnabas was discovered about the year 488, in the 
environs of Salamis. The Gospel of St. Matthew was written on the wood 
of the cypress tree. The emperor Zeno enriched it with gold ornaments, 
and deposited it in the chapel of his palace, where it was used every year, 
on Holy Thursday. 

* Odoacer, having become master of Rome, was proclaimed king of Italy 
on the 23rd of August, 476. Theodoric succeeded him in March, 493. 
The two Macedonias and Thessaly were devastated in the year 482; and 
the persecution of the Catholics by Huneric took place in 484. 



A.D. 474 — 518.] ZENO — AXASTASIUS. 313 

Aurelius Ambrosiiis, a man of great moderation, the only 
one of Eoman extraction who had the good fortune to 
escape the swords of the Saxons, when they had massacred 
his parents, who were next robed in the imperial purple, 
now led the Britons to battle against their conquerors who 
were defeated in turn. From that day victory declared 
itself, sometimes in favour of one party, sometimes of the 
other, until the moment came when a more powerful 
foreigner possessed the whole island, for a long period.^ 

In the first year of the reign of Zeno, on the death of 
Childeric, his son Clovis began to reign in Gaul, and held 
the sceptre with a powerful hand for nineteen years.^ 

Anastasius governed the empire for the space of eighteen 
years. Thrasamond, king of the Vandals, ordered the 
Catholic churches to be closed, and banished two hundred 
and twenty bishops to Sardinia. Pope Symmachus, who 
either founded or repaired a great number of churches, 
ordered dwellings to be erected for the poor near the 
churches of St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. Lawrence, and 
sent everv vear monev and clothes to Sardinia and Africa, 
for the bishops who were banished. Anastasius, who, 
favouring the heresy of Eutyches, persecuted the Catholics, 
was killed by lightning from heaven.^ 

Clovis, king of the Franks, was baptized by St. Eemi, 
archbishop of E-heims, in the fifteenth year of his reign, with 
three thousand of his nobles. He died four years afterwards, 
and was succeeded by his son Theodoric. On his death, 
Clotaire, his brother, reigned fifty-one years in Prance. At 
that time, Guildard and Elavius flourished in the see of 
Eouen ; and Mamertus, archbishop of Yienne, appointed 
litanies, that is to say, rogations, before Ascension-day, on 
account of the destructive plague which afflicted the people.* 

^ A date cannot be assigned with certainty to the victory gained by the 
Britons, commanded by Aurelius Ambrosius, over the Anglo-Saxons. 

" The reign of Zeno began in February, 474, and that of Clovis in 481. 
This prince reigned not nineteen, but about thirty years (481 — 511). 

^ Thrasamond, king of the Vandals, ascended the throne Sept. 21, 496. 
It was in 504 or 505 that he banished two hundred and twenty-eight 
bishops to Sardinia. Pope Symmachus (Nov. 22, 493 — July 19, 514) 
was a native of this island. It is doubtful whether Anastasius was killed 
by a thunderbolt. 

* Duchesne has corrected (?) the text by omitting the decimal in 

VOL. I. I 



114 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.I. CH.XXIII. 

Justin the elder reigned eight years.^ Pope John, when 
visiting Constantinople, was met at the Grolden Gate, by a 
great concourse of people, in whose presence he restored to 
sight a blind man, who implored relief. On his return, 
Theodoric ordered hiiu to be arrested at Kavenna, and 
thrown into prison with his attendants, where he died. 
Theodoric was led to commit this crime from jealousy, 
because Justin, the defender of the Catholic faith, had re- 
ceived this prelate honourably. In the same year, he put 
to death Symmaclius, patrician of Eavenna ; but the next 
year he himself died suddenly in the same city, and was 
succeeded by his nephew Athalaric. Hilderic, king of the 
Vandals, ordered the bishops to be recalled from exile, and 
the churches to be repaired, after seventy-four years of 
heretical profanations. Benedict, the abbot, was illustrious 
for his virtues, which Pope !St. Grregory has recorded in his 
book of Dialogues." 

Justinian, nephew of Justin by a sister of that prince, 
reigned twenty-eiglit yenrs. The patrician Belisarius, sent 
into Africa by Justinian, subdued the Vandals. He re- 
took Carthage after it had been ninety-six years in their 
hands, whom he defeated and expelled, taking their king 
Gelimer, whom he sent prisoner to Constantinople. The 

counting the years of the reign of Clovis after his baptism, the MSS. 
having xiv. The French editor of Ordericus Vitalis has restored the 
original reading, as, though evidently faulty, it agrees with the total 
number of years assigned to the reign of Clovis in a preceding paragraph. 
On the death of Clovis, the kingdom of the Franks was divided between 
his four sons, and was not re-united by Clotaire until the successive deaths 
of his brothers and their heirs. Clotaire, therefore, dispossessed, not his 
brother Theodoric, but his grand-nephew Theodebald, of the kingdom of 
Metz. St. Godard and Flavins, or Filleul, were indeed contemporaries of 
this prince, but not St. Mamertus, as he died May 1 1, 475. 

1 July 10, 518— August 1, 527. 

^ Pope John I. died May 18, a.d. 526, at Ravenna, in the prison where 
Theodoric ordered him to be confined, on his return from Constantino- 
pie; Symmachus, on the 2oth of May, 525 or 526, and Theodoric himself, 
on the 30th of August of this last year. The recall of the Catholic 
bishops into Africa by Hilderic appears to have taken place immediately 
after the accession of this prince to the throne, in May, 523. The 
number of years which our author gives here, as the duration of the perse- 
cution, is inexact, whether we reckon from the first period (a.d. 437), the 
second (a.d. 483), or the third (504 or 505). St. Benedict, born in 480, 
died ou the 2ist of May, 543. 



A.D. 527 — 578.] JUSTINIAN — JUSTIN THE YOUNGEE. 115 

body of St. Antliony tlie monk, found by a divine revelation, 
was conveyed to Alexandria, and buried in the church of 
St. John the Baptist. Dionysius the Little v^rote on the 
paschal cycles, beginning with the year of the incarnation 
of our Lord. At the same time the code of Justinian was 
promulgated throughout the world. Victor, bishop of Capua, 
also composed a book concernicg Easter, in which In 
refuted the errors of Victorius.^ 

King Clotaire died at a great age, and the kingdom ot 
the Franks was parted into four divisions ; Paris fell to 
the lot of Charibert, Orleans to Guntran, Soissons to Chil- 
peric, and Metz to Sigebert. But in the thirty-sixth year 
of the reign of Justinian, King Sigebert was slain by the 
treachery of his brother Chilperic, with whom he was at 
war. His son Childebert, who was yet in his infanc}', suc- 
ceeded, under the guardianship of his mother Brunehaut, 
and reigned twenty-five years.^ 

Justin the Younger's reign lasted eleven years.^ The 
patrician Narses vanquished and killed Totila, the king of 
the Goths, in Italy. The E^omans, for whom he had 
struggled bravely against the Goths, enviously accusing 
him before Justin and his wife Sophia of oppressing Italy, 
he retired to Naples in Campania, whence he wrote letters 
to the Lombards, to induce them to invade and take posses- 
sion of Italy. Pope John finished and consecrated the 
church of SS. Philip and James, which his predecessor 
Pelagiiis had begun. Then the warlike Alboin, son of 
Audoin, king of the Lombards, passed from Pannonia into 
Italy, at the head of the Guinili, and, with the consent of 
the patrician jSTarses, subjected it to his dominion.* 

^ Belisarius put an end to the dominion of the Vandals in Africa, and 
took their king Gelimer captive, a.d. 534. The body of St. Anthony was 
brought to Alexandria about 530. The Justinian code was published three 
times, A.D. 529, 533, and 534. The edition we now possess is the last 
of these. Victor, bishop of Capua, composed his Treatise on the Paschal 
Cycle about 540 or 545. 

^ Tlie thirty-sixth year of Justinian corresponds with 563 — 563, while 
Sigebert was assassinated in 575. Childebert, king of Austrasia, died in 
596, in the twentieth year of his reign. 

^ November 14, 565— October 1, 578. 

* The battle in which Totila was defeated and killed by the army of 
Narses, was fought in the month of June, 552. Narses retired to Naples in 
567, but returned to Rome, and died in the same year. It is not true that 

I 2 



116 OKUEEICUS YITALIS. [b.I. CH. XXIII. 

Tiberius Constantine reigned seven years.^ Gregory, then 
apostolic nuncio at Constantinople, and afterwards bishop of 
Borne, composed his commentary on the book of Job, and, 
in the presence of Tiberius, convicted Eutychius, the bishop, 
of error in his belief in the resurrection. He proved this 
so clearly that the emperor was of opinion that the book 
Eutychius had written on the resurrection ought to be 
committed to the flames, having also refuted it himself by 
allegations derived from Catholic authorities. Eutychius 
taught that in the glory of the resurrection, our bodies 
will be impalpable, and more subtile than the winds and 
the air ; an assertion which was contrary to these words of 
our Saviour: "Handle me and see; for a spirit hath not 
flesh and bones as ye see me have." ^ 

The nation of the Longobards, or Lombards, having in 
their train famine and mortality, overran the whole of Italv, 
and laid siege to the city of Rome. Alboin was then their 
king. 

Maurice reigned twenty-one years. Hermenegild, son 
of Leuvigild, king of the Goths, having resolutely confessed 
the Catholic faith, was deprived by his father, who was 
an Arian, of all his honours, thrown into prison and chains, 
and at last beheaded, on the second night after Easter ; and 
thus the king and martyr exchanged an earthly throne for 
the celestial kingdom. His brother Recared, who soon after 
succeeded his father, converted to the Catholic faith the 
whole nation of the Goths under his dominion, at the 
instance of Leander, bishop of Seville, who had also in- 
structed Hermenegild.^ 

the Lombards invaded Italy at his instigation. This invasion took place in 
April, 568, and the taking of Milan on the 4th of September, 569. 
Guinili or Winili is the primitive name of the Lombards. Alboin, who 
led them into Italy, died June 28, 573. John III., who finished the 
church of SS. Philip and James, filled the pontifical chair for thirteen 
years (July 18, 560— July 13, 573). 

- September 26, 578 — Angust 4, 582. 

* Luke xxiv. 49. Gregory the Great resided at Constantinople as apocri- 
sary of the Roman church, from 579 till 584; he was elected pope in 590; 
and died March r2th, 604. The discussion betweenhim and Eutychius, 
patriarch of Constantinople, who retracted his error, took place in 582. 
In 593, ho persuaded Agilulf, king of the Lombards, to raise the siege of 
Rome. iMboin had been then dead twenty years. 

^ The martyrdom of Hermenegild, by order of his father Leuvigild, took 
place in 585 or 586, and the return of Recared to Catholicism in 587. 



A.D. 5S2 — GOl.] MAURICE — PHOCAS. 117 

Maurice married the daughter of Tiberius Constantine, 
and was the first of the Greek emperors who ordered the 
Roman fasces to be carried before him. In the thirteenth 
year of the reign of Maurice, the thirteenth indiction, 
Gregory, bishop of the Roman church, and a very learned 
doctor, assembled a council of twenty-three bishops at the 
tomb of St. Peter the apostle, to make such decrees as the 
state of the church required. The same pope, having sent 
into Britain, Augustine, Mellitus, John, and several other 
monks who feared God, converted the English to Chris- 
tianity. Ethelbert soon received the faith of Christ with 
the whole Kentish nation, his subjects, and the neighbouring 
provinces under liis rule, conferring bishoprics, not only on 
Augustine, his own teacher, but also on other holy priests. 
The English nations to the north of the river Humber, 
under their kings Ella and Ethelfrid, had not yet heard the 
word of life. Gregory, writing to Augustine and the bishops 
of London and York, in the eighteenth year of the reign of 
Maurice, in the fourth indiction, sent them the pall, and 
gave them the title of metropolitans, and died four years 
afterwards.^ 

Phocas reigned eight years .^ This prince, at the request 
of Pope Boniface, decided that the Roman and apootolical 
see was the head of all the churches in Christendom, in 
order to put a stop to the pretensions of the church of Con- 
stantinople, which styled itself the first of all the Christian 
churches. The same emperor, at the instance of another 
pope Boniface, gave orders that the ancient temple called 
the Pantheon, after being cleansed from the pollutions of 
idolatry, should be converted into a church, dedicated to the 
blessed Mary, ever-virgin, and all the martyrs, so that the 
very place where of old they celebrated the worship, not of 
all the gods, but of all the demons, was from that day ren- 
dered sacred to the memory of all the saints. The Persians, 
still continuing a ruinous war against the republic, wrested 
from it many of the Roman provinces, and even Jerusalem, 
destroying the churches, profaning everything sacred, and 

1 Maurice [a.d. 582 — 602.] married Constantina, the eldest daughter of 
Tiberius II., and was murdered by Phocas in 602. The synod here 
mentioned is the third council of Rome, opened July 5, 595, The next 
year, Grcgorv sent the missionaries to England, where they arrived in 597. 

2 A.D. tiO-i— GIO. 



118 OEDERICFS YITALIS. [b.I. CH.XXIIT. 

among the ornaments belonging to the holy places, or to 
individuals, they carried off the standard of our Saviour's 
cross.^ 

Heraclius reigned thirty-one years.^ Anastasius, a Persian 
monk, suffered a glorious martyrdom for Christ's sake. 
Although born in Persia, and instructed by his father, when 
a child, in the science of the Magi, yet as soon as he heard 
the name of Christ from the captive Christians, he presently 
turned to him with all his heart ; and having quitted Persia, 
he went to Chalcedon and Hierapolis, seeking Christ every- 
where, and lastly to Jerusalem. Here he received the grace 
of baptism, and entered the monastery of abbot Anastasius, 
situated at the distance of four miles from the city. Having 
there spent seven years, under the monastic rule, while on 
a pilgrimage to CsBsarea, in Palestine, he fell into the hands 
of the Persians, and after much suffering from Marzabanes, 
the judge, who caused him to be scourged, imprisoned, and 
bound in chains, he was at length sent into Persia to King 
Chosroes. This prince ordered him to be scourged three 
times at intervals, then suspended by one hand for three 
hours, and at last to be beheaded, with seventy other 
martyrs. Soon afterwards a certain demoniac, being clothed 
in the tunic of this saint, was healed. Meanwhile,the emperor 
Heraclius, coming suddenly at the head of an army, and 
•.defeating Chosroes and the Persians, recovered with triumph 
the captive Christians, and brought back to Jerusalem the 
wood of the holy cross. The relics of the blessed martyr 
Anastasius were conveyed at first to his monastery, but 
afterwards to B-ome, where they are exposed to veneration 
in the convent of St. Paul the apostle (ad aquas Salvias) .^ 

In the sixteenth year of the reign of Heraclius, in the 

^ What Boniface III. obtained from Phocas was an order that the 
patriarch of Constantinople should no longer take the title of cacumenical, 
which Pelagius II. and St. Gregory had already protested against in vain. 
The dedication of the Pantheon by Boniface IV. took place on the 13th 
of May, GIO. The invasions of the Persians had commenced as earlv as 
603; but the taking of Jerusalem and the carrying off of the true cross hap- 
pened in 614, and consequentlv in the following reign. 

2 October 5, 610— February 11, 641. 

^ Now Sto. Paulo fuori muri. The martyrdom of St. Athanasius took 
place on the 22nd of January, 628. This victory was gained by Heraclius 
over Chosroes towards the end of 627; but the captives and the relics were 
not restored before 628, 



A.D. 610 — 641.1 HERACLIUS. 119 

fifteenth indiction, Edwin, the excellent king of the 
English in Britain living to the north of the Hnmber, 
received, as well as his snbjects, the word of salvation 
preached to them by bishop Panlinus, whom the venerable 
Justus, archbishop of Canterbury, had sent into those parts. 
In the eleventh year of his reign, and about 180 years after 
the arrival of the English in Britain, Panlinus was raised to 
the episcopal see of York. As an auspicious omen of the 
faith that was to come, and of the celestial kingdom, the 
king Edwin's temporal power had so increased, that (what no 
English king before him had ever achieved) he extended his 
dominion through every quarter of the island, whether 
possessed by the Saxons or the Britons. At that time Pope 
Honorius refuted an error which had arisen among the Scots, 
with regard to the observance of Easter, in a letter ad- 
dressed to that nation ; and John, the successor of Severinus, 
who followed Honorius, also wrote to the same people while 
he was pope elect, concerning Easter and the Pelagian 
heresy, which had again revived in their country.^ 

After the deaths of Theodebert and Theoderic, Clotaire 
the Great, the son of Chilperic, flourished in Erance, of 
which he obtained the sole monarchy. On his death 
Dagobert, his son, succeeded him, and for twelve years 
held the reigns of government with a powerful hand. His 
son Clovis ascended the throne after him, and at his death 
bequeathed his dominions to his three sons, Clotaire, 
Theoderic, and Childeric. In the time of these kings, 
several holy men distinguished themselves in Erance by 
their virtues and miracles : Eomanus and Ouen, Ansbert 
and Eloi, Evroult and Lanmer, Maur and Columban, 
Philibert and AA^andrille, with many others, powerful by 
their faith and preaching, and illustrious for their sanctity 
and miracles.' 

^ Edwin, king of Northumberland (617 — 633), wms baptized by 
Paulinus on Easter-day, April 12, 627, and consequently in the seven- 
teenth year of Heraclius, and not the sixteenth, one hundred and eighty 
years after Vortigern's calling in the Anglo-Saxons, but only one hundred 
and seventy-eigiit after their arrival in J>ritain. Honorius filled the 
apostolic see from the year 625, or 626, till the 12th of October, 638. 
John IV. must have written his letter to the Scots in 640. 

' Theodebert II. died towards the close of 612, and Thierri,or Theoderic 
II. in 613. From that time Clotaire II. reigned alone until his death ia 



120 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.I. CH. XXIII. 

Heracleonas reigned two years with his mother Martina. 
Cyrus, bishop of Alexandria, Sergius and Pjrrhiis, bishops 
of Constantmople, renewed the heresy of the Acephali, by 
teaching the doctrine of one operation and one will in the 
divinity and humanity of Christ. Pjrrhus came from Africa 
to Home, on a visit to Pope Theodore, and feigning a peni- 
tence which afterwards appeared to have been assumed, pre- 
sented the pope, in the presence of the clergy and people, 
a writing under his hand, condemning all that he or his 
predecessors had written or done against the Catholic faith. 
Deceived by this step, the pope kindly received him as 
bishop of the imperial city. But, on his return to Constan- 
tinople, he re-asserted his former errors, upon which Pope 
Theodore convoked the priests and clergy in the church of 
St. Peter, prince of the apostles, and sentenced him to ex- 
communication.^ 

Constantino, the brother of Heraclius, reigned six 
months.^ Paul, the successor of Pyrrhus, not only troubled 
the Catholics by his strainge doctrine, as his predecessors had 
done, but by open persecution. The apostolic nuncios, sent 
by the holy Homan church to correct him, were imprisoned, 
banished, or scourged ; and he wei;t so far as to strip and 
pull down the altar they had dedicated in the oratory of 
Placidia's palace, forbidding them to celebrate mass there. 

628; if we except the time when Dagohert, his son, was taken as his 
colleague in the kingdom of Austrasia in G22. The latter reigned sixteen 
years in Australia and ten in Neustria and Burgundy. Clevis II. onlv 
began the nineteenth year of his reign (Jan. 19, 638 — Sept. 656.) Childeric 
was his second and Theoderic III. his third son. The holy persons here 
mentioned died as follows : !Maur (584), Laumer (590), Evroult (596), 
Columban (615), Komanus (638), Eloi (659), Wandrille (667), Ouen 
(683), Philibert (684), Ansbert (693 or 695). 

^ Heracleonas reigned only a few months, May 25 — October, 641. 
Sergius, patriarch of Constantinople, founded the Monotheiite heresy in 
626. It was adopted by his successor Pyrrhus, and by Cyrus, patriarch 
of Alexandria. Pyrrhus abjured this heresy in 646, but returned to 
it in 648, at the instance of Constans 11. It was definitively condemned, 
and the prelates who favoured it anathematized, by popes Theodore and 
Martin, in the councils of Rome (648) and of Lateran (649). Monothe- 
lism is not, as we might be led by the words of our author to believe, the 
complete reproduction of the more ancient heresy of the Acephali. 

'■* Our author's chronology is here much confused. He not only follows 
Bede in placing Heraclius Constantine, who is here spoken of, after his 
younger brother, but makes him the brother instead of the son of Heraclius. 



A.D. 641 — GG8.] CONSTATS II. 121 

Like Kis predecessors, therefore, the sentence of deposition 
was justly pronounced against him by the apostolic see.^ 

Constans [11.], the son of Constantino, reigned twenty- 
eight years. Deceived by Paul, as Heraclius his grand- 
father had been by Sergius, also bishop of the imperial 
city, he published an edict against the Catholic faith, defining 
that there were neither one nor two wills, or operations, in 
Christ, as if we were to believe that he had neither willed 
nor acted. AVherefore Pope Martin, having assembled at 
Eome a synod of one hundred and five bishops, excommu- 
nicated Cyrus, Sergius, Pyrrhus, and Paul, the heretics just 
mentioned. The exarch Theodore, who was soon afterwards 
sent by the emperor, carried oft' PopeMartin from theLateran, 
and conducted him to Constantinople. He was then banished 
to the Chersonesus, where he ended his days, and the lustre 
of his miracles still continues. The synod above-mentioned 
was held in the ninth year of the reign of Constans, in the 
month of October, in the eighth indiction. This emperor 
sent to Yitalian, recently elected pope, a book of the 
gospels, written in letters of gold, and ornamented all 
round the cover with diamonds of an extraordinary size, to 
be deposited in the church of St. Peter the apostle. A few 
years afterwards, that is, during the sixth indiction, the same 
emperor, on his visit to Home, oftered on the altar of St. 
Peter a pall of cloth of gold, and made his whole army 
enter the church, each soldier carrying a wax-candle. The 
following year, the sun was eclipsed on the 5tli of the nones 
[3rd] of May, about ten o'clock in the day. Archbishop 
Theodore and Adrian, the abbot, a man squally learned, 
were sent by Yitalian into Britain, where they caused most 
of the English churches to bear the fruits of sound doctrine. 
Constans, after frequently subjecting the provinces to 
incredible ravages, was assassinated in a bath in the twelfth 
indiction ; and not long after Yitalian, the pope, departed to 
the realms of bliss. ^ 

^ Paul II. was deposed in the council of the year 648; but, supported 
by the Emperor Constans II., he continued to fill the see, and persecuted 
the Catholics until his death, a.d. 654. 

•^ Constans published his edict named the Typjis, or Formulary, in 648. 
It was soon after condemned by the council of Lateran in 649. Pope 
St Martin was carried off from the church of St. John Lateran, and 



122 OBDEEICUS TITALTS. [b.I. CIT.XXTIT. 

Constantlne, the brother of Constans, the last emperor, 
reigned seventeen years.' The Saracens invaded Sicily, but 
soon afterwards returned to Alexandria, carrying off an 
immense booty. Pope Agatho, yielding to the prayer of the 
Emperor Constantine and his two brothers, Heraclius and 
Tiberius, princes remarkable for their piety, sent legates 
to Constantinople, to restore union among the holy churches 
of God. Amongst these were John, then deacon of the 
Koman church, who became a bishop a short time afterwards. 
These legates were received with the greatest tokens of 
regard by Constantine, the august defender of the Catholic 
faith, and received orders to examine the true doctrine in 
an amicable conference, setting aside all philosophical dis- 
putations. They were supplied from the library of Constan- 
tinople with all the books of the ancient fathers of the 
church which they required. One hundred and fifty bishops 
assembled under the presidency of Greorge, patriarch of the 
imperial city, and Macharius, patriarch of Antioch. Those 
■who pretended that there was but one will and one operation 
in Christ, were convicted of running counter to numerous 
passages of the Catholic fathers. This debate ended, Greorge 
was reclaimed ; but Macharius with his followers, as well as 
his predecessors, Cyrus, Sergius, Honorius, Pyrrhus, Paul, 
and Peter, were anathematized ; and Theophanius, a Sicilian 
abbot, was made bishop of Antioch instead of Macharius. 
So much favour was shown to these messengers of catholic 
unity that John, bishop of Oporto, one of them, was allowed 
to celebrate high mass before the emperor and the patriarch, 

embarked for Constantinople on the 19th of June, 653. He was then 
banished to the Chersonesus, where he died, Sept. 16, 665, from the cruel 
treatment to which he was subjected. Our author, as well as Bede, while 
mentioning the offerings which the emperor made to Pope Vitalian I., 
when he visited Rome in July, 663, has omitted to speak of the depre- 
dations he committed during the twelve days he remained there. He 
carried them so far as even to strip the Pantheon of its bronze roof, though 
it was now converted into a Christian church. Constans went from Rome 
to Sicily, where he was murdered in a bath at Syracuse, on the 15th of 
July, 66h. The eclipse of the svm here mentioned happened on the 1st 
of May, 664, at half past three in the evening, according to the astrono- 
mical calculations. Archbishop Theodore was sent into England, a.d. 
66ii. 

^ A.D. 668 — 685. Constantine Pogonatus was not the son, but the brother 
of Constans. Our author was led into the error by copying Bede. 



A.D. G80, G81.] THE SIXTH OEFEEAL COTTTfCTL. 123 

in the diiircli of St. Sophia, on the Sunday after Easter, in 
Latin. This was the sixth (ecumenical council, and it was 
held at Constantinople, and its acts written in the Grreelc 
language. It assembled in the time of Pope Agatho, in 
compliance with the request of the emperor then reigning, 
the most pious Constantino, in whose palace it met, and 
was attended by the legates of the holy see and one hun- 
dred and fifty bishops.^ 

The first general council was held at IS'ice against Arlus, 
in the time of Pope Julius, under the Emperor Constantino 
[I.] : when three hundred and eighteen bishops were present. 

The second, consisting of one hundred and fifty fathers, 
assembled at Constantinople to condemn the doctrines of 
Macedonius and Eudoxius, in the time of Pope Damasus, 
and the Emperor Grratian, when Nectarius was ordained' 
bishop of Constantinople. 

The third council, of two hundred fathers, held its sit- 
tings at Ephesus, during the reign of Theodosius the G-reat, 
and in the popedom of Celestine, to oppose Nestorius, bishop 
of the imperial city. 

The fourth council, that of Chalcedon, consisted of six 
hundred and thirty bishops under Pope Leo, in the days of 
the Emperor Marcian. Its censures were levelled against 
Eutyches, who was at the head of some most unprincipled 
monks. ^ 

The fifth council, which also assembled at Constantinople, 
when Vigilius was pope and Justinian emperor, was 
directed against Theodore and all heretics. 

The sixth oecumenical council has been just mentioned. 

St. Etheldrida, who devoted herself to Christ in perpetual 
virginity, was daughter of Anna, king of the East Angles, 
and first married to Tonbert, a very great man, chief of the 

^ Pope Agatho, consecrated in June, 678 (or 670), was represented by 
his legates at this council, which sat from the 7th of Nov. 680, until the 
16th of Sept. 681. Amongst these legates we find John, who v/as after- 
Avards pope under the name of John V. (June 10, 686 — Aug. 7, 687). 
In this council the chiefs of the Moncthelites, including Pope Honorius, 
were again condemned and anathematized, Macharius, patriarch of Alex- 
andria, deposed, and George, patriarch of Constantinople, obliged to recant. 

^ The general opinion is, that there were only five hundred and twenty, 
or five hundred and twenty-six, bishops present at the oecumenical council 
of Chalcedon, while our two authors have raised the number to 630. 



124i ORDERICrS VITALIS. [b.i. cn.xxiiT. 

Southern Girvii, and afterwards to Egfrid, king of the North- 
umbrians, with whom she lived twelve years undefiled by 
intercourse with her husband. She afterwards descended from 
the throne, and, taking the veil, became a mother of virgins 
and the pious nurse of holy women, choosing a site for the 
erection of a convent in a place called the Isle of Ely. 
Even her dead body recalled to mind her living merits, for 
it was found entire, as well as the shroud in which it was 
buried, sixteen years afterwards.^ 

Justinian the younger, son of Constantine, reigned ten 
years, lie concluded a truce with the Saracens for^ ten 
years, by sea and land. The province of Africa was re- 
united to the Roman empire, from which it had been 
wrested by the Saracens after they had captured and 
destroyed Carthage. The emperor, finding that Sergius, of 
happy memory, bishop of the Roman church, would not 
ratify and subscribe the acts of the heretical council, which 
he had convoked at Constantinople, sent Zacharias, the 
captain of his guards, with orders to convey him there ; but 
the troops of Ravenna and the neighbourhood, opposed the 
cruel orders of the prince, and Zacharias was driven out of 
Rome, insulted and ill-used. 

In the fourth year of the reign of Justinian, Pepin 
became mayor of the palace in France. Pope Sergius 
ordained that venerable man AVilbrord, surnamed Clement, 
bishop of the Frisians. An Englishman by birth, he quitted 
Britain to live amongst the barbarians, every day increasing 
the influence of the Christian faith and destroying the 
power of Satan. Justinian, deprived for his perfidy of the 
imperial dignity, retired, an exile, into Pontus, where he was 
hospitably entertained by the abbot Cyrus.^ 

'^ "For the history of the pious princess Etheldrida, who died in 679, and 
a description of the convent she founded at Ely, consult the Ecclesiastical 
History of Bede, lib. iv. c, 19 ; the second volume of the Acta SS. Ord. 
Sancti Benedicti, and the Bollandists on the •24th of June. The australes 
Girvii appear to be the inhabitants of the country situate on the right 
bank of the Tyne, in the county of Durham, in the neighbourhood of 
Jarrow, the birth-place of Bede, which tlien bore the name of Girvum 
or Girvi." — Le Prevost. " The Girvii inhabited the counties of Rutland, 
Northampton, with part of Lincolnshire, and had their own princes, 
depending on those of Mercia." — iVo/e to Bede's Hist., Bohn's edition. 

^ 685 — 695. Sergius refusing in 692 to sign the acts of the council in 



A.D. G95 — G98.] LEo:ifTius, empeeor. 125 

Leo reigned three years .^ Pope Sergius, by a divine 
I'evelatiou, discovered in the sanctuary of the church of the 
blessed apostle Peter, a silver casket which had remained 
for a long Avhile forgotten in a dark corner, and which 
enclosed a crucifix ornamented with precious stones. Having 
unfolded four coverings studded with gems of remarkable 
size, he perceived that there was inserted in the crucifix a 
portion of the wood of the life-giving cross of Christ. 
Prom that time it is yearly kissed and adored by the people 
on the anniversarv of the exaltation of the cross, in the 
church of Constantino,^ dedicated to our Saviour. 

In Britain, the venerable Cuthbert, who from being a 
hermit, was raised to the bishopric of Lindisfarne,^ wrought 
a succession of miracles from infancy to old age, which have 
rendered his name illustrious. Eleven vears after his inter- 
ment, his body and the robes in which he was buried were 
found as perfect as at the hour of his death. Csedwalla, 
king of the West Saxons, abdicated in favour of Ina, and 
repaired to Rome, where he was baptized by Pope Sergius 
on Easter eve ; and, while yet wearing his white garments, 
was seized with a disorder that caused his death, on the 
12th of the calends of May [20th of April]. By order of 
the pope, who had given him at the baptismal font the name 
of Peter, he was buried in the church of the holy apostle 
whose name he had adopted, and the following epitaph was 
engraved on his tomb : — 

" High state and place, kindred, a royal crown, 
The spoils of war, great triumphs and renown ; 

Trullo of the preceding year, Zacharias was sent to arrest him in 694. 
Africa was not re-taken from the Mohametans till 697, and was again lost 
the following year. The fourth year of Justinian II. corresponds with 683 
— 689 ; but Pepin d'Heristal was raised to the dignity of " Maire du 
Palais" in 687. Wilbrord, the apostle of Friesland, died, according to 
iVlabillon, in 740 or 741; but according to Dr. Smith in 745. Justinian 
II., after having his nose cut off, was banished to Cherson in the Crimea, 
in the autumn of 695, and was entertained at the monastery of Chora by 
Cyrus the abbot. 

^ For Leo, read Leontius. 

'^ The church of Constantino is now called St. John Lateran. 

^ St. Cuthbert, bishop of Lindisfarne, died Mar. 20, 687. Lindisfame 
was the original seat of the present bishopric of Durham, transferred thither 
in 995. 



126 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.I. CH.XXIII. 

Nobles, and cities walled to guard his state, 
His palaces and his familiar seat ; 
Whatever skill and valour made his own, 
And what liis great forefathers handed down : 
Cedwall armipotent, by Heaven inspired, 
For love of heaven, left all, and here retired. 
Peter to see, and Peter's holy seat, 
The royal stranger turned his pilgrim feet; 
Drew from the fount its purifying streams, 
And sliared the radiance of celestial beams." 

After more to the same purpose, the epitaph thus con- 
cludes : — 

" From Britain's distant isle his vent'rous way, 
O'er lands, o'er seas, by toilsome journeyings lay, 
Rome to behold, her glorious temple see. 
And mystic offerings make on bended knee. 
White robed among the flock of Christ he shone, 
His flesh to earth, his soul to heaven is gone. 
Sure, wise was he to lay his sceptre down, 
And change an earthly for a heavenly crown." ^ 

Tiberius reigned seven years. The synod of Aquileia, 
from its lack of knowledge in the faith, was reluctant to 
admit the fifth general council, until it had listened to the 
sound instructions of the holy pope, when it consented to 
receive it, as the other Christian churches had done. 
Grisulf, duke of the Lombards of Beneventum, ravaged 
Campania with fire and sword, and reduced a number of the 
inhabitants to captivity. As no human power could resist 
these violent attacks. Pope John [VL], who had succeeded 
Sergius, sent priests, loaded with presents, who redeemed 
the captives and induced the enemy to retire. Another 
pope of the same name filled the apostolical chair imme- 
diately after him, and, among other remarkable works, 
erected a chapel dedicated to the holy mother of Grod — a 
building of great beauty, within the church of the blessed 
Peter, prince of the apostles.' 

Aribert [II.], king of the Lombards, restored to the holy 
see a number of farms in the Cottian Alps, which justly 
belonged to the apostolic see, but had been long before 
seized by the Lombards, ordering this donation to be 

^ The whole epitaph is given by Bede, Eccles. Hist., b. v. c. 7. 

^ John VI. filled the papal chair from Oct. 28, 701, till Jan. 9, 705. 
The chapel which John VII., his succesior, erected, was called Sancta 
Maria ad Prssepe. 



A.D. 705 — 713.] JUSTINIAN II. 127 

inscribed in letters of gold on a tablet, which was sent to 
E-ome.^ 

Justinian [IT.] reigned six years with his son Tiberius. 
Having re-ascended the throne by the assistance of Terbellis, 
king of the Bulgarians, he condemned to death the patricians 
who had driven him out of his kingdom, as well as Leontius, 
who had usurped his sceptre, and Tiberius, his successor, 
who had detained the banished emperor in custody within 
the walls of the city, during the whole period of his reign. 
He ordered the patriarch Callinichus to be sent to E-ome, 
after having his eyes put out, and bestowed his bishopric 
npon Cyrus, who was abbot in the Chersonesus, and who 
had entertained him during his exile. Having sent for 
Pope Constantine, he received and dismissed him with great 
honour, so much so that, on the Sunday before his 
departure, the emperor requested him to say mass in his 
presence, and received the sacrament at his hands. Pros- 
trate on the ground, he besought the pope to intercede for 
the pardon of his sins ; and he also renewed the privileges of 
the whole chui'ch. The troops which, notwithstanding the 
remonstrances of the pope, Justinian had sent into the 
Chersonesus to seize the person of Philippicus, banished 
there by his orders, suddenly took the part of Philippicus, 
and the whole army proclaimed him emperor. On his 
return to Constantinople, when near the twelfth milestone 
from the city, he joined battle with Justinian, who was 
defeated and killed, and Philippicus mounted the throne.^ 

Philippicus reigned eighteen months. This emperor 
ejected Cyrus from his bishopric, and ordered him to 
return to Pontus to resume, as abbot, the government of 
his monastery. He addressed to Pope Constantine a mis- 
sive so full of unsound doctrine, that, by the advice of the 
apostolic council, Constantine rejected it. In consequence, 
lie ordered tables, inscribed with the acts of the six oecume- 
nical councils, to be set up in the portico of the church of 
St. Peter, as Philippicus had commanded those which were 
in the imperial city to be removed. The Eoman people, 

^ Baronius places this occurrence somewhere about the year 704. 

^ Pone Constantine went to Constantinople October 5th, 710, and 
returned to Iloaie on the ■24 th of October in the following year. Justinian 
was Idiled in December, 711. 



128 OEDEEICUS A^ITALIS, [e.I. Cn.XXIII. 

also decreed that the name of the heretical emperor should 
no longer be used in public documents or on coins ; and his 
effigy was not placed in the church, nor his name pro- 
nounced in the office of the mass.^ 

Anastasius reigned three years. He ordered his prisoner 
Philippicus to be deprived of sight, but his life to be spared. 
This emperor wrote letters to Pope Constantine, and 
commissioned Scolasticus, patrician and exarch of Itah', to 
carry them to Eome. In these letters he showed himself 
a defender of the Catholic faith, and recognized the validity 
of the acts of the sixth holy council. Liutprand, king of 
the Lombards, admonished by the venerable pope, Gregory 
[II.], confirmed the donation of the land situate in the 
Cottian Alps, which Aribert had made and Liutprand had 
annulled. AVulfran, archbishop of Sens and a monk of 
Fontenelle, signalized himself by the many miracles he per- 
formed while preaching the word of God to the Frisians. 
Egbert, a holy man of the English nation, and an honour 
to the priesthood by his monastic life, while a pilgrim to his 
heavenly country, converted several provinces inhabited by 
the Scots to the canonical observance of the time for cele- 
brating Easter, from which they had departed for many 
years. He preached among them in the year 717 of the 
incarnation of our Lord.^ 

Theodosius reigned one year.^ Elected emperor, he defeated 
Anastasius in a severe engagement near the town of Nice, and 
having received his oath of allegiance compelled him to 
become a clerk, and be ordained priest. As soon as he was 
seated upon the throne, being a Catholic, he replaced in its 
former situation the honoured tables containing the acts of 

^ We learn from this curious paragraph what sort of honours were still 
rendered at Rome to the emperors of Constantinople. — According to some 
historians, it was not the acts of the council, but the portraits of the 
bishops present at them, which were set up in the porches of the churches 
at Rome and Constantinople, but that would have formed a collection of 
more than 1500 pictures. 

'■^ Gregory II. filled the pontifical chair from the 19th of May, 715, to 
the 13th of February, 731. The Cottian Alps are now called the Alps of 
Mount Generara. St. Wulfran, bishop of Sens about 690, retired to 
Fontenelle (St, UvandriiJe) in 719, and died there soon after. Bede 
(Hist. Eccl. lib. v. c. 23) informs us that St. Egbert Mas sent into Scotland 
in 716. He died there in 729. Anastasius reigned 713 — 716. 

' Theodosius, January, 716 — March, 717. 



A.D 717 — 741.] LEO, THE IS.VUR1A.>'. 129 

the six lioly synods, which Philippicus had ordered to be 
removed. The river Tiber overflowed its banks, and caused 
much damage in the city of Home ; its waters rose to a 
height of about eight feet in the Broad street (via lata), 
and formed a wide torrent, extending from St. Peter's gate 
to the Milvian bridge. This inundation lasted seven days, 
until, the citizens having frequently made processions with 
litanies, the river returned at last to its channel on the 
eighth day. In those times, it was the custom of great 
numbers of the English, high and low, men and women, 
persons of rank and private individuals, inspired by the love 
of God, to leave Britain and repair to Home.^ 

Leo reigned nine years. '^ In the third year of his reign 
Charles Martel, son of Pepin, became mayor of the palace, 
and, the year following, defeated the tyrant Eagenfred at 
Vinci, and after this victory besieged him in Angers. The 
Saracens, investing Constantinople with an innumerable 
army, besieged the city for the space of three years, until 
the inhabitants, having raised their voices to heaven, their 
fervent prayers were heard, and the greatest part of the 
barbarians perished from hunger, cold, and pestilence ; and 
the survivors, disheartened at the length of the siege, retired. 
On their return to their own country, the Saracens attacked 
the Bulgarians, a nation on the Danube, but sustaining 
another defeat, were forced to seek refuge on board their 

^ Our author only cursorily alludes to passages in Bede describing the 
strong tendency at this period among the Anglo-Saxon princes and others 
to withdraw from the troubles and revolutions then so prevalent, and seek 
the repose of a monastic life in the capital of the Christian world. 

* Our author has servilely followed Bede in the computation of the years 
of the reign of Leo, without reflecting that the English historian, who died 
in 735, could not have seen the end of this emperor's reign. This number 
of nine years proves that Bede finished his treatise, " On the Six Ages of 
the World" about 72() or 727, and consequently four or five years before 
his '* Ecclesiastical History^' (731). The third year of Leo comprehends 
the time between the 25th of March, 719, and the 24th of March, 720; 
Charles Martel was named duke of Austrasia in 715, defeated Ragenfred 
before Vinci in Cambrai, and besieged Angers in 724. The siege of Con- 
stantinople only lasted one year (Aug. 15, 717 — Aug. 15, 718). In the 
winter the earth was covered with ice and snow for one hundred and ten 
days. The Bulgarians attacked the Saracens at the time they were raising 
the siege. The tempest was so dreadful that it is said only five vessels out 
of the whole re-entered the ports of Syria. 
YOL. I. K 



130 ORDERICUS VITALIS. [b.I. CH.XXIY. 

ships. They had scarcely gained the offing, when a violent 
storm suddenly arose, and immense numbers either perished 
in the waves, or, their vessels being dashed to pieces on 
the shore, were massacred by the natives. King Liutprand, 
hearing that the Saracens had not contented themselves 
with ravaging Sardinia, but had even dared to defile the 
spot to which the remains of St. Augustine, profane bishop, 
had been formerly translated in order to protect them from 
the fury of the barbarians, and where they were reverently 
interred, sent to claim them ; and having obtained them 
for a large sum of money, ordered them to be transferred 
to Pavia, where they were again buried with all the honours 
due to so great a father of the church.^ 

Ch. XXiy. Continuation of the series of the emperors of 
Constantinople — Kings of the Franks — English Icings — 
and emperors of Germany. 

Up to this point I have followed the chronography of the 
Englishman Bede, who has brought down his work to the 
year 734 of the incarnation of our Lord.^ This Bede, a 
priest, and Paul, of Mount Cassino, both monks, and men 
of deep learning, among other useful works, have published 
in five books the history of their respective nations ; they 
have clearly made known to us whence the Lombards and 
English came, and how the former subdued Italy, while the 
latter occupied Britain.^ Henceforth I shall be forced to 
make laborious researches through the writings of other 
fathers of the church, while I endeavour to bring my history 
of past events down to the present day, embittered by so 
many and such varied calamities, while two prelates have 
ambitiously contended during the last six years for the 
pontifical chair, and, since the demise of Henry I. king 

* The translation of the relics of St. Augustine to the church of St. 
Peter in Pavia, in compliance with the order of King Liutprand, appears 
to have taken place in 7-2, 

'^ As we have just seen, Bede did not bring down his work " On the Six 
Ages" further than 7*26, and his Ecclesiastical History later than 731 ; but 
there is a short continuation extending as far as a.d. 766, appended to the 
edition, of which the entries as far as a.d. 734 may perhaps have been 
written by Bede. 

' The History of the Lombards, by Paul the Deacon, is not divided 
into five, but six books. — De Gestis Longobardorum libri vi. 



A.D. 741 — 775.] CONSTANTINE V. COPKONYMUS. 131 

of England, Stephen of Blois, his nephew, and Q-eoffry of 
Anjou, his son-in-law, are contending for the crown and 
venting their fury, to the common loss, by having recourse 
to arms, as well as by threats.^ 

Constantino, the son of Leo, reigned fifty-eight years.' 
Then Hugh, archbishop of Rouen, gloriously filled the sees 
of Paris and Bayeux, and governed the abbeys of Jumieges 
and Fontenelle. Carloman and Pepin become mayors of 
the palace, and Bemi, their brother, having ejected Bagen- 
froi, obtains the archbishopric of Kouen. Constantino and 
Abdallah, the emir of the Saracens, are rivals in cruelty 
towards the orthodox followers of Christ. Constantino 
assembled at Constantinople a council of three hundred and 
thirty bishops.^ 

In the year 754 of our Lord's incarnation, Stephen, the 
pope, no longer able to bear the persecutions of Astolph, king 
of the Lombards, escaped to Prance and was honourably 
received by the inhabitants, but fell sick at Paris. As soon 
as he was convalescent, he consecrated an altar in the 
church of St. Denys, crowned Pepin and his two sons, 
Charles and Carloman ; and committed the holy church to 
their protection against her enemies.* 

^ As our author has mentioned that six years had already elapsed since 
the commencement of the struggle between Innocent II. and the antipope 
Anacletus (February, 1130), we learn that this paragraph must have been 
written in 1136, the period when the succession to Henri I. was disputed 
with fury by Stephen of Blois, his nephew, and Geoifry of Anjou, his son- 
in-law, or rather by the empress, Geoffry's wife. 

* Here our author, who had cut off fifteen years from the reign of the 
father (or rather some unskilful corrector, for the number has evidently 
been erased by a later hand in the manuscript of St. Evroult), gives as a 
compensation too many, by twenty-four, to that of the son. 

^ Hugh, archbishop of Rouen before 722, bishop of Paris and Bayeux, 
abbot of Fontenelle and Jumieges in 722, died at Jumieges on the 8th of 
April, 730. Carloman and Pepin inherited the power and the functions 
of their brother Charles Martel, in 741. Remi their brother, archbishop 
of Rouen in the room of Ragenfroi, in 755, died January 19, 772. The 
most severe persecutions directed by Constantino Copronymus against the 
Catholics took place in 754, 761, and 760. Among the Saracens they 
were persecuted by the caliph Almanzor and his lieutenant Selim, more 
than hy his uncle Abdallah. Three hundred and thirty-eight bishops were 
present at the council convened by the emperor at Constantinople in 754. 

* Stephen II. left Rome Oit. 14, 753, arrived at Pontion (Marne) Jan. 
6, 754, consecrated Pepin and his children on the 28th of July, and 
set out on his return before the end of tiie year. - ■ 

K 2 



132 OUDERTCUS VTTALTS. [b.T. CH.XXIV. 

Pepin, king of the Frencli, after having held the reins of 
government with a strong hand for sixteen years, died on 
the eighth of the calends of October [24th September]. 
He left his crovrn to his son Charlemagne, who reigned forty- 
seven years, and whose conduct, both of secular and eccle- 
siastical affairs, was memorable. His virtues were great in 
the sight of Grod and man ; so that numbers relate his acts 
with admiration, and celebrate them before attentive hearers. 
He marched to E-ome at the head of an army of Franks, 
and, on his return, seized Desiderius, king of the Lombards, 
and made himself master of Pavia and other towns in Italv. 
He dismantled Pampeluna, took Saragossa sword in hand, 
annihilated, in the numerous battles he won, not only the 
Saxons but the Spaniards and Saracens, and humbled the 
infidel power by Christian valour, raising, in the name of 
Christ, the standard of the cross/ 

Leo, the son of Constantine, reigned five years.^ Charle- 
magne went a second time to Home, and, then overran 
with his army Capua and Apulia.^ 

Constantine reigned seventeen years jointly with his 
mother Irene. During his reign, an inhabitant of Con- 
stantinople discovered a stone chest, enclosing the body of a 
man, and bearing this inscription : " Christ will be born of 
the Virgin Mary, and I believe in him. When Constantine 
and Irene are emperors, the sun shall see me again." Char- 
lemagne crossed Germany to the frontiers of Bavaria, which 
he conquered in three years. He then marched against a 

^ Pepin died on the 24th of September, 768, in the 27th year of his 
administration and the 17th of his reign. Charlemagne did not reign 
forty-seven years, but forty-five years and four months (Sept. 768 — Jan. 
28, 814). During his first expedition into Italy, he entered Rome on the 
2nd of April, 7 74, and took Desiderius prisoner at Pavia in the month of May 
following. It was in 778 that he made himself master of Pampeluna, 
besieged Saragossa without taking it, and dismantled Pampeluna on his 
return. A different account of Charlemagne's expedition to Spain is given 
by the Arabian and some of the Latin historians. The Frank ^vriters gloss 
over his severe losses in his retreat at Roncesvalles, rendered memorable 
by the death of Roland, the Orlando of Ariosto; and his previous successes 
appear to have been partial and transitory. 

= Leo IV., September 14, 775— September 8 780. Constantius VI., 
September 8, 780— August ]9, 797. 

' Charlemagne arrived at Rome in the winter of 788, occupied Capua 
at the commencement of the following spring, and returned to Rome to 
celebrate the feast of Easter. 



A.D. 772 — 816.] POPES ADllIAN I. AND LEO III. 133 

tribe of the slaves called the Wiltzes, and in the following 
year ravaged Hungary.^ 

In these times, Adrian [I.] and Leo [III.] governed the 
holy see forty-eight years, signalizing their pontificates by 
their great virtues and services to the church. Constantino 
and Leo, and another Constantino, were then emperors, as 
we have already stated." From the time of Constantino the 
Grreat, the son of Helena, who founded Constantinople, 
until the reign of Constantino, the son of Irene, the 
emperor of Constantinople governed the Homan empire, 
and gave laws to Italy and many other nations speaking 
different languages. Several of these emperors were 
heretics, and were not raised to the throne by the 
lawful exercise of the rights of the people, nor legiti- 
mately elected by the people, but unjustly usurped it by 
cruel murders of their masters or their relations ; nor were 
they able to defend one half of so vast an empire against 
the attacks of the barbarians, who were everywhere in arms 
against it. In consequence, Pope Leo, and an assembly of 
the senators and people of Rome, concerted measures for the 
safety of the state, and by unanimous resolve threw off the 
yoke of the emperors of Constantinople, and elected Char- 
lemagne, the powerful kiug of the Franks, who had long 
protected them with great valour, to be emperor of Rome. 
Thus, in the fifth year of Pope Leo, which corresponds with 
the year 808 of the incarnation of our Lord, king Charle- 
magne became the eightj^-third emperor from Augustus, 
and the Romans proclaimed him by that august name. He 
condemned to death the assailants of Pope Leo, by whom 
he had been consecrated ; but at the pope's request he 
spared their lives, and only banished them to Prance. 

1 This pretended discovery happened in 781. The conquest of Bavaria 
belongs to the year ToJj. The invasion of the part of Sclavonia here 
mentioned, and situate on the right bank of the Oder, near its mouth, took 
place in 789, and the troops of Charlemagne overran Hungary as far as 
Raab in 792. 

^ Adrian I. occupied the pontifical chair from the 9th of February, 772, 
to the "25111 of December, 79-5; and Leo III. from this last date until the 
11th of June, 816; a period of forty-four years and some months, which 
nevertheless extends far beyond the reigns of the three emperors mentioned 
by our author, as it comprises those of Irene, Nicephorus, Maurice, Michael, 
Curopalates, and a part of that of Leo the Armenian. 



.134 , OEDEEICTJS TITALTS. [b.I. C'H.XXTY, 

About the same time, a great earthquake shook nearly the 
whole continent of Italy, and threw down the greater part 
of the roof and timber-work of the church of St. Paul the 
apostle.* 

Nicephorus I., brother of Irene, reigned six years. He 
made peace with Charlemagne, to whom Aaron also, the king 
of the Persians, sent ambassadors with presents to induce 
him to join in friendship with him.' 

Michael, the son-in-law of Nicephorus, reigned three 
years. He sent ambassadors to the emperor Charlemagne 
to renew their alliance. 

Leo, son of Bardas, reigned six years. Charlemagne died 
at Aix-la-Chapelle ; and Louis the Pious, his son by Hilde- 
garde, daughter of AVitikind, king of the Saxons, succeeded 
to the empire which he governed for twenty- seven years 
with spirit. During his reign a storm of troubles sw^ept 
the world. Pascal, the hundredth pope from Peter, crowned 
Louis at Rome on Easter day.' 

Theophilus reigned eleven years. Lothaire rebelled 
against his father Lewas, and disturbed the world by his 
repeated perfidies. The Normans now ravaged Britain 
and other countries, and the bodies of Samson, Philibert, 
and many other saints, were translated for fear of the 
pagans.* 

^ Charlemagne was cnnvned on the last day of the fifth year of the 
pontificate of Leo III., which corresponds with the year 800, and not 
808, as our author states. The enemies of the pope to whom Ordericus 
here alludes, were Pascal and Campulus, officers of the Roman church, 
who, in a procession which took place in 79.9, fell upon him and cut out his 
tongue and put out his eyes. The earthquake happened during the night 
of the 30th of April, 801. The church of St. Paul here mentioned is that 
now called Fuori muri, outside the walls of Rome„ 

' Charlemagne received the ambassadors of the caliph (the famous 
Aaron-al-Raschid) in the spring of the year 801, between Verceill and 
Ivree, on his return to France from Rome, and those of Nicephorus in 
803. 

' Charlemagne died at Aix-la-Chapelle, January 28, 814. Louis le 
Debonaire (Jan. 28, 814 — June 20, 840) was, it is true, the son of Hilde- 
garde, but this princess was not a daughter of Witikind. He had been 
consecrated at Rome on Easter day, 781, as king of Aquitaine, at the age 
of five years. It was his son Lothaire who was crowned by Pope Pascal 
I., on Easter-day, 923. 

* Theophilus, son of Michael II. The most serious revolts of Lothaire 
against his father took place in 830 and 833. The translation of the body 



A.D. 842 — 826.] MICHAEL — BASIL, EMPEKOES. 135 

Micbael, son of Theophilus, reigned twenty-seven years. 
In the second year of his reign, the Emperor Lewis died 
on the 12th of the calends of July [20th June]. He was 
buried by his brother Drogo, archbishop of Metz. Three 
years afterwards, that is to say, in the year of our Lord 842, 
the battle of Fontenay, near Auxerre, was fought, on the 
sixth of the calends of July [26th June], between his three 
sons, Lewis, Lothaire, and Charles the Bald, in which 
Christian nations destroyed each other with great slaughter 
on both sides. At last victory declared in favour of Charles 
In the same year the Normans pillaged Eouen, and burned 
the abbey of St. Ouen, the bishop, on the ides [15th] of 
May.^ 

Basil, after having put to death Michael, his sovereign 
and master, reigned twenty years. A dreadful famine and 
consequent mortality, with a murrain among cattle, caused 
great calamities throughout the world. On the death of 
King Lewis, Eollo penetrated into Neustria, and on the 15th 
of the calends of December [17th November], in the year 
of our Lord 876 entered Normandy, and carried on a war 
with the Franks, which lasted thirty-seven years, until he 
was baptized by Franco, archbishop of Bouen.^ 

of St. Samson from Dol to Orleans did not take place before 878. Tlie 
relics of St. Philibert were carried from the island of Noirmoutier, at the 
mouth of the Loire, over to the continent in the month of June, 836, with 
the permission of Pepin, king of Aquitain, and deposited at the convent of 
Dee, near Nantz, as being more safe from the piratical incursions of the 
Danes; though the monastery of Noirmoutier had been strongly fortified, 
and the monks had spent the season of the year most favourable to such 
enterprises at D^e. 

1 Our author is not more fortunate than usual in his dates. Lewis le 
Debonaire died on the 20th of June, 840. The battle of Fontenai was 
fought on the 25th of June, 841, and in the month of May in the same 
year, the Normans made their first incursion in the valley of the Seine. 
They set fire to Rouen on the 14th, and perhaps, as here intimated, the 
flames did not reach the monastery of St. Ouen, in the suburbs, before the 
following day. 

* Our author probably alludes to the plague and famine of 88.0. Lewis, 
king of Germany, died on the 28th of August, 876. The arrival of Rollo 
in France so early as 876, rests on the assertions of writers too remote 
from this epoch to be of any authority, and the chronicles which mention 
it are visibly interpolated ; but it is true that the valley of the Seine was 
entered by the Normans in 876, though it does not appear that Rollo was 
with them. 



136 ORDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.I. CH.XXIV. 

Leo and Alexander, the sons of Basil, reigned twenty- 
two years. Charles the Fat was crowned emperor on the 
death of Arnold, king of G-ermany, and reigned ten years. 
In the year of our Lord 900, King Zwintibold killed the 
son of xlrnold. At this time Eollo laid siege to Chartres ; 
but Grualtelm, the bishop, a holy man, issued forth carrying 
the tunic of St. Mary, mother of God, and with the assist- 
ance of Heaven, put the enemies to flight, and delivered the 
•city. He had appealed for succour to Eichard, duke of 
Burgundy, and Ebles, earl of Poictiers. The enemy being 
routed, the Christians rejoiced at the victory God had 
wrought.^ 

Alexander [after the death of his brother] reigned one 
year. The Huns devastated Saxony and Thuringia [a.d. 
908]. 

Constantine [Porphyrogenitus], son of Leo, reigned with 
Zoe, his mother, ten years. In the third year of his reign, 
Lewis [III-]? ^011 of Arnold, departed this life, and Conrad, 
the son of Conrad, became emperor, and reigned seven 
years .^ 

Eomanus, the Armenian, reigned, jointly with Constantine 
before mentioned, twenty-seven years. In their time B-ollo 
embraced Christianity, and concluded a peace with Charles, 
king of the Franks, receiving in marriage Gisela, his daugh- 
ter.^ "When Henrv was emperor, king Charles died at 
Peronne, where he was imprisoned by Herbert, count of 

1 Charles the Bald died October 6, 877. Arnold became king of Ger- 
many, on the 11th of November, 887. He was crowned emperor in April, 
896, and died on the 8th of December, 899. 

It was Zwintibold himself that was killed, on the 13th of August, 900. 
The defeat of Rollo under the walls of Chartres, is the first authentic fact 
in which this chief of the Normans of the Seine makes his appearance, but 
it happened on the 20ih of July, 911, and not in 900. The presence in 
this battle of the Earl of Poictiers, Ebles II., is only attested by writers of 
a later date. A more authentic fact is the part taken in it by Robert II., 
duke of France who afterwards contested the crown with Charles the 
Simple. 

* Louis IV., king of Germany, son of Arnold, elected emperor on the 
4th of February, 900, died on the 2l3t January, 912. Conrad, his 
successor, elected on the 19th of October in the same year, died December 
23, 918, of the wounds he received in battle with the Hun^rarians. 

' The baptism of Rollo took place in 912. The French editor of 
Ordericus raises doubts as to this marriage, on the ground that it rests only 
on the authority of Norman historians. 



A.D. 919— 0G9.] THE CONSTANTINES — STEPHEN. 137 

Vermaiidois, and Prance was disturbed by great dissensions. 
Pive years afterwards, Louis, the son of Charles, married 
Grerberga, tlie daughter of Henry, emperor of Grermany.^ 

Constantino [VII.] associated with liimself E-omanus, his 
son, while yet a boy, and reigned fifteen years. At the 
same period Otho, son of Henry, began his reign, which 
lasted thirty-six years ; his wife was the sister of Athelstau, 
king of England.^ In those days, William Long-sword 
defeated Ealph, count of Evreux, on the spot which was 
called Battle-mead, and was himself assassinated eight 
years afterwards, on the sixteenth of the calends of Janu- 
ary (17th December), by Arnold, earl of Manders. Eichard 
I., the son of William Long-sword, succeeded his father, 
and governed his states with vigour fifty-four years, per- 
forming many great actions.^ 

Stephen and Constantino [VIIL], the sons of Eomanus, 
expelled their father from the throne. But Constantino in 
turn deposed them both, and reigned sixteen years with his 
son Eomanus. Edgar, son of Edmund, now governed the 
English, and was a bountiful patron to the servants of God, 
faithfully obeying his teachers in all that appertained to the 
edification of the church. In his reign Dunstan, archbishop 
of Canterbury, Oswald, archbishop of York, and Ethelwold, 
bishop of Winchester, were illustrious for their sanctity 
and learning, governing the people committed to their 
charge with diligence and happy effects. They used such 
eftbrts to encourage the growth of religious insitutions that 
by their means twenty -six monasteries and nunneries were 

^ Henry the Fowler, elected in 919, died on the 2nd of July, 936, and 
Charles the Simple, taken prisoner by Herbert 11., Count of Vermandois 
(923), died in his prison at Peronne, on the 9th of October, 929. The 
marriage of Louis IV., D'Outremer, with Gerberga, the daughter of Henry 
the Fowler, was solemnized in the year 939. 

2 Otho the Great, elected king of Germany in 936, died May 7, 973. 
He married, in 930, Edith, the daughter of Edwaid, king of England, and 
consequently sister to Athelstan. 

^ It is difficult to assign a precise date to the victory gained by William 
Long-sword on the spot whicli has received from that event the name oi' le 
Pre de la Bataille. M. Le Prev6t, in his note on this panigiaph, agrees 
with the Norman historians, that it happened in 933. William was mur- 
dered at Picquigni, en the 16th of December, 943. If, as is generally 
supposed, Richard 1. died in 996, the number liere stated is too many by 
two years. 



138 ORDEIIICUS YITALIS. [b.T. CH.XXIV. 

founded iu England. The ravages of the Danes, who some 
years before had martyred St. Edmund, king of the East- 
Angles, had spread desolation among Christ's flock through- 
out nearly the whole island of Britain, churches and monas- 
teries being ruined, and the Lord's flock torn to pieces or 
dispersed as if they had been the prey of wolves.^ 

Nicephorus was emperor ten years. It was a period of 
general disorder; ambitious nobles putting themselves at 
the head of their vassals in arms for mutual hostilities.^ 

After the death of Nicephorus, who was assassinated at 
the instigation of his own wife, John [Zimisces] ascended 
the throne, and his niece, Theophania, married the emperor 
Otho. He died in the fifth year of his reign, leaving the 
crown to his son Otho III., who reigned eighteen years.^ 
At this period, Hugh the Great and other Erench lords 
rebelled against Lewis, their king ; the duke following the 
example of his father Robert, who revolted against Charles 
the Simple, and caused himself to be anointed king. 
Charles, the rightful sovereign, perceiving with what 
contempt he was treated by the perjured duke, did not 
allow a year to elapse before he attacked the rebel with 
troops assembled from all quarters, with which he fell upon 
and defeated and killed him at the battle of Soissons.* 

In the month of May, on a Eriday, a shower of blood fell 
upon the workmen in the fields. The same year [954], in 
the month of September, Lewis [d'Outremer] died, after 

• The administration of Stephen and Constantine VIII. lasted only from 
the 20th of December, 944, until tl)e 27th of January, 945. Edgar began 
his reign in 959, and died July 8, 975. St. Dunstan filled his see from 
961 to May, 988; St. Oswald, 972— February 29, 992; St. Ethehvold or 
Athelwold, 96?) — 984. St. Edmund suffered martyrdom in thepreceding 
century (Nov. 20, 870). 

' In an age so fruitful of disorders, it is difficult to point out the 
particular events to which the author alludes. They are probably those 
which occurred between the years 930 — 940. 

' Otho II. married, in 972, Theophania, daughter of the Greek emperor 
Ilomanus II. This princess died at Rome, June 15, 991. Her husband 
had died there December 7, 983. Otho III., their son, crowned on the 
25th of December, 983, at Aix-la-Chapelle, died on the 23rd of January, 
1002. 

* Our author probably here refers to the revolt of Hugh the Great and 
other lords, against Louis dOutremer in 941, when that prince was forced 
to seek refuge with the Count de Vienne. He then goes back to the battle 
of Soissons (June 15, 923). 



A.D. 954.] LOTHAIRE, KING OF THE FKANKS. 139 

having suffered much adversity, and was buried at Eheima, 
in the church of St. Kemi.^ Lothaire, his son, was 
crowned at Rheims, and ably governed the kingdom for the 
space of seven years. At this time Hugh the Great, of 
Orleans, duke of France, raised himself above all the nobles 
of France by his riches and power. He married the 
daughter of the emperor Otho, by whom he had three sons, 
Hugh, Otho, and Henry, and a daughter of the name of 
Emma, who married Richard the elder, duke of Normandy, 
but died without children.^ 

In the second year of the reign of Lothaire, in the month 
of August, Hugh the Great besieged the town of Poictiers ; 
but through the merits of St. Hilary, bishop and patron of 
the town, the Lord caused an awful thunder, while a violent 
whirlwind rent the duke's tent, who, struck with a panic, 
as well as his army, immediately raised the siege and re- 
treated. ^ The same year, Gislebert, duke of Burgundy de- 
parted this life, and Otho, his son-in-law, the son of Hugh 
the Great, obtained possession of the duchy, but dying 
without children not long afterwards, he was succeeded by 
his brother Henry. Then Ansegise, bishop of Troyes, was 
driven from his see by Earl Eobert, and repaired to the 
court of the emperor Otho in Saxony. Eeturning thence 
at the head of an army of Saxons, he laid siege to Troyes 
which held out for a considerable time, although he was 
ably assisted by the forces of the chiefs, Helpo and Bruno. 
One day as they were on an expedition to plunder the town 

1 These hvo events, the account of which is borrowed from the Chronicle 
of Hugh de Fleuri, as well as a great part of what follows, belong to the 
year 954. Lewis died at Rheims on the 10th of September, and was 
buried in the church of St. Remi, as our author states. 

^ King Lothaire was thirteen years old when he was crowned at 
Rheims on the 12th of November, 954. The duration of his reign was 
not seven, but thirty-one years. Hugh the Great, duke of France and 
Burgundy, count of Taiis and Orleans, appears on tiie political scene from 
922 to 956, the period of his death. By his third wife, Hadwide or Hed- 
wiges, sister, and not daughter, of the Emperor Otto I., he had, besides the 
children here mentioned, an elder daughter nnmed Beatrice. 

^ It was not in the second, but in the first, year of the reign of king 
Lothaire, that Hugh the Great, displeased at seeing William-Tete- 
d'Etoupe invested with the duchy of Aquitain and the earldom of 
Auvergne, appeared with the young king before Poictiers to lay siege to 
the place. 



140 OllDERICUS YITALIS. [b.I. CH.XXIV. 

of Sens, archbishop Archambauld, with the aged count 
Haynard, and their troops, encountered them, fighting a 
battle in which duke Helpo and a number of the Saxons, 
were slain. His colleague, Bruno, who was an eye-witness 
of their defeat, raised the siege, and returned to his own 
country in great sorrow.^ 

King Lothaire recovered the kingdom of Lorraine ; 
he repaired, attended by a numerous army, to the palace 
at Aix-la-Chapelle, where the emperor Otho resided with 
his queen: he entered at the hour of dinner, no one 
trying to prevent him ; for Otho, his wife and attend- 
ants, saved themselves by flight, and quietly left him in 
possession of the palace. Lothaire after this success re- 
turned to Prance, and the emperor, assembling an army, 
appeared before Paris, and set lire to one of the suburbs, 
but his nephew with many of his followers fell by the swords 
of the French.- Lothaire, therefore, calling to his assist- 
ance Hugh, duke of France, and Henry, duke of Burgundy, 
attacked their enemies, whom he defeated and pursued as 
far as Soissons. The terrified fugitives in their haste threw 
themselves headlong into the river Airne, and as they 
were not acquainted with the fords, numbers perished ; 
indeed those who were drowned in the river were more 

1 Gislebert died on the bth of April, 956; Otho, his son-in-law, on the 
'23rd of February, 965; Henry, about 1002. Robert de Vermandois, earl 
of Chalons and of Beaune in right of his wife Adelaide, drove Bishop 
Ansegise out of Troyes about 958. He also took Dijon the foUowhig year, 
and drove the king's officers out of the town. In the month of October, 
Archbishop Bruno, uncle of Lothaire, at the head of a strong army, in 
compliance with the request of this prince and of Queen Gerberga, retook 
these two places. No one knows who this Helpo was who fell near Sens. 
This episode of the expedition of Archbishop Bruno into Burgundy, as well 
as what relates to the town of Troyes, is borrowed from the Chronicles of 
Hugh de Fleuri. 

* The expedition of Lothaire into Lorraine, and the momentary occu- 
pation of Aix-la-Chapelle by this prince, belong to the year 978; but the 
French editor thinks that we must exclude from this account the story, 
which seems to him evidently invented, of the dinner prepared for the 
emperor, but consumed by the king, although it is reported in almost ail 
the chronicles of the succeeding age, and introduced again by our author in 
his seventh book, with fuller details. We know with certainty that the 
emperor having pursued Lothaire during his precipitate retreat, carried his 
devastations even to the environs of Paris; but as for the death of his 
nephew, th's is considered another fable invented in the following century, 
and which has suffered many transformations. 



A.D. 986.] DEATH OF LOTIIATRE. 141 

numerous than those who fell by the sword. Its waters 
were swollen, and such multitudes perished in the current 
that its course was almost choked by their corpses.' King 
Lothaire continued the pursuit of the enemy three days and 
three niglits. In the end of the same year, contrary to the 
wishes of his officers and his army, Lothaire concluded a 
peace with the emperor at Eheims, and ceded to him Lor- 
raine, to the great grief of the French.^ 

King Lothaire died in the year of our Lord 976, and 
was interred at Rheims in the church of St. Kemi. His 
son Lewis filled the throne eleven years, and at his death 
was buried in the church of St. Cornelius, the martyr, at 
Compiegne.' Charles, his brother, claimed the throne ; but 
Hugh the G-reat [Hugh Capet], son of Hugh the G-reat, 
opposed him, and, having raised a numerous army, sat down 
before Laon, where Charles resided with his queen. The 
king, full of indignation, made a sally at the head of the 
garrison, attacked and put to flight the army of Hugh, and 
burnt their huts. The duke, perceiving that Charles was 
not to be subdued by open warfare, concerted measures 
with Ascelin, bishop of Laon, who was the king's adviser. 
The bishop, forgetting his age and profession, and not 
considering that death was approaching, followed the ex- 
ample of Achitophel and Judas, and did not blush to become 
a traitor. During the night, when all the inhabitants were 
asleep, he admitted Hugh into the town, who made Charles 
and his wife, the daughter of Herbert, earl of Troyes, 
prisoners, and condemned them to perpetual captivity in 
the tower of Orleans. There, Charles became the father of 

^ There is much exaggeration in these details, borrowed from Hugh de 
Fleuri. 

^ Our author borrows this account also from the Chronicle of Hugh de 
Fleuri. The treaty between the two monarchs took place in 980. The 
Saxon Chronicle states that the place selected for the meeting was Ingel- 
heim, and it is probably correct. 

' King Lothaire was poisoned by his wife Emma, at Compiegne, on the 
2nd of March, 986. Lewis V., called the Indolent, crowned at Compiegne 
during the lifetime of his father, on the 8th of June, 979. died May 21, 
987; it is therefore impossible to reckon eleven years as the duration of 
his reign, even if we dated from his coronation. Our author's guide, Hugh 
de Fleuri, gives nine years, which is one too much. 



112 OEDEEICUS VITALTS. [b.I. CH. XXIV. 

two children, Lewis and Charles ; but from that time the 
posterity of Charlemagne ceased to reign in France.^ 

In the year of our Lord 983, Hugh, the duke, was 
anointed king at Hheims. In the same year, Kobert his 
son was crowned king, and reigned thirty-eight years.'^ 
Hugh was induced by a vision to commit this great crime. 
St. Yalery appeared to him when he was duke at Lutetia, 
the city of the Parisii. He revealed to him in a dream who 
he was, and what he wanted, commanding him to undertake 
an expedition against Arnold, earl of Flanders, and take his 
body out of the monastery of Sithieu, where that of St. 
Bertin also lies, and restore it to the convent of Leuconaiis 
in the Vimeux. He then promised him that, if he faithfully 
obeyed his orders, he and his posterity to the seventh 
generation should wear the crown of France. Hugh readily 
obeyed the orders of the saint, and, by the will of God, 
terrified Arnold with his impetuous courage, recovered and 
reverently restored to their tombs the bodies of the vene- 
rable saints Yalery and Riquier, which had been carried 
away by 'a certain clerk named Erchambald, bribed by the 
offer of a large sum of money. The duke himself repaired 
to Leuconaiis with the great men of his court, and deposited 
the remains of St. Valery in a monastery situate on the 
banks of the Somme, and having driven out the secular 
canons, filled their places with regular monks. Not long 

^ Charles of France, duke of Lorraine, was not brother of Lewis V,, as 
our author, following Hugh de Fleuri, calls him, but King Lothaire's. 
Hugh Capet never bore the title of Great, which was exclusively given to 
his father. It was on Good Friday, April 3, .091, that Ascalin or Adal- 
b^ron, bishop of Laon, opened the gates of that town to him. Agnes de 
Vermandois, the second wife of Charles, was the daughter of Herbert IIL, 
count of Vermandois, who was also often called count of Troyes and 
Meaux. Their children, Lewis and Charles, who shared their captivity at 
Orleans, were still alive in 1009, a period when mentioned with King Robert, 
at the commencement of a charter. 

^ The coronation of Hugh Capet took place on the 3rd of July, 987, and 
that of King Robert, his son, taken by him as his colleague, on the 1st of 
January, 988. The computation of the years of the reign of this last 
prince, given by our author, is inexact, M'hether we include or not those 
during which he shared the government with his father; because, in the 
first case, his reign lasted more than forty- two years and a half, and in the 
secx)nd, thirty-three years and nine months. 



A.D. 987.] HUGH CAPET. 143 

afterwards, as already stated, he usurped the throne, which 
his descendants have filled to the present day ; for four 
kings of his race have reigned up to this moment, namely, 
Robert, Henry, Philip, and Lewis.^ Hugh, at the com- 
mencement of his reign, convoked a synod at E,heims, to 
which he invited Sewin, archbishop of Sens, with his suifra- 
gans, and ordered Arnold, archbishop of Ebeims, to be 
degraded ; declaring that according to the canons of the 
church the son of a concubine could not be a bishop. But 
in truth he was jealous of Arnold, because he had the royal 
blood of Charlemagne in his veins, being the brother of 
king Lothaire, although the son of a concubine. He was 
not however for this reason the less worthy and unassuminsr, 
but was renowned for his great virtues. But the venerable 
Sewin feared Grod more than the king ; he therefore refused 
to be a party to the unjust degradation of Arnold ; what 
was more, as far as lay in his power, he opposed the king's 
design. His opposition only incensed the king against 
himself and induced him to persist in his unjust project. 
However, some other bishops were worked on by their fears, 
though with great reluctance, to pronounce the sentence of 
degradation on Arnold, and consecrated in his place Ger- 
bert, a monk and philosopher, who had been tutor to king 
Robert, In this manner, by the imperious command of the 
king, Arnold was deposed, expelled ignominiously from the 
chui^ch of the blessed Mary, mother of God, and imprisoned 
at Orleans for three years. These outrages were soon 
brought to the knowledge of the pope, who, being highly 
indignant, suspended the bishops who had deposed Arnold 
and put Gerbert in his place. He also sent Leo, an abbot, 
into France, as the legate of the apostolical see, to remedy 
these irregular proceedings. The legate began his labours 
by first paying a visit to Sewin at Sens, and communicated 
to him the orders of the holy see, knowing him to be a 
more strict observer of what was right than the rest. In 

^ For information respecting this vision of Hugh Capet, and the events 
that were the consequence of it, see the Acta SS. ord. S. Beiiedicti, scec. v. 
p. .556, et seq. Leuconaiis was the primitive name of St. Val^ri sur 
Somme. The relics of the saint were carried back there by Hugh himself 
in 981, after he had exacted their restitution from the Earl of Flanders by 
threats of an invasion. 



Itl* OTIDERTCUS TITALIS. [b. T. Cir.XXTT. 

obedience to the apostolic commands, another council was 
assembled at Rheims, and archbishop Arnold was released 
from custody, and restored to his see with great honour. 
The pleadings between the prelate Gerbert, and abbot Leo 
are considered of great importance, and are carefully filed 
among the records of the archbishops of Kheims.^ G-erbert 
was very well read in sacred and profane literature, and 
had many illustrious and noble pUpils in his school, amongst 
whom were. King Kobert, Leotheric, archbishop of Sens ; 
E-emi, bishop [monk] of Auxerre ; Haimond, and Hubold, 
and several others who rank high on the list of learned 
men. Bishop Kemi composed a good commentary on the 
mass, and published a useful edition of the work of the 
grammarian Donatus. Haimond wrote a valuable expo- 
sition on St. Paul's epistles, and commented on the gospels 
and other parts of the holy scriptures. Hubold, who was 
skilled in music, made the churches echo with the praises 
of the Creator, composing a sweet office in praise of the 
Holy Trinity, besides a number of hymns in honour of Grod 
and his saints.^ These, and many others received instruc- 

1 Arnold, the illegitimate son of King Lothaire, and not of Lewis 
d'Outre-Mer, was created archbishop of Rheims through the influence of 
Hugh Capet in 988 or 989. Having violated the engagements into which 
he had entered with this prince, and given up the town to his uncle 
Charles, competitor with Hugh for the crown, he was arrested at Laon on 
the 2nd of April, 991, carried prisoner to Orleans, and deposed in the 
synod of bishops held at St. Basle, near Rheims. In 997, he was 
liberated, and recovered his bishoprick, which he kept until his death in 
1023. It appears that there was no council at Rheims in 995, but only a 
preparatory council held at Mouson on the 2nd of June, in which another 
was announced to be held at Rheims on the 1st of July, which Hugh Capet, 
the protector of Gerbert, probably prevented from taking place. We still 
possess the discourse which Gerbert pronounced at this meeting, but his 
discussion with the legate Leo, abbot of St. Boniface, is now lost. 

' Our author has confounded Remigius [Remi], a monk, and not 
bishop, of Auxerre, who taught at Rheims, and also at Paris, at the end of 
the ninth century, with Remigius, a monk of Mithlac in the diocese of 
Treves, who really was a disciple of Gerbert. The greater part of the 
works of R^mi of Auxerre have been ascribed sometimes to Haimon, 
bishop of Halherstadt, a person still more ancient, sometimes to a certain 
Haimon the Wise, who is no other than Remi himself; indeed all those 
that are here mentioned under that name belong to him. Hubolde, 
canon of the church at Liege, was a professor at Paris towards the end of 
the tenth century, but had no relation with Gerbert. The works that are 
here attributed to him, we owe to Hucbalde, a monk of Saint Amand, 



A.D. 909.] POPE SILAGE STER II. 145 

tious from Gerbert, and, by their varied knowledge in after 
days rendered the greatest services to the church of God. 
Degraded from the archiepiscopal throne of Ehcims, which 
he had unjustly usurped, he quitted I'rance with shame and 
indignation, and repaired to the court of the emperor 
Otho, by w^hom, and the people of Eavenna, he was pro- 
moted to the archiepiscopal see of that town. A few years 
afterwards, he was translated to the apostolic see, being 
raised to the papal dignity under the name of Silvester [II.] 
in the year 999. It is related that when Gerbert was master 
of a school, he had a conference with the devil, and inquired 
of him what his future career was to be. He immediately 
received the following ambiguous answ^er : — 

Transit ab R. Gerbertus ad R. post papa vigens R} 
Translated from R, you still will be E., and as pope shall be R. 

This oracle was too obscure to be then understood ; but we 
clearly see that after a while it was fulfilled, for Gerbert 
passed from the see of Eheims to that of Eavenna, and 
afterwards was elected pope at Eome. 

In the year of our Lord 1002, the emperor Otho died, 
and was succeeded by Henry [II.] Afterwards, that is to 
say in 1024, Cono [Conrad II.] became emperor. In the 
third year of his reign, Eichard 11. put off mortality. His 
zeal for religion justly gained liiin the title of father of the 
monks.^ 

contemporary and friend of Remi of Auxerre, except the Office of the 
Holy Trinity, which is from the pen of Stephen, bishop of Liege. See the 
Hist. Litt. tie la France, t. vi. 

^ Gerbert was in Italy with Otho III. in the summer of 997. He was 
named archbishop of Ravenna at the commencement of the following year, 
and pope in 999. The verse quoted by our author is usually written in the 
following manner : — 

Scandit ab R. Girbertus in R., post papa regens R. 

2 "Otho III. died, as already stated, on the 23rd of January 1002. 
Henry II., his successor, elected emperor June 6, 1002, died July 13, 
1024. Conrad II. (not Cono) having been crowned on the 8th of Sep- 
tember, 1024, the third year of his reign must be reckoned in September, 
1027. But we know that Duke Richard If. died on the 23rd of August 
of that year. Ordericus Vitalis gives the 23rd of August, 1027, as the date 
of this event, that is to say, one year more than is usually done. We find 
the same d<ite in a charter of William the Conqueror. This is also my own 
opinion, but it is a very obscure question, and I acknowledge that I have 
not always solved it in the same way." — French Editors. 

VOL. I. L 



116 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.I. CIT.XXXIV. 

During the reign of Etlielred the son of Edgar, many- 
disastrous events happened in England. Sweyn, king of 
the Danes, having assembled a numerous jleet, invaded the 
country, upon which king Ethelred, being deserted by his 
own subjects, who went over to the Danes, escaped into 
Normandy with his wife and sons. Emma, his queen, was 
the sister of E,ichard I. ^11.], son of Gunnor and duke of 
Kormandy, and of Eobert, archbishop of Eouen. Not long 
afterwards, the heathen king, Sweyn, M-as killed by St. 
Edmund, king and martyr, and his body was embalmed, 
and carried to Denmark. The Danes were still pagans, 
and were terrified at the death of tlieir fierce chief, 
whose corpse could not be buried in English ground. 
However, king Ethelred, having heard the report of Sweyn' s 
death, immediately returned to his own country, and, by 
fair words and promises, drew to him those who had de- 
serted his standard, and encouraged them to defend them- 
selves better than they had hitherto done. But Canute, the 
son of Swe^Ti, was highly incensed at the flight of his 
troops, who had abandoned in such a cowardly manner the 
noble kingdom of England, which they had already subdued ; 
lie therefore equipped a powerful fleet, and Olave, king of 
Norway, with Lacman, king of Sweden, crossing over to 
England, laid siege to London. At that time king Ethelred 
was lying sick, and soon afterwards died there ; and Edmund, 
his son, surnamed Ironside, was raised to the throne. Many 
battles were fought between the English and the Danes 
with uncertain results, and much blood was shed on both 
sides. At last, through the well-directed cff"orts of some 
prudent men, the two princes agreed on the terms of peace 
so necessary to the welfare of their subjects. Canute em- 
braced Christianity, and received for his wife Emma, the 
widow of King Ethelred, with one-half of the kingdom. 
By her he had Hardicanute, who became king of England, 
and Grunnilda, who married Henry III., emperor of the 
Homans.^ 

^ Ethelred II. ascended the throne in 978, immediately after the assassi- 
nation of his brother Edward the Martyr. In 1013, after a protracted 
contest, England was conquered by Sweyn, king of Denmark, and Ethelred 
retired into Normandy to the court of his brother-in-law, Duke Richard II. 
The death of Sweyn happened on the 2nd of February, 1014. Ethelred, 



A.D. lOlG.] CANUTE, KING OF ENGLAND. 147 

At the instigation of Satan, wlio never rests from stirring 
deadly feuds among men. King Edmund, after a reign of 
seven years, was murdered in a privy by the treacliery of 
the cruel Edric Streon ; and Canute obtained the sove- 
reignty of the whole of England, which he enjoyed until 
his deatli. He sent to Denmark Edward and Edmund, the 
sons of Edmund II., two amiable young princes,^ and re- 
quested Sweyn his brother, king of the Danes, to put them 
to death. However, he refused to be a party to the murder 
of these innocent children ; and took an opportunity of de- 
livering them as hostages to the king of the Huns, passing 
them off as his nephcAvs. There Child Edmund prematurely 
died, but Edward, by God's permission, obtained the crown 
of Hungary, with the hand of the king's daughter, and 
became the father of three children, Edgar Atheling,^ 
Margaret, queen of the Scots, and Christina, who became 

who returned to England, after an absence of six weeks, was still as 
powerless as ever against the Danes, whatever our author may say to the 
contrary. After a severe struggle, Canute, son and successor of Sweyn, 

, shared the kingdom with Edmund Ironside, the son and successor of 
Ethelred, in 1016, marrying at the same time the widow of the latter. 
Edmund did not long hold the kingdom of Wessex, his share under the 
treaty, as we shall presently see. As for Lacman and Olave (see William 
of Jumieges, lib. v. eh. 11), the first, who appears to be quite an imaginary 
personage, could not be king of Sweden at that period, as the throne was 
tilled by Olave, sumamed the Infant, who died in 102G. Olave II., king 
of Norway, far from taking part in the expedition of Canute, had recovered 
his dominions from him in lUl5,and never ceased to be his most inveterate 
enemy. Chunelind, daughter of Canute, here named Gunnilda, married, 
in 1036, the Emperor Henry III., and died in 1038. 

1 " Alveolos," a word peculiar to our author, from whence comes the 
French eleves. He sometimes ^\Tites it " Albeolos." Like the Norman 
[and Anglo-Saxon] authors in general, he calls Denmark Dacia, as just 

' before he has called the Norwegians Norici, and elsewhere the Swedes, 
Suevi. 

^ Our author, in this paragraph and elsewhere, gives the young princes 
the titles generally applied, among the Anglo-Saxons, to the sons of the 
Icing, (7/i/o and Aiheling ; giving to this last name the Norman form Adelin, 
The two words have the same meaning, a noble youth. Child, as Child-- 
Harold, Child-Edmund, is the Anglo-Saxon word translated " Clito." 
Atheling is derived from adel, noble, with the termination ling^ expressive 
of youth or inferiority, as suckling, hireling. See note to Henry of Hun- 
tingdon's History, p. 122 (Bohn's edition). Both these titles were intro- 
duced into Normandy, where the first has remained attached to the name 
of William Clito (Guillaume Cliton), son of Robert-Courte-Heuse (Curt- 
hose). 

L 2 



148 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b. I. Cn. XXXIY. 

a nun. Edward, the son of king Ethelred, having recovered 
his father's throne, invited them over to England, and 
brought them up with as much care as if they had been 
his own children.^ 

In the year of our Lord 1031, Robert, king of the French, 
died, and Henry his son, supported by Eobert, duke of 
j^ormandy, secured the throne notwithstanding the oppo- 
sition of Queen Constance and his younger brother Eobert, 
and others of the Erench. His reign lasted twenty-nine 
years.' 

Robert, duke of Normandy, died on the calends [1st] 
of July, in the fifth year of his reign, at Nice, a town of 
Bithynia, on his return from Jerusalem, and William the 
bastard, his son, a boy only eight years old, succeeded 
to his dukedom, which he ably governed for fifty years.^ 

^ Edmund Ironside succeeded his father Ethelred II., who died on the 
23rd of April, 101 G, and was assassinated, at the instigation of Edric 
Streon, towards the end of November in the following year, veru ferreo 
in secreta naturcB transjixiis, dum in secessu rcskleret, says Ralph de 
Diceto. What is related of the children of Edmund is disfigured with 
the grossest improbabilities, or even impossibilities. Thus our author 
makes Canute send them to his brother Sweyn, king of Denmark, but he 
never had a brother of that name, and the prince who shared with him 
the throne of Denmark from 1014 to 1017, was called Harold. Other 
historians call this Sweyn king of Sweden, but the king of Sweden con- 
temporary with Canute, bore the name of Olave ; lastly, they say one 
of the exiled princes married the sister of Solomon, king of Hungary, and 
our author even, makes him reign over that country; and they marry the 
other to the daughter of the Emperor Henry II., sister-in-law to the king 
of Sweden. But Solomon did not ascend the throne before 10b"3, nearly 
fifty years after the princes were banished from England, and had only one 
sister, Adelaide, wife of Wratislas, king of Poland. What we know with 
certainty is, that the sons of Edmund took refuge in Hungary, whence the 
youngest returned to England, with his three children, in the reign of 
Edward the Confessor, his uncle, about the year 1055. 

* King Robert died on the 20th of July, 1031. It is certain that the 
succour he received from Robert, duke of Normandy, in whose court Henry 
I. sought refuge, enabled that prince to defeat the intrigues of his mother. 
He died on the 29th of August, 1060. 

^ King Robert, having died July 20, 1031, the fifth year of his son's 
reign extends from July 20, 1035, to July 20, 1036. But the common 
opinion is that Duke Robert died at Nice in Bithynia on the 2nd of July, 
1035, and consequently in the fourth year of the reign of Henry I, Our 
author himself confirms this by saying, that William governed Normandy 
fifty-two years (July, 1035 — September, 1087). It would not appear that 
he had completed his eighth year at his father's death, as he had only begun - 



A.D. 1035.] -STILLIAM I. DUKE OF IfOEMAlS'DT. 149 

However, during his childhood, the Normans, being natu- 
rally in an unsettled state, there was a long civil M'ar, in 
which many of the nobility as well as the commons perished. 
Gislebert, count of Brionne, Osbern, high-steward of Nor- 
mandy ; Yauquelin de Ferrieres, Hugh de Montfort, Koger 
of Spain, Eobert de Grrautemesnil, Turketil, guardian of 
the young duke, and many others, fell in these mutual 
quarrels.^ 

his sixtieth when he himself died, {fere sexagenariuSj the continuator of the 
history of William de Jumicges says), 

^ Gislebert was uncle, according to the custom of Brittany, as well as 
guardian, of the young prince. The circumstances of his tragic end, little 
honourable to his memory, are related by our author in book vii. 

Gislebert, count of Brionne, son of Godfrey, count d'Eu and Brionne, 
the illegitimate child of Richard I., possessed the earldom of Eu for a short 
time, partimper, says William of Jumieges, probably after the death of his 
uncle William, another natural son of Richard 1., who had succeeded 
Godfrey in this earldom, and to whose posterity it reverted. 

Osbern the high-steward is also sometimes called Osbern de Crepon, 
from the name of an estate in the neighbourhood of Bayeux. William of 
Jumieges calls him procuratoi- principalis domus, an office which was only 
concerned with that branch of the stewardship which regulated the internal 
service of the palace. He was assasinated at Vandreuil, in the very room 
and before the eyes of the duke, by William of Montgomery. His son 
was the famous William Fitz-Osbern. 

Vauquelin de Ferrieres, lord of Ferrieres St. Hilaire, near Bernai, was 
the founder of the family of the barons de Ferrieres and Ferrers (Ferrariis), 
so distinguished in Normandy and England. His descendants bore the 
singular title of " premiers barons fossiers de Normandie," or " baron- 
miners," which they derived from their ancient and valuable iron works 
at Ferrieres, a rare instance in those times of importance and rank derived 
from such sources. 

Hugh de Montfort, surnamed A la Barbe, the son of Toustain de 
Bastenbourg, and brother of William Bertran de Briquebec, was the 
ancestor of the lords of Montfort-sur-Risle. He perished, as well as 
Vauquelin de Ferrieres, in a conflict in which these two barons attacked 
each other with the utmost fury, the first of the scenes of murder and 
anarchy which distracted the early years of the young duke's government, 
at that time purely nominal. 

Roger, lord de Toeni and de Conches, surnamed of Spain, on account of 
his having visited that country (probably banished for some previous 
oifence), during duke Robert's pilgrimage to the Holy Land, and Avhere he 
signalized himself by his exploits against the Moors, was descended, accord- 
ing to William de Jumieges, or rather his continuator and interpolator, 
from Matahulce, uncle of Rollo, but that could only be in the female line. 
The imperious character of Robert, which probably caused his journey to 
Spain, immediately exhibited itself after his return, and he openly refused 
to submit to the authority of a child, who was also illegitimate. This 



150 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.I. Cn.XXIY. 

Guy, son of Eeynold, duke of Burgundy, by a daughter 
of E/icliard II., although William had conferred an earldom 
upon him, took up arms against him, and by dint of 
promises, drew over to his party a great number of the 
Normans, who were ripe for revolt. Supported by these, 
he menaced the young prince with the loss of his duchy, 
and he was forced to fly to Poissy, where he threw himself 
at the feet of Henry, king of France, and implored his aid 
against his traitorous nobles and relations. Henry, a 
generous prince, had compassion on one so young and 
friendless, and having assembled the flower of the French 
army, marched into Normandy to lend him his aid.^ 

In the year of our Lord 1039, Conrad the emperor died, 
and Henry, his son, succeeded him, who reigned seventeen 
years. In the fourth year of his reign, there was a general 
mortality.^ 

In the vear 10 i7 was foudit the bloodv battle of Tales- 
dunes, in which Gruy, who could not withstand the impetuous 
attack of King Ileury and Duke "William, was defeated and 

succeptibility, though it is asserted by a number of his contemporaries, 
may well surprise those wlio are aware of the frightful barbarism which 
then prevailed. Roger de Toeni having become, by his ravages and 
devastations, insupportable to all his neighbours, and more especially to 
Humphrey de Vieilles, he attacked him with his vassals, headed by his 
son, Roger de Beaumont and the aggressor fell in the conflict, mth his 
two sons. 

Robert de Grentemesnil (now Grandmesnil, near Croissanville), founder 
of the family of that name, perished in the fight between Roger de Beau- 
mont and Roger de Toeni. Turketil, guardian of the young duke, is 
called Thorold by William de Jumieges. He appears to have been assas- 
sinated under the same circumstances, and perhaps at the same moment 
as Osbern the high-steward. 

1 Guy of Burgundy, second son of Reynold, earl of Burgundy, by 
Adelaide or Judith, eldest daughter of Richard II., received from Duke 
William, of whom he was cousin-german, Vernon and the earldom of 
Brionne, vacant by the death of Count Gislebert, whose children had 
retired to the court of the earl of Flanders. This token of good will did 
not prevent him from putting himself at the head of the malcontents of 
Lower Normandy, in order to take possession of the duchy. Never did 
William run greater danger than from- the consequences of this rebellion, 
which broke out in 1047. He was forced, as our author says, to go to 
Poissy, and throw himself at the feet of King Henry to implore his assist- 
ance. 

^ Conrad died on the 4th of June, 1039, as already stated; his son 
Henry, elected in 1026, and crowned on Easter-day, 1028, died Oct. 5, 1056. 



A.D. 10J;9.] POPE LEO IX. 151 

obliged to quit the field and fly with his troops, covered 
with shame and having suffered considerable loss.^ In those 
days Bruno, bishop of Toul, repaired to Eome as ambassador 
from Lorraine. A¥hile on the road, one night as he was 
praying, he heard angels singing : — " / think toward you, 
saith the Lord, thoughts of 'peace and not of eviir"^ Bruno 
having attained the end of his journey, was honourably 
received by Pope Damasus, and ordained cardinal-bishop 
in a conclave. He was noble in person as well as descent, 
wise and eloquent, and adorned with many virtues. The 
same year Pope Damasus died, and Bruno, who took the 
name of Leo, was elected pope. He made great efforts to 
revise the decisions of the holy canons which had fallen into 
disuse in times past, through the negligence of the kings 
and pontiffs already mentioned, and were almost forgotten. 
He therefore held a very important council at E^heims in 
the year 1050, in which chastity and righteousness were 
enforced in the ministers of God, and several decrees 
necessary to the welfare of tlie church renewed, though the 
bishops and priests were ignorant of their existence. He 
also, at the request of Herimart, the abbot, consecrated the 
church of St. Eemigius, archbishop of Rheims, on the 
calends [1st] of October, assisted and translated the body 
of the same bishop, whose feast is celebrated every year 
in France with great pomp on the first of October.^ 

The following year, the monastery of St. Evroult at 
Ouche was repaired by William, the son of Geroie, and his 
nephews, Hugh de Grantemesnil, and Eobert his brother ; 



^ For the particulars of the battle of Valesdunes, or of the Val-des- 
Dunes, see Wace, ii. p. 27, et seq. This place appears to belong to the 
commune of Valmerai, now joined to Airan, near Croissanville. After his 
death, Guy shut himself up in his castle of Brionne, which, very differently 
situated from the one of which the ruins still exist, then occupied an island 
of the river Risle. He here defended himself for three years against the 
attacks of the besiegers, so that it was about the year 1050 that he quitted 
the islraid to seek refuge with the earl of Anjou, William's enemy. 

2 Jerem. xxix. 11. 

' Bruno, the son of Hugh, count of Egesheim, and bishop of Toul in 
3 026, elected pope at Worms at the end of 1048, was enthroned on the 
12th of February, 1049, untler the name of Leo IX. The dedication of 
the church of St. Remi took place on the 1st of October, 104D, and the 
opening of the council two days after. 



152 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.I. Cn.XXIV. 

the venerable monk of Jumieges, Theoderic, was the first 
abbot.^ 

In those days, a violent animosity, which became the origin 
of a long war, broke out between the king of the French 
and the duke of the ISTormans. "William D'Arques, uncle 
of the duke, had rebelled against him, and by the advice of 
Mauger, his brother, archbishop of Eouen, had requested 
the aid of King Henry. The brave duke immediately in- 
vested the town of Arques, and, marching against Engelran, 
count of Ponthieu, who attempted to throw relief into the 
place, killed the earl, and, after taking Arques, disinherited 
his uncle, and ordered Mauger, the author of these dissen- 
sions, to be degraded. The king of Trance chafed with 
indignation upon hearing this news, and, in 1054, entered 
the territory of Evreux, at the head of a numerous army, 
while he made his brother Eudes cross the Seine with a 
strong force and march into Beauvais. In these circum- 
stances, Duke William huug upon the king's flank with a 
powerful army, having before detached against Eudes the 
troops of the Cauchois, under the orders of Eobert, count 
d'Eu, and E-oger de Mortemer. They came up with the 
Erench, and gave them battle at Mortemer, defeating them 
with dreadful slaughter on both sides, and Guy, count of 
Ponthieu, who had come to reveuge the death of his brother, 
was made prisoner. The Normans, hastened to announce 
the victory to their duke in great triumph. The king of 
Erance was covered with shame on hearing that his troops 
were beaten by the Normans, and retired suddenly in great 
sorrow to his own dominions. Some time afterwards, the 
faithful ministers of peace interposed between the contend- 
ing princes, and Guy and the other prisoners having been 
released, the king and the duke concluded a peace to the 
extreme satisfaction of their subjects.^ 

^ It was on the 5th of October, 1050, that Theoderic de Matonville "was 
chosen abbot of Ouche or St. Evroult. Our author supplies in the 
sequel very circumstantial details of the restoration of this abbey, and 
relating to the family of Geroie. For the present, it need only be observed, 
that Hugh and Tlobert de Grantemesnil were the two eldest sons of Robert 
de Grantemesnil lately spoken of. 

^ Archbishop Mauger was deposed by the council of Lisieux in May, 
1055, two years after the revolt of the earl, and fourteen months after the 
battle of Mortemer. These facts, which are pretty correctly stated, are 



A.D. lOGG.] WILLIAM I. KITvTG OT ET^GLATs'D. ]53 

In the year of our Lord TOGO, Ilenrj, king of the French, 
departed this life, and his son Philip who succeeded him, 
held the sceptre of France forty-seven years. ^ In the sixth 
year of his reign, Edward, son of Ethelred, and king of 
England, being dead,- Harold, the son of Godwin, usurped 
the throne of England. The following year a comet was 
seen.'^ "William, Duke of Normandy, crossed the sea in the 
autumn, and on the second of the ides [14th] of October 
fought with Harold, who, being slain in the battle, "William 
became king. He was crowned on Christmas-day, and 
filled the throne twenty years and eight months. The 
holy church in his time increased and was exalted, under 
the direction of religious men and good rulers ; for Mau- 
rillius, John and William filled the metropolitan see of 
Eouen, Lanfranc was archbishop of Canterbury, and Thomas 
of York ; the monasteries and bishoprics were entrusted to 
the care of godly fathers and superiors. 

In the year of our Lord 1087, King "William died, after 
whom AViiliam Rufus, his son, reigned twelve years and ten 
months.* 

given in more detail in our author's seventh book. It may be observed, 
however, that the majority of contemporary historians a^ree that the 
active part taken by Archbishop Mauger in the dispute between William 
and the court of Rome relative to the canonical impediments to his 
marriage with Matilda of Flanders, had more to do with the bishop's 
deposition than the evil counsels he gave his brother, or the laxity of his 
own mode of life. He was not deposed till the synod of Liseux, held in 
May, 1055, two years after the count's revolt, and fourteen months after 
the battle of Mortemer. 

^ Henry I., king of France, died on the 4th of August, 1060, as already 
stated. Philip I., his son, having lived until the 29th of July, 1108, 
reigned forty-eight years less six days. 

'^ Edward the Confessor died January 5, 1056, and consequently in the 
course of the sixth year of the reign of Philip I. 

^ It will appear in the sequel that the comet appeared in the month of 
April of the same, and not the following, year. Our author reckons the 
years of William's reign from the day of his coronation (December 25, 
106G — September 9, 1087). Maurillus Avas archbishop of Rouen from 
September, 1055, till the 9th of August, 10C7 ; John (1067— 1079); 
William Bonne- Ame (1079 — Feb. 9, 1110). Lanfranc was primate of 
Canterbury from the 29th of August, 1070, till the 28th of May, 1089, and 
Thomas of York from the month of September, 1070, to November 13, 
1100. 

■• The death of William the Conqueror took place on the 9th of Septem- 
ber, 1087, according to our author and the necrology of Jumi5ges, and not 



154! OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.I. CH.XXIY. 

About tliis period, in 1095, pope Urban held a nume- 
rously attended council at Clermont, at which he exhorted 
all Christians to join the crusade and deliver Jerusalem from 
the pagans. Drought, famine, and pestilence, at that time 
desolated the world.^ 

In the year of our Lord 1099, Jerusalem was captured 
by the holy pilgrims from the infidel tribes who had long 
held possession of it. Then died Pope Urban [II.], and 
Pascal [II.] succeeded him.^ The following year "Wil- 
liam Rufus, king of England, was struck by an arrow which 
killed him as he was hunting in the JSTew Forest. His 
brother Henry [I.] succeeded him, and reigned thirty-five 
years and four months. In the seventh year of his reign 
he fought the battle of Tinchebrai, in which he took prisoner 
Eobert, his brother, duke of Normandy, and became master 
of the whole duchy. Then the emperor Henry died on the 
seventh of the ides [7th] of August, and Charles Henry his 
son succeeded him. Three years afterwards, Philip, king of 
the Prench, departed this life, and Louis Thibaut obtained 
the crown, and has now reigned twenty-nine years. The 
next year Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury, and Hugh, 
abbot of Cluni, departed this life, and were soon followed 
by William, archbishop of Piouen. During these three 
years, a horrible famine in Prance, and a great number of - 
persons were debilitated by attacks of erysipelas.^ 

on the 10th, as other historians assert. As William Rufus died on the 
2nd of August, 1100, his reign really lasted twelve years and nearly eleven 
months, but our author reckons from the 30th of September, the anni- 
versary of the feast of St. Michael, on which he was crowned. 

' The council of Clermont was opened by the pope in person on the 
18th of November, 1095, and closed on the 26th of the same month. 

2 Jerusalem was taken on the 15th of July, 1099. Urban II. died on 
the 29th of the same month, and the election of his successor, Pascal II., 
took place a fortnight after. 

' The precise date of the death of William Rufus is already given ; 
that of Henry I. happened December 1, 1135. The battle of Tinchebrai 
was fought at the commencement of the autumn of 1 106. The death of the 
emperor Henry IV. took place on the 7th of the month of August, preceding 
that of Philip I. on the 29th of July, 1108; and consequently not in the 
third, but the second year, whether we reckon from the battle of Tinche- 
brai, or the death of the emperor. The twenty-ninth year of the reign of 
Lewis the Fat, crowned on the 2nd of August, 1108, ended in 11 37, and as 
he died on the 1st of August at Paris, this paragraph must have been 
written before the news had arrived at Saint Evroult, that is to say, in July 



A.D. 1118.] HENRY I. KING OF ENGLAND. 155 

111 the year of our Lord 1118, on the eve of Christmas, 
a violent gale of wind passed over the west of Europe, and 
many houses and forest-trees were blown down. The next 
year, war broke out between Henry, king of England, and 
Lewis, the Frencli kiug ; the battle of Bremulle, was fought 
on the thirteenth of the calends of September [20th Au- 
gust], in which the English and Normans gained the victory 
over the Erench army who were routed. The same year 
Pope Calixtus [II.] held a sj-nod of many bishops, and used 
all his endeavours to put an end to the contest. Peace 
having been at last made between the two kings, as the 
king of England was returning to his own country, his two 
sons William and Richard, with a great number of the 
nobility from several countries, perished by shipwreck.^ 

In the year of our Lord 1123, the first indiction, Amam-i, 
count of Evreux, and Yaleran, count of Meulan, and some 
others associated with them, having rebelled against their 
sovereign. King Henry, beseiged, took, and burnt to the 
ground their towns of Montfort, Brionne, and Pont-Ande- 
mer. After many serious losses, count Waleran was taken 
prisoner in battle, with eighty of his soldiers, and kept five 
years in captivity by King Henry, who had brought him up, 
and against whom he had now the presumption to take 
arms.^ 

In the year of our Lord 1125, a great change occurred 
among the reigning princes. The emperor Charles Henry Y. 

or at the commencement of August. St. Anselm died on the 21st, and 
Hugh, abbot of Chmi, on the 2yth of April, 1109; William Bonne- Ame 
on the 19th of February, 1110, as we have just seen. The erysipelas was 
particularly severe in 1109, and especially desolated France; meanwhile 
the dominions of the king of England were a prey to two other plagues, 
leprosy in Normandy and famine on the other side of the channel. 

^ The battle of Bremulle, called by the English historians the battle of 
Noyon (see Huntingdon, p. 248, for a full account), was fought on the 20th 
of August, 1119; the council of Clermont between the 21st and 31st of Oc- 
tober foUovnng; the peace between the two kings in the course of November; 
and lastly, the shipwreck ot the Blanche-Nef on the 25th of the same month. 

^ The author or his copyists have omitted here the name of Hugh de 
Montfort, one of the leaders of this conspiracy, which was discovered in 
the month of Octolier, 1123. Their meeting at La-Croix- Saint- Leufroi 
took place durhig the month of September. Brionne, invested in October, 
held out for one month; Pont-Audemer and Montfort for six weeks; Count 
Waleran was not taken before the 2Gth of March following, at the battle 
of Rougemontier. 



158 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.T. CH.XXIT. 

died, and Lotliaire, duke of Saxony, succeeded to the empire. 
At the same time, AVilliam, duke of Poictiers, and "William, 
duke of Apulia, two illustrious princes, also departed this 
life ; and before three years had elapsed, Charles duke 
[count] of Elanders, was assassinated in a church while 
hearing mass, on the calends [1st] of March. He was 
succeeded by "William, the son of Eobert, duke of Nor- 
mandy, w^ho was killed the following year at Alost. Then 
also died Grormond, patriarch of Jerusalem, and Geoffry, 
archbishop of Eouen.^ In the year 1130 from the incar- 
nation of our Saviour, Bald^-in II. king of Jerusalem died 
on the 18th of the calends of September [15th August], 
and was succeeded by Eulk count of Anjou, his son-in law. 
Two years afterwards, Pope Honorius died at Eome; and 
soon after this event, a deplorable schism troubled the 
church ; for the deacon Gregor}^ a native of Pavia, was 
chosen pope during the night by a few of his partisans, 
assuming the name of Innocent ; and the church established 
in the western parts of Europe received and submitted to him; 
but three days afterwards Peter, the son of Leo, was en- 
throned, and called Anaclete. Being supported by brothers, 
relations, and friends, who were extremely powerful, he has 
now retained undisturbed possession of the city of Eome, 
and the revenues and domains of the papacy for seven 
years; Apulia, Sicily, and a great part of Christendom 
acknowledging his rule.^ 

^ The emperor, Henry V., died on the 23rd of May, 112."), and was 
succeeded by Lothaire If, on the 30th of August following; William IX 
duke of Aquitain, died February 10, 1126; William, duke of Apulia, 
July 20, 1127; Charles, earl of Flanders, on the 2nd of March in the 
same year; William Clito on the 28th of July, 1128, and Geoffry, arch- 
bishop of Rouen, on the 25th of November following. Gormond, 
patriarch of Jerusalem, and son of Gormond the second of that name, 
lord of Picquigni, also died in 1128, from the effects of the fatigue he 
endured during his defence of the Castle of Bethassem, near Sidon. 

* Bald^vin II., king of Jerusalem, died August 21, 1131, and his son-in- 
law Fulk, earl of Anjou, was crowned on the 14th of September following. 
Honorius died February 14, 1130; Innocent II., his successor, was elected 
the next day, early in the morning, by sixteen cardinals, before the death 
of the pope was known, and the antipope Anaclete by twenty-one, as soon 
as the news was spread abroad. The approbation of St. Bernard, who 
openly declared in favour of Innocent, induced France and the rest of the 
western states to acknowledge him, but St. Bernard had some difficulty in 



A.D. 1135.] DEATH OF HENRY I. KING OF ENGLAND. 157 

In the year of our Lord 1136, in the 14th indiction, 
Henry, king of Enghmd and duke of ]S"ormandy, a firm 
friend of peace and justice, a faitliful worshipper of God, the 
protector of the weak, and zealous defender of the holy 
church, died on the calends [1st] of December, at the castle 
of Lions. His body, after being embalmed, was carried to 
England, and buried in the church of the Holy Trinity in 
the abbey of Heading, which he had founded and given to 
the monks. ^ Stephen of Blois, his nephew, a son of his 
sister Adela, succeeded him on the throne, and has now 
completed the sixth year of his reign,^ which has been 
marked by important events, pregnant with serious losses 
and disasters ; for Stephen, having fought a battle at Lin- 
coln^ with the barons who were in arms against him, was 
defeated and taken prisoner, and is now detained a wretched 
captive in the prison of Eobert at Bristol.* 

bringing the king, and still more the Norman and English bishops to his 
side, perhaps because the Normans in Sicily had taken that of Anaclete ; 
some traces of this feeling seem to be indicated in the terms which 
Ordericus employs in relating the election of Pope Innocent: a qiiibusdam 
iioctu, by a small number and by night. The death of Anaclete, which 
happened on the 7th of January, 1138, put an end to the dispute. This 
paragraph was evidently written between the month of February, 1137, 
and the moment when the news arrived at St. Evroult. 

^ We learn from our author himself that Henry I. died on the 1st of 
December, 1135, and not in 1 136, at the castle of Lions. He was interred 
in the monastery of Reading (Berkshire), which he had founded in 1125, 
on the site of another more ancient. 

- Stephen of Blois, his nephew by his sister Adela, was crowned on the 
26th of December, 1135. Tlie battle of Lincoln was fought on the 2nd of 
February, 1141. 

^ The preceding paragraph of the history was evidently written between 
the moment of hearing the news of the captivity of the king at Bristol, 
and that of his exchange for the Earl of Gloucester, which took place on 
the 1st of November following. We may be allowed to suppose that it 
was in the month of July, the period when Ordericus terminated the 
thirteenth and last book of his history. Perhaps the best account of the 
battle of Lincoln and succeeding events is that given by Henry of Hunting- 
don, who was a canon of that church, and was either there at the time of 
the battle, as seems probable, or heard the particulars from eye-witnesses. 
See pp. 273—280 (Bohn's edition). 

* In the MS. Brihiton, a name which seems to have puzzled both 
Ordericus and his French editors. However there can be no doubt that 
Bristol is meant. Its ancient name was Erihtstowe, and its castle was the 
chief seat of Robert, earl of Gloucester, in which Stephen was confined. 



158 OEDERICUS TITALIS. [b.T. CH.XXIY. 

In tlie year of oiir Lord 1138, Peter Anaclete died sud- 
denly. The emperor Lothaire^ also breathed his last while 
on his way back from Apulia, which he had conquered ; 
his successor, Conrad, was nephew to the emperor Charles 
Henry. Nevertheless Eoger, king of Sicily, having followed 
the steps of Conrad, entered Apulia, and, on the decease of 
Ealph, the brave duke, to whom the pope and emperor had 
entrusted the defence of the country, recaptured all the 
towns which had been taken from him. However, he 
compelled the pope, though very reluctantly and with great 
regret, to grant him the investiture of the kingdom of 
Sicily and duchy of Apulia, and, having received his absolu- 
tion, appointed his son Eoger duke of Apulia.^ 

Following in the steps of my predecessors, and endea- 
vouring to write annals, I have now, in this first book of 
my Ecclesiastical Histojy, begun the thread of my narrative 
with the incarnation of our Saviour, and have brought it 
down, through the succession of emperors and kings to the 
present day, when the emperor John, son of Alexis, reigns 
at Constantinople, Lothaire governs the Grermans, Louis 
the French, Stephen the English, and the ex-monk Eemi- 
gius the Spaniards.^ In my second book, I propose by 

1 After the words, " Lothaire the emperor," there is in the MS. of St. 
Evroult a blank page, in which the author probably intended to insert 
further particulars of passing events, but which contains only nine lines of 
an evidently later date. The preceding paragraph, except some words 
added or interlined, was written at the same time as the rest of the book, 
which seems to show that this part of the MS. was not written before 1141, 

^ The precise date of the death of Anacletus is already given ; that of 
Lothaire happened on the 4th of December, 1137; and that of 
Ralph on the 3rd of April, 1139. Innocent II. was taken prisoner on 
the '22nd of July in the same year, and on the 25th bestowed on Roger 
the investiture of the kingdom of Sicily, the duchy of Apulia, and the 
principality of Capua. Roger, the son of this prince, who had taken the 
pope prisoner, received from his father the duchy of Apulia, and died 
before him in 11 48. 

' John Comnenus reigned from the 15th of August, 1118, until the 8th 
April, 1143. The person whom our author calls R,emigius, king of Spain, 
is Ramirus II., king of Arragon, surnamed indeed the Monk, because he 
was taken out of a convent, after the death of his brother, to ascend the 
throne, which he occupied until 1137. 

Ordericus Vitalis must have written the conclusion of this book between 
the coronation of Stephen (December 26, 1135) and the news of the abdi- 
cation of Ramirus, as well as of the death of Lothaire (December 4, 1137), 



A.D. 1135 — 1137.] POPE INNOCENT II. 159 

Grod's help to inquire what the old doctors have written and 
scribes^ have copied, respecting the holy apostles and apo- 
stolic men, meaning to make a short abridgment of their 
acts, as the Holy Spirit shall vouchsafe to inspire me. 

At the request of my superiors, I shall diligently, with a 
faithful pen, trace the series of the popes of E,ome and 
their fellow labourers in the Lord's vineyard. 

From Peter, to whom first the Lord Jesus Christ said : 
" I tvill ffive unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven^'' ^ 
to Pope Innocent, who now governs the apostolic see, we 
reckon one hundred and forty-one bishops of E-ome. I 
hope to be able to give to the world, in my next book, some 
account of all these popes who are mentioned in the work 
called " The Acts of the Popes." 

consequently about four years before the two preceding paragraphs, which 
were inserted at a later date. 

' " Antigrai)hus," scriptor, c.ancellarius. — Dii Cange Gloss, 

' Matt. xvi. 19. 



160 OEDERICUS VITALIS. [e.II. CH.I. 



BOOK 11. 

Ch. I. History of the cliurch from our Lord''s ascension to 
Si. FauVs 2^reac}iing at £j)hesus, a.d. 33 — 57. 

Whet? the fulness of time was come, the divine grace, 
mercifully announced to mankind the saving visitation 
which was provided before the creation of the world, and 
towards its last age illuminated the dark recesses of the 
hearts of men with the rays of a new light. Our Lord 
Jesus Christ, as the sublime voice of the holy gospel truly 
informs us, in the fifteenth year of the emperor Tiberius 
Csesar, was baptized by John in the river Jordan ; and the 
true sun shone forth by visible signs and wonders for three 
years and a half, and manifested to the world his divine 
nature, by which he is co-equal, consubstantial, and co- 
eternal, with the Father and the Holy Ghost. Afterwards, 
in his mercy, he suffered on the cross in the thirty-third 
year of his age,^ for the salvation of man; and, having 
destroyed death, which for five thousand years had kept 
mankind fast bound in the chains of a just damnation, he 
despoiled hell, and, having vanquished Satan, the old serpent, 
on the third day rose triumphantly from the dead. Lastly, 
on the fortieth day, after he had confirmed the belief of the 
faithful witnesses in his resurrection, by often showing him- 
self to them openly, and commanded them to ^preach the 
gospel to all nations, giving them power to perform miracles, 
he led the disciples forth as far as Bethany, and, standing 
on mount Olivet, blessed them, and while they beheld Avith 
joy, ascended into heaven. Ten days afterwards, while 
his friends were fasting and continuing in prayer with one 
accord, he sent to them the Holy Grhost the Comforter, and 
according to his promise instantly, by an internal unction, 
he taught them all things, gloriously filled them with all 
spiritual powers, strengthened them against all the assaults 

1 " The baptism of Christ took place at the commencement of the 
sixteenth, not the fifteenth, year of the reign of Tiberius. If, as 
now generally believed, our Lord was not bom later than the end of the 
year 749 from the foundation of Rome, he had at least begun his thirty- 
seventh year at the period of his crucifixion in 786." — M. Le Frevost. 



A.D. 32.] THE DAT OF PENTECOST. 161 

of their enemies, and made them invincible champions of 
the faith and teachers of all nations. 

Luke, a Syrian by birth, a physician by profession, and a 
faithful disciple of Christ, full of the grace of the Holy 
Spirit, after having written his gospel for the instruction of 
the faithful in Grreece, added the noble volume of the Acts 
of the Apostles, which he addressed to Theophilus. The 
word means a lover of God, and may be applied to all who 
are studious and intelligent, and unceasingly devoted to 
meditation on the divine law. To such the word of Grod 
is justly addressed, and they eagerly receive it and hold it 
fiist with sincere affection. The gospel, that is to say, the 
good tidings, penetrate their hearts, the triumphs of the 
invincible army of apostles and martyrs are recounted to 
them because they are accounted worthy to be made par- 
takers of the heavenly mysteries.' 

The eloquent Arator also, sub-deacon of the see of Eome, 
diligently copied the narrative of St. Luke, making it the 
substance of a metrical composition, in a poem he presented 
to Pope Yigilius, remarkable for the beauty of its melodious 
versification ; leaving to future generations, a noble monu- 
ment of his genius.'^ I aim at tracing the course of such 
illustrious precursors as these, although, like a lame man 
halting by the way, I can only follow them with slow and 
distant steps ; but desiring to treat of the apostles and 
their blessed fellow combatants for the faith, with the 
materials which they have furnished. 

Luke tells us, in his lucid narrative, that, on the holy day 
of pentecost, the apostles were all filled with the Holy 
Grhost, and spoke, in the difierent gentile languages, of the 
wonderful works of God, to the great amazement of the 
Jews, who were then assembled from various parts of the 
world. But while their enemies showed their hatred, and 

' The Acts of the Apostles form the sequel to St. Luke's gospel, and are 
addressed to the same person. They embrace a period of thirty-three 
years, from the year 32 of the Christian era until about the vear 65. 
Notwithstanding all their marks of authenticity, we do not find them 
quoted by the fathers of the church till an advanced period of the second 
century. — M. Le Prevost. 

^ Arator, at first secretary and intendant of finances to Athalaric, and 
afterwards sub-deacon of the Roman church, presented to Pope Vigilius iu 
the year 544, the Acts of the Apostles in Latin verse. 

VOL. I. M 



162 OEDERICUS VITALIS. [b.TT. CH.T. 

muttered, " These men are full of new wine," Peter, in- 
flamed with zeal for the faith, stood up with the eleven, and, 
lifting up his voice, explained that the coming of the Holy 
Grhost the Comforter had been foretold long before by the 
prophet Joel. He supported the truth of his declaration, that 
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of Grod by miracles, and 
wonders and signs, was raised from the dead three days after 
his passion on the cross, by reference to predictions in the 
Psalms. The Jews were pricked in their heart, and, receiv- 
ing the word to the salvation of their souls, were baptized ; 
and the same day there were added about three thousand 
souls to the number of the believers.^ Such was the origin 
of the primitive church, on which the heavenly grace was 
abundantly bestowed. 

Many wonders and signs were done by the apostles at 
Jerusalem, and all those who saw these extraordinary things 
trembled with fear. And they that believed lived together, 
and had all things common. They sold their possessions 
and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had 
need. Every day the fliithful increased in virtue, while the 
Lord added continually to the number of those who were to 
be saved. 

Now Peter and John went up together into the temple 
at the ninth hour, and there saw a beggar who had been 
lame from his mother's womb. Peter told the indigent man 
that he possessed no earthly riches, but offered him some- 
thing more valuable ; and, taking him by the hand, presently 
healed him in the name of Jesus Christ. Immediately his 
feet and ankle-bones received strength, so that he leaped up 
and ran, and entered with them into the temple, rejoicing 
and praising Grod before all the people, who were filled with 
wonder and amazement when they saw this special miracle 
performed in the name of Jesus Christ on the lame man, 
who was laid daily at the Beautiful Gate of the temple. 
While the apostles were thus employed, the people ran 
together to Solomon's porch, to see him who had just been 
healed by the virtue of the name of Christ. Seeing the 
multitude assembled, Peter opened his mouth and humbly 
disclaimed the merit of the cure, which he wholly ascribed to 
the divine nature of Jesus Christ. Mildly rebuking the 
* Acts ii. 1 — 41. (Year 33 of the Christian era.) 



A.D. 33.] ST. Peter's piiEACHi:frG. 163 

Jews who had persecuted him, and trusting in the inex- 
haustible mercy of his Master, he mildly excused them, 
because they did it through ignorance. At the end of his 
discourse, he exhorted them to repent of their sins, and 
proved to them in the clearest manner that the Saviour and 
true Prophet had already come, as Moses, and Samuel, and 
all the prophets had predicted long before.^ 

As they spake unto the people, the priests, and the cap- 
tain of the temple, and the Sadducees, came upon them, and, 
laying hands upon them, put them in hold ; for, being filled 
with the bitterness of iniquity, they were grieved that the 
apostles taught the people, and preached, through Jesus, 
the resurrection from the dead. Many of them which 
heard the word believed ; and the number of the men was 
about five thousand. On the morrow, Annas, the high 
priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as 
many as were of the kindred of the high priest, and the 
rulers, and elders, and scribes, were gathered together at 
Jerusalem. And when they had set them in the midst, they 
asked : " By what power, or in what name, have ye done 
this?" Then Peter, filled with the Holy G-host, testified 
clearly that the impotent man was made whole by the 
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and that there was 
none other name given under heaven whereby we must be 
saved. Now when their adversaries saw the boldness of 
Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned 
and ignorant men, they marvelled, and were grieved; and 
they took knowledge of them, that they had been with 
Jesus. And beholding the man which was healed standing 
with them, they could say nothing against the miracle, 
as it was manifest to all who were in Jerusalem, they were 
consumed with rage. Afterwards, having taken counsel, 
they called the apostles, and commanded them not to speak 
at all nor teach in the name of Jesus. But Peter and John 
refused to obey their injunction, saying with great boldness : 
" Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto 
you more than unto God; judge ye. Por we cannot but 
speak the things which we have seen and heard." The 
assembly then sent them away with threats, but not daring 

^ Acts ii, 4-2~iii. 26. 
M 2 



164 OEDERICrS YITALIS. [b.I. CH.I. 

to punlsli tliem, as they perceived that the great miracle 
which they had just performed had gained them the favour 
of the people. On regaining their liberty, the apostles went 
to their own company, and reported all that had befallen 
them. And when they heard that, they lifted up their voice 
to God with one accord, and, inspired with holy zeal, offered a 
signal prayer of thanks to God. And when they had prayed, 
the place was shaken where they were assembled together, 
and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost ; and the nets 
spread by their holy preaching drew many from the abyss of 
error to the light of faith and righteousness.^ 

And the multitude of them that believed were of one 
heart and of one soul : neither said any that aught of the 
things which he possessed was his own, neither was there 
any among them that lacked ; but they had all things in 
common. The possessors of houses and lands sold them, and 
laid the price of them down at the apostles' feet ; and distri- 
bution was made unto every man according as he had need. 
The primitive church at Jerusalem shone thus brightly, 
all its aspirations being fervently directed heaven-ward. 
The blessing of God sanctified this happy society, whence 
originated the excellent institutions which have come down 
to us. Joseph [Joses], who by the apostles was surnamed 
Barnabas, that is to say, the son of consolation, a Levite, of 
the country of Cyprus, ever ready in good works, having 
land, sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the 
apostles' feet. Ananias also sold a field, but kept back part 
of the price, his wife Sapphira being privy to it, and brought 
a certain part, and laid it at the apostles' feet. When 
this fraud was revealed to Peter by the Holy Ghost, the 
apostle rebuked the man who endeavoured to deceive him 
by a lie. Ananias had scarcely heard the apostle's repri- 
mand, when he fell down and gave up the ghost. And 
about the space of three hours after, his wife, not knowing 
what was done, came in, and, when Peter questioned her 
as to the price of the land, she also told a lie, and being 
rebuked by the apostle, fell down straightway at his feet, 
and yielded up the ghost. And great fear came upon all the 
church, and upon as many as heard these things.^ 

^ Acts iv. 1—34. 2 Acts V. 1—11. 



A.D. 33.] ST. PETEH RELEASED FROM PRISOIT. 165 

By the liands of the apostles were many signs and 
wonders wrought among the people, and they were all with 
one accord in JSolomon's porch. However, of the rest durst 
no man join himself to them, but the people magnified 
them. The number of men and women who believed in the 
Lord increased more and more. In the streets the sick were 
laid on couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter passing 
by might overshadow some of them, and free them from 
their infirmities. Grreat numbers of the inhabitants of the 
neighbouring towns hastened together to Jerusalem, bring- 
ing to the apostles the sick and those who were possessed 
with the devil, and they all recovered the health they 
desired.^ 

The high priest and all they that were with him were 
filled with indignation, and laid their hands on the apostles, 
and put them in the common prison. But the angel of the 
Lord opened the prison doors by night, and bringing them 
forth, said, " Go, stand and speak to the people in the 
temple all the words of this life." They accordingly 
entered into the temple early in the morning, and there 
preached the word of Grod with boldness. But the high 
priest and they that were with him called the council 
together, and sent to the prison to have them brought. 
The officers truly found the prison shut with all safety, but 
no man within. At length, they heard that the men of whom 
they were in search were teaching in the temple. Then the 
captain and the officers brought them without violence, 
for they feared the people, lest they should have been 
stoned. When they had set them before the council, the 
high priest accused them of having filled Jerusalem with 
a doctrine which was contrary to their tenets, and opposed 
to the universal decisions of the elders. The apostles 
therefore answered, " We ought to obey God rather than 
man. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye 
slew and hanged on a tree. Him hath God exalted with 
his right hand, to be a Prince and a Saviour, and to give 
repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. We are 
witnesses of those things, and so is also the Holy Ghost, 
whom God hath given to them that obey him." When they 

^ Acts V. 12— IG. 



16G OKDERICUS YITALIS. [b.II. cil.i. 

heard -that, they were cut to the heart, and took counsel 
to slay thcm.^ 

Then there stood up one of the council, a Pharisee 
named Gramaliel, a doctor of the law, who was held in repu- 
tation among all the people, who, causing the apostles to be 
removed from the assembly, as he wished to be of service to 
them, then plainly recounted how, only a few days before, 
Theudas with four hundred followers was brought to nought, 
and how Judas the Galilean, who drew away much people after 
him, perished in the days of the taxing, with all his faction. 
After having adduced examples of this kind, he con- 
tinued : " And now I say unto you, refrain from these men, 
and let them alone ; for if this counsel or this work be 
of men, it will come to nought ; but if it be of Grod ye 
cannot overthrow it, lest haply ye be found even to fight 
against Grod." Having heard this, they concurred in 
Gamaliel's opinion, and having recalled the apostles and 
beaten them, commanded tliat they should not speak in the 
name of Jesus, and let them go. And they departed from 
the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were 
counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Christ. 
And daily in the temple, and in every house, they ceased 
not to teach and preach Jesus Christ.'^ 

In those days, as the number of the disciples was 
continually on the increase, there arose a murmuring of 
the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their widows 
were neglected in the daily ministration. Then the twelve 
called the multitude of the disciples unto them, and said ; 
" It is not reason that we should leave the word of God and 
serve tables. Wherefore, brethren, look ye out among you 
seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and 
wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business. But we 
will give ourselves continually to prayer, and to the 
ministry of the word." This advice was unanimously 
adopted, and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of 
the Holy Ghost, Philip and Prochorus, Nicanor and 
Timotheus, Parmenas and Nicolas, a proselyte of Antioch; 
and set them before the apostles, who, when they had prayed, 
laid their hands on them. The number of the disciples 

» Acts V. 17—33. 2 Acts v. 34—42. 



A.D. 31.] ST. Stephen's maetyedom. 167 

multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the 
priests were obedient to the faith. ^ 

Stephen, full of grace and power, did great wonders and 

miracles among the people. The Jews, therefore, moved 

with envy, rose up against him, and disputed wdth him, but 

were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which 

he spoke. Then they suborned false witnesses, who asserted 

that they had heard him speak blasphemous words against 

Moses and against Grod. And they stirred up the people, 

and the elders, and the scribes, and arresting him, brought 

him before the council, and began to accuse him. And all 

that sat in the council saw his face, as it had been the face 

of an angel. Being examined by the high priest, Stephen 

made an eloquent reply, and boldly unfolded the history of 

the fathers with great wisdom, expatiating fitly on the 

merits of Abraham, Moses, and the other patriarchs, and 

concluding with an account of many great events in a few 

words. He then rebuked the unbelievers, and those who 

despised the law, calling them plainly stiff-necked and 

uncircumcised in heart and ears, who always resisted 

the Holy Ghost, and persecuted the prophets. When 

they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and 

gnashed on him with their teeth. But he, being full 

of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven 

and saw the glory of God, and said : " Behold, I see 

the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the 

right hand of God." Then they cried out with a loud 

voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one 

accord, and cast him out of the city, and stoned him : and 

the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet 

whose name was Saul. And they stoned Stephen, calling 

upon God, and saying: "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit." 

And he kneeled down and cried with a loud voice : " Lord, 

lay not this sin to their charge." And when he had said 

this, he fell asleep in the Lord." This happened in the 

second year of our Lord's ascension, on the seventh of the 

calends of January [December 26]. Devout men then 

carried the corpse of the first martyr to Gamaliel's country 

* Acts vi. 1 — 7. Our author, in his list of the seven deacons, inserts 
Timotheus instead of Timon. 
^ Acts vi. 8 — vii. 60. . , 



168 OEDEKICUS VITALIS. [b.II. CII.I. 

house, wliicli is called Caphargamala, where they buried him 
with respect, and made great lamentation over him. Nico- 
demus, Gramaliel, and Abibas, were afterwards interred in the 
same spot. This great treasure remained concealed there for 
three centuries, until the priest Lucian discovered it hj a 
revelation from God ; and John, bishop of Jerusalem, 
ordered it to be carried to that city, in the seventh year of 
the reign of the emperor Honorius [a.d. 415].^ 

After Stephen was stoned, a great persecution arose 
against the church at Jerusalem, and they were all scat- 
tered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, 
except the apostles. But during this dispersion, the dis- 
ciples, strengthened by the Holy Ghost, passed into several 
countries, and there preached the word of God. Then 
Philip preaclied Christ in Samaria, and wrought before his 
hearers many wonderful works in the name of Christ, healing 
the paralytic, the lame, and those possessed with a devil. 
The Samaritans gave heed with one accord unto the things 
which Philip spake, and received the true faith with great 
alacrity. Then Simon Magus (who had long bewitched the 
people of Samaria, and blinded them with his sorceries to 
such a degree that these deluded men looked upon him as 
some great one, and called him the great power of God) 
believed also when he heard Philip preaching the things 
concerning the kingdom of God. Being baptized in com- 
pany with other men and women in the name of Jesus 
Christ, Simon continued with Philip, and beholding the 
signs and great miracles which were wrought, marvelled 
much at things so extraordinary.^ 

Now when the apostles, which were at Jerusalem, heard 
that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto 
them Peter and John, who, when they were come down, 
prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost. 
Then laid they their hands on those who were baptized, 
and they received the Holy Ghost.^ Hence proceeds the 
institution of the church, that, after the catechumens have 

^ Our author is mistaken as to the time of St. Stephen's martyrdom, 
which happened only about nine months after our Lord's death. As to 
the discovery of his relics in 415, see book i. p. 106, and note p. 107. 

^ Acts viii. 1 — 13, 

^ Acts viii. H — 17. 



A.D. 34.] SIMON MAGUS. 169 

received the sacrament of baptism from the priest, the 
bishop shall lay hands ou them, offering up prayers in their 
behalf, and anointing them with the chrism ; and thus the 
confirmation of those who are baptized is completed by the 
gift of the sevenfold graces of the Holy Spirit. When 
Simon saw that, through the laying on of the apostles' hands 
the Holy Grhost was given, he oftered them money, say- 
ing, " Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay 
hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost." But Peter said 
unto him : " Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast 
thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money. 
Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart 
is not right in the sight of God. Eepent therefore of this 
thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of 
thine heart may be forgiven thee, l^or I perceive that 
thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of ini- 
quity." But Simon, making light of the apostle's words, 
left him, and became an apostate, and for a long time pro- 
voked the anger of God by his innumerable crimes. The 
apostles, when they had spoken the word of the Lord, 
returned to Jerusalem, and preached the gospel in many 
parts of Samaria.^ 

At the command of an angel of the Lord, Philip went to 
meet Candace, the eunuch who had the charge of all the 
treasure of the queen of the Ethiopians, as he was returning 
from Jerusalem ; and having mounted the chariot, sat by 
him, and expounded to him the book of the prophet Isaiah 
which he was reading ; and commencing with the prediction 
of the slaughter of the unresisting Lamb, preached unto him 
Jesus. The eunuch, listening to him with pleasure, readily 
comprehended and believed him, and, as soon as they found 
water, was baptized ; and then returned to his own country, 
rejoicing in his renewal by holy regeneration. But the 
Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, who preached the 
gospel in all the cities from Azotus to Caesarea.^ 

^ Acts viii. 18 — 25. The account given in the Acts of the Apostles 
ends very diiferently : " Then answered Simon and said, Pray ye to the 
Lord for me, that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon 
me." 

* Acts viii. 26 — 40. Our author has confused the name of the eunuch 
with that of the queen of Ethiopia. 



i70 • OEDERICTJS YITALIS. [b.D. Cn.T. 

Saul, yet breatlaing out threatenings and slaughter 
against tlie disciples of the Lord, desired of the high priest 
letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that he might be 
able to make havoc of the church of God, and bring the 
men and women of the sect of the Nazarenes bound 
to Jerusalem. As he came near Damascus, a light from 
heaven shone about him. Falling to the ground, he heard 
the Lord rebuke him ; he forthwith repented, and his con- 
version was profitable both to himself and many others. 
Being led into Damascus by his companions, who heard 
indeed the voice of the Lord talking with Saul, but saw no 
one, he was three days without sight, and neither did eat 
nor drink. Ananias, whom the Lord sent to him, put his 
hands upon him, comforted him, restored his sight, and 
baptized him. Thus Saul, who before had ravened as a 
wolf, and was a cruel persecutor of the church, became 
not only a lamb, but fearless as a ram, a chosen vessel, and 
the teacher of the Gentiles. He immediately entered the 
synagogues, and preached Jesus, that he is the Son of God, 
to the great amazement of all present, wlio remembered the 
bigotry with which in times past he had zealously followed 
the traditions of the fathers.^ 

Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded 
the Jews which dwelt at Damascus. But his faithful testi- 
mony roused their implacable hatred against him ; so much 
so, that a short time after they narrowly searched for him, 
intending to kill him, and placed sentries day and night 
at the gates of the city, to prevent his escape. But the 
disciples, discovering the schemes of his enemies, defeated 
their projects by letting him down by the wall, in a basket, 
during the night. AVhen Saul was come to Jerusalem, 
he endeavoured to join himself to the disciples ; but they 
were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a 
disciple. But Barnabas took him, brought him to the 
disciples, and related to them how he had seen the Lord 
in the way, and told them all the other things that had 
happened, and Saul faithfully attached himself to the disci- 
ples. He, therefore, returned thanks to God, and continued 
with them coming in and going out, doing everything boldly- 
in the name of the Lord Jesus. He disputed against the 

^ Actsix. 1—21. 



A.D. 35.] ST. PETER AND COENELIFS. l7l 

G-recians, confounded the Jews, and by God's help refuted 
them all. The leaders among them, thus baffled in argu- 
ment, were so enraged at 8aul, that they tried to kill him. 
AVhich when the brethren knew, they brought him down to 
Cesarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus. Then had the 
churches rest throughout all Judea and Galilee and Samaria, 
and were edified ; and walking in the fear of the Lord, were 
filled with the comfort of the Holy Ghost ; and the multi- 
tude of believers increased.^ 

The apostle Peter healed at Lydda a man sick of the 
palsy, named Eneas, who had kept his bed eight years. 
And all that dwelt in Lydda and Saron, when they wit- 
nessed this miracle, turned to the Lord. At Joppa, 
Tabitha, full of good works and alms-deeds, died, and was 
laid by the brethren in an upper chamber. The disci- 
ples, hearing that Peter was at Joppa, which was not far 
from Lydda, sent unto him two men, desiring him to come 
to them. As soon as he received the message of the breth- 
ren, he humbly obeyed the summons. "When Peter was 
come, all the widows stood round him weeping, and showing 
the coats and garments which Dorcas made for them. But 
Peter put them all forth, and kneeled down, and prayed ; and 
turning to the body said, " Tabitha, arise." And she opened 
her eyes, and when she saw Peter, she sat up, and he, giving 
her his hand, lifted her up, and presented her alive to the 
saints and widows. This miracle was known throughout 
all Joppa, and many believed in the Lord !" 

Cornelius, a centurion of tlie cohort, called the Italian 
band, a devout man, and one that feared God with all his 
house, was constantly employed in acts of charity and 
prayers for his eternal welfare. This man saw plainly in a 
vision, about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God, 
and as he regarded him with deep awe, heard him say, " Cor- 
nelius, thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memo- 
rial before God." The angel then commanded him to send 
for Simon Peter, who would give him saving advice. He 
therefore immediately obeyed the order, and sent three meu 
to Peter, On the morrow, as they drew nigh unto the city, 
Peter went up upon the house-top to pray, about the sixth 
hour. While he was fasting, and his thoughts were dwelling 
1 Acts ix. 22—31. 2 Acts ix. 32—42. 



172 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.I. 

on heavenly things, he saw in a trance heaven opened, and 
a certain vessel descending unto him, as it had been a great 
sheet, knit at the four corners, and let down from heaven to 
the earth, wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts and 
creeping things of the earth, and fowls of the air. And 
there came a voice to him, saying, " Rise, Peter, kill and 
eat." But Peter said, " Not so. Lord ; for I have never 
eaten any thing that is common or unclean." And the 
voice spake unto him again the second time, " What the 
Lord hath cleansed, that call not thou common." This was 
done thrice, and the vessel was immediately received up 
again into heaven. By this revelation the conversion of the 
Grentiles through the four climates of the world, in every 
language and nation, was divinely intimated to Peter ; and 
be was plainly taught by Grod himself not to reject any one 
who wished to be converted. Re-assured and joyful, he 
hospitably received in the house of Simon the tanner the 
messengers of Cornelius, and on the following day accom- 
panied them to Caesarea of Palestine. On his arrival there, 
, he found Cornelius, with his kinsmen and intimate friends 
expecting him, and as they were ready to hear him preach 
and obey his words, he kindly complied with their wishes.^ 

Peter, therefore, opening his mouth, said : " Of a truth I 
perceive that Grod is no respecter of persons ; but in every 
nation, he that feareth him and worketh righteousness, is 
accepted with him. He sent his word unto the children 
of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, who is Lord 
of all." When Peter had proclaimed these and many other 
things, respecting the advent of our Saviour and eternal life, 
and had supplied the thirsty souls with copious draughts of 
the water of life from the fountain of heavenly doctrine, 
the Holy Grhost fell on all who heard the word, and 
suddenly conferred upon them the gift of languages. Then 
Peter, to the great surprise of those of the circumcison who 
had accompanied him, baptized Cornelius and all those who 
believed with him.^ 

In compliance with the invitation of his distinguished 

1 Acts X. 1—33. 

- Acts X. 34 — 48. There is a slight difference in the two accounts. 
Here we have St. Peter baptizing the centurion and his friends, in the 
Acts we are told that the apostle commanded them to be baptized. 



A.D. 37 43.] ST. PAUL AT ANTIOCH. 173 

converts, Peter remained some days at Csesarea, and having 
confirmed them in the faith, went iip to Jerusalem, where 
he related to his fellow apostles the conversion of the 
Gentiles, Then certain men that were of the circumcision, 
contended with him, saying, " "Why wentest thou in to men 
uncircumcised, and didst eat with them ?" But Peter began 
to explain to them, in regular order, how, while fasting and 
praying in the city of Joppa, he had seen a vision in a 
trance, wherein God showed him the calling and conversion 
of the Gentiles, and promised his aid ; giving them, further, 
a simple account of all that had happened. AYhen they 
heard these things, they held their peace ; and being full 
of brotherly love, praised and glorified God, who saves 
even Gentiles through repentance. The faithful of Cyprus 
and Cyrene, and others, who were scattered abroad by the 
persecution that arose about Stephen, travelled as far as 
Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the word to 
none but Jews. But when they were come to Antioch, 
they made known the Lord Jesus to the Greeks, and a 
great number believed and turned to the Lord. The church 
which was in Jerusalem hearing this, rejoiced in the Lord, 
and sent forth Barnabas, a good man, and full of the Holy 
Ghost and of faith, who, when he came to Antioch, and had 
seen the grace of God, was glad, and having comforted the 
disciples, departed to Tarsus, to seek Saul. Prom thence 
they both went together to Antioch, where they frequented 
the church a whole year, and taught much people. And 
the disciples were called Christians first at Antioch.^ 

Then one of the prophets who came from Jerusalem, of the 
name of Agabus, predicted by inspiration that there would 
be a great dearth, upon which Saul and Barnabas, having 
received from their brethren the contributions intended for 
the relief of the saints, were despatched to Jerusalem.'^ 

Tiberius Caesar reigned about twenty-two years. In the 
eighteenth year of his reign, as history correctly states, our 
Lord Jesus Christ sufiered on the cross, rose again from the 
dead, performed, in an ineffable manner, many miracles, 

^ Acts xi. 1 — 26. This famine, which is mentioned before, book i. pp. 
85, 86, was predicted a.d. 43, began in 44, and continued to desolate the 
East for several years. 

■■^ Acts xi. 27—30. 



174 ORDEEICTJS VITALIS. [b.II. CH.L 

whicli becoming known far and wide throughout the world, 
were the subject of a report from Pilate to Tiberius ; 
adding, that on account of the innumerable wonders eifected 
in his name, Christ was already looked upon as a God. 
Tiberius informed the senate of all that had come to his 
knowledge. But this body, we are told, as TertuUian writes 
in his Apology, showed nothing but contempt for Christ, 
because the judgment of this affair had not been referred at 
first to it, but the decision of the mob had anticipated its 
authority. For, according to an ancient law, no one could 
be considered a god amongst the Eomans, if the title was 
not confirmed by a decree of the senate. Moreover, as 
Eusebius of Caesarea assures us, in the second book of his 
"Ecclesiastical History," what had taken place was neces- 
sary to prevent our thinking that the divine power has 
any need of the support of human laws. As we have just 
stated, the senate refusing to acknowledge Christ, Tiberius 
maintained his own opinion, and forbade any one from 
offering molestation to the Christians.^ Divine Providence, 
no doubt, inspired the emperor with this determination, in 
order that, at first, the preaching of the gospel might be 
universally extended without opposition. The consequence 
was that suddenly, like light flashing from heaven, or the rays 
of the rising sun, the word of Grod illuminated the whole 
world with the brightness of its divine light, that the pro- 
phecy might be accomplished, which said, " Their sound 
went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends o. 
the world." '^ From that time, in every town, and village, 
an immense number of people congregated in the churches, 
as the sheaves in harvest-time are crowded into the barns. 
All those who were held by the bonds of a deadly supersti- 
tion, handed down to them by their fathers, now freed from 
their tyrannical masters by receiving the knowledge of the 
word of God, through the teaching of Christ, and by wit- 

1 Tiberius, as before remarked, reigned little more than twenty-two 
years and a half after the death of Augustus. His prohibition of per- 
secuting the Christians, if it really did take place, must have been issued 
A.D. 35 ; but there is some difficulty in crediting it, notwithstanding all 
the documents respecting it alleged by TurtuUian and St. Justin as 
authentic. 

- Psalm xviii. 5. Rom. x. 10. 



A.D. 37 — 41.] IMPIETY OF CALIGULA. 175 

nessing the miracles performed in his name, turned to the 
one true God and Lord, their Creator, repenting of their 
old errors which they faithfully confessed. 

On the death of Tiberius, Caius Caligula ascended the 
throne, but did not fill it quite four years. He gave the 
government of Judea to Herod Agrippa, son of Aristobulus, 
and, at the same time, conferred upon him the tetrarchates 
of Philip and Lysanias, to which he also shortly afterwards 
added that of Herod. This same Herod was the author of 
the death of John the Baptist, and had treated the Lord 
with derision a short time before his passion. The emperor, 
after having tormented him in many ways, banished him for 
life to Spain, as Josephus, the famous historian of the 
Hebrews, relates in his writings.^ 

At this time Philo the Jew, a most celebrated writer, who 
stands in the first ranks among those who have studied the 
philosophy of the Greeks, bequeathed to posterity glorious 
monuments of his learning. Among other things, he de- 
scribes the cruelty and folly of Caligula, who carried his 
pride to such a pitch that he aspired to be worshipped as a 
god, and profaned the sanctuary at Jerusalem by setting up 
idols in the temples. In addition to this, the Jews, in 
punishment for their daring and heinous cruelties to Christ, 
sufi'ered fearful massacres and tribulations, as the learned 
men above named, Philo and Josephus, relate in their works. 
Indeed, from the time they committed the impious crime, 
they were constantly exposed to the fury of seditions, and 
continually the victims of war and murder, until at last 
their ruin was complete at the siege of Jerusalem by Ves- 
pasian. Pilate, who, in the twelfth year of the reign of 
Tiberius Caesar, had been named procurator of Judea, and 
had pronounced sentence of death on Christ, suffered such 
persecution by the orders of Caius, that he killed himself 
with his own hand. During this reign, Matthew, who 
preached in Judea, wrote his gospel in the Hebrew tongue.^ 

1 See before, book i., page 85. [16 or 26 March, 37 — January 24, 4] .] 
- The account given by Philo of the follies, the cruelties, and the 
impieties of Caligula, in connexion with the Jews, may be seen in his 
work, De Virttitibus, sive de legatione ad Gakim. This mission took 
place in the year 40, The attempt of Caligula to have his statue raised in 
the temple at Jerusalem was made in September of that year, although 



17G ORDEEICUS YITALTS. [b.II. CH.I. 

Caius CaBsar having been put to death, Claudius reigned 
thirteen years and eight months. During his reign a fright- 
ful famine desolated the whole world, as Luke tells us the 
prophet Agabus predicted. About that time, during the 
famine which happened under Claudius, Herod the king 
stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the church. 
Then James, the son of Zebedee, an apostle of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, visited all Judea and Samaria, and performed 
many miracles by the power of Christ. He disputed in the 
synagogues with the unbelievers, and expounded the Holy 
Scriptures, proving that every thing which had been pre- 
dicted by the prophets, was fulfilled in our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

Hermogenes, the magician, when he heard how highly 
James was spoken of on account of his virtues, was filled 
with envy, and sent his disciple Philetus to watch the 
motions of the apostle. Attended by a few pharisees, 
Philetus tried to oppose James, and to shake the truth of 
his preaching of our Lord Jesus Christ. But the apostle 
persisted with confidence in the Holy Spirit, and proving the 
falsehood of his adversary's assertions shewed from the 
sacred scriptures that Jesus of JN'azareth was the true Son 
of God. Eeturning to Hermogenes, Philetus bestowed the 
highest praises on James, honestly admitted the truth of 
his statement respecting the true faith, extolled him as 
invincible in argument, and published abroad the numerous 
miracles he had seen or heard of He ended his narrative 
by advising his master to go with him immediately to the 
apostle to entreat his favour and number themselves among 
his disciples. But Hermogenes was so much incensed, that 
he put Philetus in bonds, and he was unable to move. As 
soon as the apostle was apprized by the son of Philetus of 
this treatment, he sent his handkerchief to him, and com- 
manded him to touch it in the name of the Lord. This 
done, Philetus was delivered from the bonds of the magician, 
and hastening to James in great joy, laughed at these dia- 

Philo places it in the spring. The same year Pilate appears to have killed 
himself in despair at his disgrace, while, as it is supposed, he was in exile at 
Vienne, in Dauphiny; and it is reckoned that about this time St. Matthew 
composed his gospel in Hebrew, or rather Syro-Chaldaic ; and it was 
immediately translated into Greek. 



A.T). 41 43.] LEGEND OF HEllMOGENES. 177 

bollcal sorceries. However, the magician, seriously grieved, 
called up the demons by his nefarious art, and commanded 
them to bring to him James and Philetus in chains. But 
the devils, as soon as they made their appearance in the air, 
began to howl, complaining, with horrible groans, that the 
angel of Grod had bound them with chains of fire which 
caused them excruciating pain. At last, being set free by 
order of the apostle, they went back to Hermogenes, and, 
in turn binding his hands behind with cords, led him thus 
bound before James. 

The blessed apostle rebuked the magician, telling him 
that the society of demons was a detestable thing, and 
ruinous to man : he then ordered Philetus to untie the 
cords with which the magician, who stood before him humi- 
liated and confounded, was bound. Thus liberated, he seized 
the apostle's staff to defend himself against the fury of the 
demons, and ordered his disciples to bring from his house, 
on their shoulders, several coffers full of books. He then 
began to throw the books into the fire, but in compliance 
with the commands of the apostle, he filled the coffers with 
stones and lead, and cast them into the sea, lest the smell 
arising from the combustion of polluted things should do 
injury to those who were unaware of their witchcraft. 
Hermogenes, thus delivered from the burthen of magic, 
returned to the apostle, and humbly embracing his feet, 
manifested sincere repentance to Grod ; and, attaching him- 
self to the blessed James, obeyed him in all things. He 
thus began to attain such a state of perfection in the fear 
of God, that the Lord through him wrought several mira- 
cles, by witnessing which many persons turned to the Lord, 
renouncing their errors and forsaking their evil deeds. 

The Jews, persevering in their malice, when they saw 
that the magician, whom they considered invincible, and his 
friends, had become believers in Christ, offered money to 
Lysias and Theocritus, the centurions of Jerusalem, who 
arrested James, and committed him to prison. The apostle 
was brought "^ith great tumult into the judgment-hall, 
where all admired his confidence in the Lord. Being 
questioned by the Pharisees, he returned excellent answers, 
and commented on the holy scriptures with wisdom and 
'eloquence. He proved from them irrefragably Christ's 

VOL. I. N 



178 ORDERICUS YITALIS. [l3.II. CII.I. 

birth from a pure virgin, lais passion and resurrection, and 
all the rest as confessed by the Catholic church. The apostle 
concluded his discourse with such power, that all who were 
present believed, confessed their sins, and became faithful 
adherents to the church of Grod. 

A few days afterwards, Abiathar, the chief priest, per- 
ceiving that so great a multitude believed in the Lord, was 
grieved to the heart, and by giving money to the people, 
stirred up a violent tumult ; the result of which was, that 
the scribe Josias put a cord round the neck of the apostle, 
and dragged him to the palace of king Herod, son of 
Aristobulus. The king, wishing to please the Jews, ordered 
that he should be beheaded. While James was on the way 
to the place of execution, he saw a man, afflicted with the palsy, 
lying on the ground, who begged him with faith to heal his 
infirmity ; the apostle said to him, " In the name of my 
crucified Lord Jesus Christ, for whose sake I am led away 
to be beheaded, rise up sound in every limb, and bless your 
Saviour." The palsied man immediately got up, and re- 
joicing at being able to run, began to bless the Lord. 
At this sight, Josias threw himself at the apostle's feet, and 
humbly implored his pardon. 

James, perceiving that the heart of the scribe was visited 
by the grace of Grod, rejoiced, and Josias confessed the Lord 
Jesus Christ, the true son of the living God. Then Abia- 
thar ordered him to be detained while the bystanders beat 
him in the face with their hands, and having sent to Herod 
a report of what had happened, requested permission to 
behead the new convert also. "When James had embraced 
the neophyte, he laid his hand on his head, and blessed him, 
making the sign of the cross upon his forehead. Josias, 
thus perfected in the faith, was beheaded with the apostle, 
and the Almighty Emmanuel granted them both an eternal 
reward. 

The martyrdom of the blessed apostle James, the brother 
of John the great Evangelist, having been consummated 
on the 8th of the calends of August [the 25th of July], 
the day on which the devotion of the church celebrates his 
festival, seven disciples who had been instructed in the true 
faith by him, and were present at his passion, by divine 
inspiration, placed his body on board an old ship, and com- 



A.D. 44.] PETER RELEASED FROM PRISON. 179 

mitted themselves to the sea, without a pilot, without 
rigging, but full of confidence in God's providence. They 
arrived in a miraculous manner on the coast of Spain, and 
being well received by the king of Grallicia, were the first to 
preach the faith and religion to the Spanish nation, and 
gave their master an honourable burial. Many miracles 
were there eff'ected through the merits of St. James the 
apostle, and the inhabitants of the whole province soon 
embraced the laith of Christ. The canons of the cathedral 
church watch with veneration the precious body of the 
apostle ; and devout Christians, from every quarter of the 
globe, flock thither, where they meet to implore the mercy 
of Grod through the intercession of the apostle.^ 

King Herod, called Agrippa by Josephus, finding that 
the execution of James was acceptable to the Jews, put 
Peter also in prison, and delivered him to the custody of 
four quaternions of soldiers. Peter, therefore, was kept in 
prison, as they intended after Easter to bring him forth to 
the people, to put him to death. The prayers of the church 
ascended incessantly to the Divine Majesty, beseeching him 
that the young flock might not be deprived of the guardian- 
ship of its pious shepherd. The Lord, in his clemency, 
listened to the prayer of his spouse and loving handmaid 
on behalf of her protector. Heavenly aid was not wanting 
to the church, and Herod's cruel designs were provided 
against and frustrated. Peter was sleeping at night between 
two soldiers, bound with two chains, and the keepers before 
the door kept the prison ; when the angel of the Lord came 
upon him, surrounded with light, and smote him on the side, 
and raised him up, saying, " E-ise up quickly." Immediately 

'■ All that is known with any certainty of St. James the Great is, that he 
was the first of the apostles who shed his blood for the faith, having been 
beheaded by Herod Agrippa some time before the passover. The circum- 
stances of his martyrdom, related by our author, are completely apocry- 
phal, and the persons introduced supposititious, including the high-priest 
Abiathar, who never existed but in the days of David, The whole of this 
legend is merely an extract, sufficiently exact, from the fourth book of the 
"Apostolic History" of the Pseudo-Abdius, printed in the Codea/ Apocry- 
phus Novi Testamenti of J. A. Fabricius. 

If the relics of this apostle were really translated to Compostella, which 
is very doubtful, it could not have happened before the seventh or eighth 
centurv. It is certain that in the ninth they had already acquired a great 
reputation, and were highly venerated. 

N 2 



180 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.II. CH.I. 

the clialns fell from off his hands, and, taking his girdle, 
binding on his sandals, and casting his garment about him, 
he followed the angel, passing through the guards, unto the 
iron gate which opened to them of its own accord. At first 
he thought that all this had happened in a dream ; but 
when the angel had departed from him, Peter came to 
himself, and, perceiving the truth, returned thanks to his 
deliverer for his escape.^ He then went to the brethren 
who were assembled in the house of Mary the mother of 
John, whose surname was Mark, and as he knocked at the 
door, a damsel, named Ehoda, went to see who was there. 
When she knew Peter's voice, she opened not the gate for 
gladness, but ran in, and told how Peter stood before the 
gate. At length, having obtained admission, he cheered the 
drooping spirits of the astonished disciples, and declared 
unto them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison, 
and, immediately departing, retired to another place. His 
escape caused great commotion among the soldiers, and, as 
they could not discover where he was. King Herod was 
greatly incensed with the guards. However, his cruel treat- 
ment of the apostle was not suifered to remain long un- 
punished ; but the avenging hand of God was quickly upon 
him, as Luke tells us in the " Acts of the Apostles," and 
Josephus in the nineteenth book of his " Antiquities." 
For on his going to Csesarea, anciently called the Tower of 
Strabo, on a set day, he entertained the citizens with public 
shows, in honour of the emperor. Splendidly arrayed in 
apparel admirably embroidered with gold and silver, he 
proceeded to the theatre, and sitting upon his throne, made 
an oration to the people, who shouted that it was not the 
voice of a man but of a god. And immediately the angel 
of the Lord smote him, because he gave not Grod the glory ; 
and five days afterwards he expired, eaten of worms. ^ 

Agrippa, the son of Herod, reigned twenty-six years,^ that 

1 Actsxii. 3—12. 

"^ Acts xii. 1 3 — 23. The death of Herod Agrippa certainly happened 
A.B. 44, shortly after the miraculous deliverance of St. Peter. 

* It might be supposed from our author's mode of expression, that 
Agrippa succeeded his father; but it was Herod, his uncle, he succeeded in 
the kingdom of Chalcis and the custody of the temple, a.d. 49. Three 
years afterwards he received in exchange the tetrarchate of Philip, tr gether 



A.D. 42 — 45.] ST. PAUL IN CYPRUS. 181 

is to say, until the extermination of the Jews. He lived in 
peace with the Romans and Christians, and the word of God 
grew and multiplied. 

There were in the church at Antioch, certain prophets 
and teachers, viz. Barnabas, and Simeon Niger, Lucius of 
Cyrene, Manaen, foster-brother of Herod the tetrarch, 
and Saul. As they ministered to the Lord and fasted, 
the Holy Ghost said : " Separate me Barnabas and Saul for 
the work whereunto I have called them." And when they 
had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they 
sent them away. So they, being sent forth by the Holy 
Ghost, departed unto Seleucia, and from thence they sailed 
to Cyprus. At Salamine they preached the word of God in 
the synagogues of the Jews, and travelled over the island 
as far as Paphos.^ 

There the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, a prudent man, 
called for Barnabas and Saul, and having thankfully heard 
the word of God, believed. The apostle then struck Ely- 
mas the sorcerer blind for a season, because he withstood 
the doctrine of the faith. Saul now justly gained the name 
of Paul, from the first among the gentiles whom he brought 
into subjection to the faith, as Scipio was surnamed Africanus 
after he conquered Africa. They then repaired to Perga in 
Pamphilia, and afterwards to Antioch in Pisidia, where they 
went into the synagogue on the sabbath-day, and sat down. 
After reading the law and the prophets, the rulers of the 
synagogue having granted permission, Paul stood up, and, 
beckoning with his hand for silence, admirably reviewed the 
history of the patriarchs, and proved clearly that the pro- 
mises of God, made long before by the prophets, were now 
fulfilled in Christ.^ 

The next sabbath-day almost the whole city came to hear 
the word of God, but the most bigoted of the Jews used their 
earnest endeavours to oppose the preaching of the apostles 
by their blasphemous outcries. Then Paul and Barnabas 
boldly exclaimed : " It was necessary that the word of God 
should first be spoken to you ; but seeing that ye put it from 

with that of Lysanias. After the destruction of Jerusalem (a.d. 70) he 
came to reside at Rome, where he died in the year 90. 

^ Acts xiii. 1 — 6. (a.d. 42 or 44.) 

' Acta xiii. 7 — 43. (a.d. 44 or 45.) 



182 OEDEEICTIS VITALTS. [b.II. CH.T. 

you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, 
we turn to the gentiles. For so hath the Lord commanded 
us, saying : ' I have set thee to be a light of the gentiles, 
that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the ends of the 
earth.' " When the gentiles heard this, they were glad, 
and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed. 
But the Jews raised persecution against Paul and Barna- 
bas, and expelled them out of their coast. Then, filled with 
joy, they came to Iconium, and preached in the synagogue 
both to the Jews and Greeks. Remaining in that city for 
some time, they laboured boldly for the glory of Grod,'who 
worked signs and wonders by their hands. But the unbe- 
lievers, both gentiles and Jews, insulted them in their rage, 
and attempted to stone them. But they fled to Lystra and 
Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, and unto the whole region that 
lieth round about, and there they preached the gospel; and 
their doctrine caused a great commotion among the whole 
population.^ 

At Lystra, a lame man, who had never been able to walk, 
having heard Paul speak, called upon the name of the Lord 
Jesus, was immediately healed, and, leaping up full of faith, 
glorified the Lord. AVhen the people saw what Paul had 
done, they were struck with wonder, and exclaimed, in the 
speech of Lycaonia : " The gods are come down to us, in 
the likeness of men," And they called Barnabas, Jupiter; 
and Paul, Mercurius. Then the priest of Jupiter and the 
people would have offered sacrifice to them, but the apostles 
immediately ran in among the people, rending their clothes, 
and humbly gave the glory of the miracle to the Lord. But 
although they thus humbled themselves, they could scarcely 
restrain the people from, doing sacrifice unto them. And 
there came suddenly thither Jews from Antioch and 
Iconium, who persuaded the people to stone Paul ; so that 
they drew him out of the city, supposing him to be dead. 
But while the disciples stood round him, he rose up and 
came into the city, and the next day he departed to Derbe. 
Some time after, the two apostles returned again to 
Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch, and passed through Pisidia, 
preaching every where the word of life, and strengthening 
the souls of the disciples by their exhortations ; and when 
1 Acts xiii. 44 — xiv. 6. (a.d. 45.) 



A.D. 45 — 50.] PAUL A]S^D BAENABAS AT JERUSALEM. 183 

they had ordained them elders in every church, and had 
prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord. 
From Paraphilia they went down into Attalia, and thence 
sailed to Antioch.^ 

There they abode a long time with the disciples. Then 
certain men, which came down from Judea, persuaded the 
believing gentiles to be circumcised and observe the law of 
Moses. Paul and Barnabas opposed this teaching, and were 
sent, by unanimous consent, to the apostles and elders at 
Jerusalem, to have the question determined. Passing 
through Phenice and Samaria, they published the conversion 
of the gentiles, and caused great joy unto all the brethren. 
At Jerusalem, they were received of the church, and de- 
clared all things that Grod had done with them. However, 
as certain of the sect of the Pharisees, which believed, were 
strongly inclined to Judaize, Simon Peter, James, and the 
other elders handled with great zeal the question proposed 
to them, and at last decided, by the inspiration of the Holy 
Ghost, that chosen and experienced brethren should be sent 
to the gentiles, entrusted with a letter requiring them to 
cast off all other burdens, except abstaining from meats 
offered to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, 
and from fornication.'^ 

Paul, therefore, and Barnabas, with Judas, surnamed Bar- 
sabas, and Silas, were sent to Antioch, and delivered the 
epistle of the apostles and elders to the multitude of believers 
among the gentiles, who, when they had read it, rejoiced 
for the consolation. Judas and Silas, being also prophets, 
comforted the brethren with many words, and confirmed 
them, and after a while returned in peace to Jerusalem. 
Notwithstanding, Paul and Barnabas preached the word ot* 
the Lord for some time at Antioch. On their departure 
from thence, they separated ; Barnabas, with Mark and 
John, embarked for C}^rus, while Paul, having chosen 
Silas for his companion, went through Syria and Cilicia, 
confirming the churches, and commanding them to observe 
the commands which the apostles and elders had given. 
He then came to Derbe and Lystra, and there, to obviate 
the subtle scruples of the Jews, circumcised Timothy, who 

1 Acts xiv. 7—25. (A.D. 4,5, 4G.) 

2 Acts xiv. 2G— XV. 29. (a.d. 50.) 



184 ORDEKICUS VITALIS. [b.II. CH.I. 

was the son of a gentile. Passing through Phrygia, Gralatia, 
and Mysia, he came down to Troas, and, warned by a vision in 
the night, crossed over into Macedonia. He preached at 
Philippi, which is the chief city of that part of Macedonia, 
where Lydia, a seller of purple, who worshipped God, 
listened to the things which were spoken of Paul, and 
believing, and being baptized with her household, she con- 
strained the apostles, by her repeated entreaties, to lodge 
with her.^ 

As Paul, with his companions, was going forth to prayer, 
he was met by a certain damsel possessed with a spirit of 
divination, who brought her masters much gain by sooth- 
saying. This girl followed them exclaiming, " These men are 
tho servants of the most high God, which show unto us the 
way of salvation." Having done this for many days, Paul 
being grieved, said to the spirit : " I command thee, in the 
name of Jesus Christ, to come out of her." And he came 
out the same hour. But when her masters saw that the 
hope of their gains was gone, they were in a great rage, and 
caught Paul, and Silas, and drew them into the market- 
place unto the rulers, and accused them of causing dis- 
turbances in the city by introducing customs foreign to the 
manners of the Eomans. The excited populace also joining 
in the attack upon these innocent men, they were scourged, 
and, by order of the magistrates, thrust into the inner prison, 
with their feet made fast in the stocks. At midnight, Paul 
and Silas prayed and sang praises unto God ; and soon 
received his special assistance. Por suddenly there was a 
great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were 
shaken; and immediately all the doors were opened, and 
every one's bonds were loosed. At this sight, the gaoler 
was terrified beyond measure, and having heard from the 
lips of Paul the grounds of his faith, believed and w^as 
baptized with all his household. The magistrates of the 
city feared, when they heard that the apostles were Eomans, 
and, releasing them from prison, desired them to depart out 
of the city. Being set free, they went to the house of 
Lydia, and then departed for Thessalonica by way of 
Amphipolis and ApoUonia. At Thessalonica, on three sab- 
bath-days, Paul entered the Jews' synagogue, and publicly 
^ Acta XV. 32 — xvi. 15. (a.d. 51, 52.) 



A.D. 52.] ST. PAUL AT ATHENS. 185 

reasoned with them out of the scriptures, alleging that 
" Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the 
dead; and this Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is Christ." 
Many, both Jews and gentiles, believed and joined the com- 
pany of Paul and Silas. But the bigoted Jews, moved with 
envy, stirred up the multitude against them, and accused 
Jason and the other brethren, whom they drew before the 
rulers of the city. But the rulers, when they had taken 
security of Jason, and of the other, let them go. And the 
brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night 
unto Berea; and thence, as the Jews had raised tumults 
ithere also, the brethren conducted Paul to Athens. Here 
he waited for Silas and Timothy, whom he had left at Berea. 
Meanwhile, he disputed in the synagogue with the Jews 
and devout persons, and preached in the market-place every 
day to those who came to hear him. Then certain philoso- 
phers of the Epicureans and Stoics disputed with him. 
For the Athenians, and strangers which were there, spent 
their time in nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some 
new thing. Then Paul, standing in the middle of the 
Areopagus, rebuked the Athenians for their idolatry and 
superstition, and began to speak of the altar on which he 
had found an inscription: " To the unknown God." These 
words he took for the text of his expected discourse, and 
announced to them the true God, who, in former times, 
was unknown to the world ; then, saying much in a few 
words, he preached earnestly the faith, and the hope of the 
resurrection.^ 

Then Dionysius the Areopagite, with his wife Daniaris, 
and a few others, clave unto the apostle and believed his 
words. Paul afterwards departed from Athens and came to 
Corinth, where he testified to the Jews and the Greeks that 
Jesus was the Christ, and earnestly devoted himself to the 
ministry of preaching ; and he reasoned in the synagogue 
every sabbath. Meanwhile Silas and Timotheus arrived 
from Macedonia. Crispus, the chief ruler of the synagogue, 
convinced by the arguments of Paul, believed and was bap- 
tized, with all his house, and many of the Corinthians. 
And Paul entered into a certain man's house named Titus 
the Just, whose house joined hard to the synagogue. 
^ Acts xvi. 16 — xvii. 31. (a.d. 52.) 



186 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.II. 

Obedient to tlie commands of Grod made known to him by 
a vision in the night, Paul continued there a year and six 
months, teaching constantly the word of God. There lived 
at Athens a Jew, of the name of Aquila, born in Pontus, 
and his wife Priscilla ; Paul, being a tent-maker as well as 
Aquila, assisted them in their labours, and thus gained a 
living by the work of his own hands. Paul then took leave 
of the brethren, and sailed thence into Syria, and came to 
Ephesus. He then went to Cesarea, and thence came to 
Antioch ; and after he had spent some time there, he de- 
parted, and went over the country of Galatia and Phrygia 
strengthening the disciples.^ 

Ch. II. lAfe of St. Feter,from tlie Acts of the Apostles, 
mid the Recognitions of St. Clemens liomamis. 

Thus far I have made brief extracts from the history 
of the primitive church as related by Luke in the Acts of 
the Apostles, as far as tlie account of Paul's baptizing at 
Ephesus, in the name of the Lord Jesus, those disciples 
who had before received the baptism of John. He after- 
wards remained there for three months with those who, filled 
with the Holy Grhost, spake with tongues and prophesied ; he 
himself continually setting forth the kingdom of Grod, to 
the profit of many : and then departing thence, for the next 
two years he preached the gospel boldly in every part of 
Asia, and performed in the name of Jesus Christ a number 
of miracles on the sick and demoniacs,^ I must now have 
recourse to other works, and collect some short notices of 
the apostles generally, from authorities which are considered 
authentic, and are used by the church. 

The Creator of all things only knows the degrees of rank 
and the respective merits of the apostles ; and He, who 
searches the secrets of the human heart, has apportioned to 
each the rewards of his labour. The word apostle signifies 
sent ; for Christ sent them to preach the gospel throughout 
the world, in order that, as fishermen's nets haul shoals of 
fishes from the depths of the sea, the apostle's preaching 
might draw from the pit of perdition to the light of life, 

» Actsxvii. 34— xviii. 23. (a.d. 52— 55.) 
2 Acts xix. 1— ]0. (a.d. 54—57.) 



A.D. 33.] CALLTNa OF ST. PETER. 187 

those who were lost in the depths of sin. Their names are 
these : Simon Peter, and Andrew his brother ; James, the 
son of Zebedee, and John his brother; James, the son of 
Alpheus, and Philip ; Thomas and Bartholomew ; Levi, 
Matthew, and Simon the Canaanite ; Judas Thaddeus and 
Matthias.^ 

Peter, called the first, the greatest in dignity, the key- 
bearer, he who zealously obeyed Christ, and followed him 
with his whole heart — he it was who filled the highest seat 
in the company of the apostles. He was the son of Jonas 
or John, and born at Bethsaida, a village near the lake 
of Gennesaret, in the province of Galilee. To announce 
his future dignity and illustrious power, he received three 
names. The significations of the three words indicated the 
man}^ virtues vouchsafed to him by Heaven ; for Simon 
means ohedlent, Peter acknowledging, and Cephas a liead? 
Thus Simon, by the obedience with which, as soon as he 
heard the Lord's commandment, he attached himself to him, 
leaving all things, and ready to follow him to death, rose to 
the knowledge of the ineffable divinity. Inspired by 
Heaven, he ardently desired to be acquainted with divine 
things, above the powers of human intellect, and in the 
sincerity of his faith loudly proclaimed a glorious confession, 
"Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." He 
therefore, was honoured above measure by Christ himself, 
made the head and foundation of the church. The generous 
Benefactor, who had inspired him divinely with the know- 
ledge of himself, rewarded with the highest rank and 
authority the faith of a pure heart to which his mouth had 
given utterance by that confession. "Blessed art thou," 
said he, " Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood hath not re- 
vealed it unto thee, but my Pather which is in heaven."^ 

Truly blessed, indeed, is Simon, that is to say, the obe- 
dient, who is also called Barjona, that is to say, the son of a 
dove, the symbol of the Holy Ghost. "An obedient man," 
saith Solomon, " boasts his victories." 

1 Actsi. 13, 26. (a.d. 33.) 

^ We are not aware that Peter is sjiionymous with agnoscens in any 
language. As for the Syro-Chaldaic word Cephas, it is by a mere abuse of its 
similarity that it can be connected with the Greek word Kf^aXr), caput, a head. 

^ Matt. xvi. 16, 17. 



188 ohdekicus yitalis. [b.ii. ch.ii. 

He who unremittingly observes the divine commandments 
is attacked by divers temptations in his daily conflicts with 
Satan, whom he overcomes by perseverance in the law of 
God. AVhat, indeed, does the divine law command or teach, 
but that every man must engage in spiritual warfare, combat 
the old serpent, who is always lying in ambush for us, and 
labour diligently to obtain the reward of his heavenly call- 
ing ? Thus, the brave soldier of the Lord doubtless speaks 
of his victories, when he returns thanks to God his pro- 
tector, after triumphing over the enemy, saying with the 
prophet : — " Thou hast girded me with strength unto the 
battle ; thou shalt throw down my enemies under me ;"^ and 
others in the same strain. No one can please God the 
Father by his holy works, if he have not obtained the virtue 
of obedience through the grace of the Holy Spirit. 

Then the Saviour, nobly consummating the reward of 
Simon's pious confession, said to him: — " Thou art Peter, 
and upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates 
of hell shall not prevail against it." Petrus, in Latin, 
Cephas, in Syriac, are names derived in both languages 
from the word petra, a stone, that is, from Christ, who is the 
chief corner-stone upon which the church is founded. Thus 
Simon, by his obedience, was prepared to acknowledge the 
Son of God, a knowledge which not flesh and blood, but the 
heavenly Father, revealed to him ; and therefore Peter was 
considered, by our Saviour himself, to be worthy of the sur- 
name of acknowledging. Having afterwards given to him 
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, the King of Sabaoth 
appointed him to be Cephas, that is to say, head of the 
church, the prince and sovereign pontifi" of the apostles, 
gifted with the power of binding and loosing, pre-eminent 
in doctrine and sanctity, exalted by signs and miracles, the 
first pastor of the flock of Christ in his church, and his 
special vicar. 

Peter preached the word to those of the circumcision for 
the space of seven years, and performed, during that time, 
the wonderful works which Luke records in the Acts of the 
Apostles, as I have mentioned above. He healed, at the 
Beautiful gate of the Temple, the lame man, aged forty 
years, and baptized the five thousand Jews who were con- 

^ Psalm xviii. 39. 



A.D. 87 — 41.] ST. petee's miracles. 180 

verted ; he punished, with his censorial power, Ananias and 
his wife Sapphira, who were guilty of deceit and falsehood, 
and thus gave a terrible warning, to the men of that day 
and to posterity, of the chastisement to be given for their 
souls' health. As he passed along the streets, his shadow 
alone, falling upon the multitude of sick people as they lay 
in their beds, was sufficient to heal them, so great were the 
merits and power which Heaven bestowed upon him. 

At Lvdda he restored to health, in the name of the Lord, 
the paralytic Eneas, who had kept his bed eight years ; and 
brought to the faith those who saw and wondered at so 
unheard-of a miracle. At Joppa he raised to life the vener- 
able widow Tabitha, and presented her alive to the saints 
and widows. The rest of his acts, from Judea to An- 
tioch, and how he repeatedly overcame Simon Magus in 
his frequent disputes with him, Clemens Eomanus, the son 
of Faustinian, has related in his book of the Recognitions^ a 
work which he has also entitled the Itinerary of Peter. 
This author, having abandoned all he possessed at Eome, 
embarked for Palestine, and met the apostle Peter at 
Caesarea Stratonis, his residence being pointed out to him 
by Barnabas, whom he had hospitably entertained at Rome, 
and who treated him as a friend and guest worthy of the 
greatest respect. Clemens was kindly received by Peter, 
as a son by his father, on account of his regard for both him 
and Barnabas, and being fully instructed in the faith of the 
true Prophet, and renewed at the sacred font, he inseparably 
attached himself to Peter.^ 

Peter disputed with Simon Magus at Caesarea, and after 
Simon had retired in the evening with a thousand of his 
followers, he strengthened in the faith those who remained, 
and, invoking the name of God, healed the demoniacs and 
the sick. 

The next day, the discussion was renewed, and with 
God's help, Simon was put to silence on many points. At 
last, as night was approaching, Simon, confounded, left the 
place with a few adherents, and the people rejoicing, threw 

^ St. Clemens, the disciple and the third successor of St. Peter, died in 
the year 100, after filling the pontifical chair nine years. The book of The 
Eecognitions, attributed to him by our author, was justly rejected as apo- 
cryphal even in the time of St. Jerome. 



190 OEDERTCUS TITALIS. [b.II. CH.lt. 

themselves at Peter's feet. The demoniacs and the sick 
were cured by his prayers, and having heard the doctrine 
and experienced the mercy of the true God, they retired full 
of joy. On the third day, Peter established the immortality 
of the soul, by the truth of his arguments, against Simon, 
who denied it, and laid bare his wicked principles, by giving 
proofs of them. The people, indignant, drove the blas- 
phemer from the hall, and even thrust him out of the door 
of the house ; and of the numbers who had been his follow- 
ers for a long time, scarcely one now ventured to keep com- 
pany with him. However, Simon loaded the shoulders of 
his companion with the polluted and execrable instruments 
of his art, and fearing that, if he were taken, he should come 
within the grasp of justice, he threw them at night into the 
sea, and ran away, his attendant refusing to accompany him, 
because he had by this time found him to be a detestable 
impostor. . " 

Peter dwelt three months at Csesarea, ordaining Zaccheus 
bishop of that city ; and baptized on a day of festival an 
immense number of believers, amounting to ten thousand. 
From thence he sent twelve brethren after Simon, to follow 
his track. Sophonias and Joseph, Micheas and Eleazar, 
Phineas and Lazarus, Elisaeus and Benjamin, son of Saba ; 
Ananias, son of Saphra ; Rubelus, the brother of Zacchaeus ; 
Nicodemus and Zacharias the architect, were selected by the 
apostle, that he might be assisted in the worship of Grod by 
twelve faithful brethren, though relying principally on divine 
grace, and that by their aid he might follow up Simon Magus 
and the other enemies of righteousness. 

Having completed the three months he spent at Caesarea, 
Peter went, by way of Dora, to Ptolemais, and there remained 
ten days teaching the people the law of Grod. After this he 
was also employed in sowing the seed of the divine word at 
Tyre, Sydon, and Berytus ; and then entered Tripoli with a 
considerable number of the elect, w^ho followed him from 
each of these cities. At Tripoli he was entertained in the 
house of Maro with every token of regard from the citizens, 
who also granted to all the companions of Peter a gratui- 
tous hospitality, marked with the greatest kindness. The 
following morning an immense multitude crowded into 
Maro's garden to hear the apostle, who, in the first place, 



A.D. 41 — ?] LEGEND OF ST. PETER. 191 

put to flight the foul spirits which cried out from the bodies 
they possessed, and after his sermon healed the sick in that 
place. There, for the space of three months, he sowed 
abundantly the words of salvation, and baptized Clemens, 
and several others, at fountains which were in the neigh- 
bourhood of the sea ; appointing Maro, his host, who was 
already perfectly prepared in all things, bishop. 

Thence he repaired to Antarados, and divided the multi- 
tude of believers who followed him into two bodies, ordering 
Nicetas and Aquilas to conduct them, and go before him, 
to Laodicea, from fear that such a concourse of persons 
accompanying him might excite the jealousy of the enemies 
to the laith. During the journey, Clemens informed Peter, 
in a familiar conversation, whence he came, described his 
family, and related the history of his parents. The next 
day, he visited a neighbouring island, in order to see some 
pillars of glass ^ of an immense size ; and here, thanks to 
Peter, he recognized his mother Matidia, after a separation 
of twenty years. Peter healed by his prayers a paralytic 
woman, who was the hostess of Matidia, and Clemens gave 
her a thousand drachms as a remuneration for her services. 

After this, Peter went to Balancas, and then to Palthos 
and Grabala, and thus reached Laodicea, where he staved ten 
days ; during which time the recognition of the mother and 
her three sons, Clemens, Paustinus, and Faustus, took place. 
Two of the brothers, who were twins, related, that after 
being shipwrecked, as they were tossed to and fro by the 
waves, holding on to a piece of plank, some pirates found 
them, and taking them on board their boat, sailed with them 
to Csesarea, and there sold them under feigned names to a 
certain woman, who had acted most justly towards them, 
having educated them as her own children, instructed them 
in liberal and Greek literature, and, when they had arrived 
at the proper age, put them to the study of philosophy. 

While Peter remained at Laodicea, incessantly occupied 
as was his custom, in pious works, an old man, named 
Paustinian, who appeared to be in a state of poverty, went 

^ Vitreas. M. Le Prevost proposes to read viteas, observing that pillars 
of vine-ivood, however large we may suppose them, are less incredible than 
pillars of glass, immensis maqnitiidinis. The learned editor remarks, that 
the temple of Juno at Metapontum was supported by pillars of vine-wood. 



102 OEDERICUS YTTALIS. [b.TI. Cir.TT. 

to h'lm, and began to deny the existence of Q-od, of a pro- 
vidence in this world, and the necessity of divine worship ; 
asserting that every thing was done by mere chance and by 
generation.^ His three sons, whom he had not yet recog- 
nized, opposed him in the hearing of all the people for three 
days, and, by their answers, instructed their hearers in many 
abstruse doctrines. 

The first day, Nicetas ably argued that there exists a 
God who is master of all things, who made the world, and 
governs it by his providence, a just Grod, who will reward 
every man according to his works. On the second day, 
Aquilas discoursed with eloquence on the just disposal of 
Jill things by a God of justice. On the third day, Clemens 
disputed on the origin of things, inquiring whether all 
depended upon generation, or whether there was aught in 
us effected not by the hazard of birth, but by the will of 
God. It was then that, by a divine motion, without which 
nothing happens, the obstinate old man and his wife recog- 
nized their children, although twenty years had elapsed. 

The chief magistrate of the town used his utmost en- 
deavours to detain at his house Peter and the brethren who 
were with him ; and his daughter, who for twenty years 
had been the prey of a cruel demon, was set free and healed. 
At this time, as Faustinian, while on a visit to his friends, 
Auubis and Appio, who lodged at the house of Simon, was 
taking his supper with them, his face was transformed by 
magic art into that of Simon : a circumstance which caused 
the greatest fear to all his friends, as they dreaded that, by 
an order of the emperor, he would be taken for the magician, 
and punished in his room. 

After this Peter went to Antioch, where he was received 
with great demonstrations of joy by the inhabitants : he 
there preached the word of God, restored to health the sick 
who were brought to him, and healed the people afflicted 
with the palsy, possessed with a devil, as well as all those 
who suffered from any kind of accident. The number of 
the sick was immense. Peter was offering up a prayer to 
the Lord for them all, in the presence of the people, when 
suddenly, by the grace of God, an extraordinary light ap- 
peared in the midst of the audience, and all who were 
1 " Genesis :" genitura, fatum, horoscopus, — Ducange, Gloss. 



A.D. 42 ?] ST. PETEE AT ANTIOCII. 193 

afflicted in any way immediately recovered their health. 
In consequence, all the inhabitants of Antioch, with one 
voice, confessed the Lord, and within seven days more than 
ten thousand souls believing in God were baptized. 

Theophilus, who held the highest rank among the great 
men of the city, was inflamed with so ardent a love for God, 
that he freely offered the great hall of his own house to be 
converted into a spacious church.^ It was consecrated under 
the name of a church, and an episcopal throne^ was erected 
in it for the apostle Peter by the entire population. Mean- 
while Faustinian, laying open his mind to the heavenly 
mysteries, at the sight of so many miracles threw himself 
publicly at the feet of the apostle, and, abjuring his ancient 
errors, requested to be baptized. Peter enjoined him a 
preparatory fast, baptized him on the following Sunday, 
and, standing in the midst of the people, made the con- 
version of Paustinian the subject of a discourse, in which 
he recounted the events of the convert's life. This account 
was generally pleasing and useful, and gained for the old 
man and his family the favour and esteem of the inhabitants 
of Antioch. The entire city made a happy progress in 
divine things, and the number of the faithful increasing 
daily, holy mother church rejoiced in Christ Jesus. ^ 

The blessed apostle Peter filled the see of Antioch for 
the first seven years, and preached the word in Pontus, 
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia. Afterwards, Simon 
Magus having gone to Eome, Peter set in order the church 
of Antioch, and consecrated Evodius bishop in his place. 
He then proceeded to Eome,^ attended by several chosen 
disciples, and, entering the city in the time of the emperor 
Claudius, found the juggler, so often mentioned, deceiving 

^ Basilica; from a Greek Avord signifying a royal palace, hall, or court 
of justice. Every one knows that most of the early Christian churches 
consisted of such halls converted to religious uses ; from whence it arose 
that in old writers this word is often synonymous with church. 

* Cathedra, literally a chair or seat; hence "St. Peter's chair," "the 
see," or "seat of a bishop," and the ecclesiastical phrases, "sat," "filled 
the see," &c. 

^ Our author's quotations from the Recognilions of St. Clemens end 
here : Recognitionum S. dementis ad Jacobum fratreni Domini, libri x. 

■* This first journey of St. Peter to Rome is generally supposed to have 
taken place in the year 42; but there are great doubts respecting it. 

TOL. I. O 



194 OBDERICUS YITALTS. [b.II. CH.II. 

the people with a variety of phantoms raised by virtue of 
the diabolical power called a familiar spirit. This impostor 
was so puffed up with pride, that he set himself up for a 
god, and even obtained from the Boman citizens the honour 
of having a statue erected to him, as a god, on the banks of 
the Tiber, between the two bridges. In fact, Satan had 
taken entire possession of this insane contriver of all wicked- 
ness, who was the first he armed Avith the weapons of 
impious heresy to war against the true faith of the church. 
The Almighty Emmanuel prepared the illustrious leader of 
his army to contend with him in close combat; I mean 
Simon Peter, to whom Christ entrusted the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven, and appointed him to be the prince of 
the apostles and the firm ruler of his church. He, there- 
fore, on his arrival in Eome, dispelled the darkness of 
falsehood by the brilliant light of truth and justice ; and 
there, as a worthy censor, judging with equity, he filled the 
see twenty-five years, two months, and three days. ^ 

When the bright light of the word of Grod had shone forth 
in the Eoman capital, and the word of truth, which Peter 
preached, had enlightened the minds of all his hearers, and 
had caused them so much satisfiiction that hearing only 
did not satisfy those who daily attended, Mark, a disciple 
of the apostle, was induced by repeated solicitations to 
compose his gospel, that what the one taught by word of 
mouth might be committed to writing by the other, and 
thus transmitted to posterity for the perpetual instruction 
of the readers. Peter was delighted to find that through 
the influence of the Holy Spirit, his teaching was ap- 
propriated by a kind of pious fraud ;^ and perceiving in 
this their faith and piety, he confirmed himself the work 
of the evangelist, and delivered this Scripture^ to the 

1 It is the common opinion of the church, still current at Rome, that 
Peter governed that chuch more than twenty-five years. Unfor- 
tunately, there is nothing; less authentic, pr more easily refuted, than the 
assertion of this long residence of St. Peter at Rome. What appears most 
probable, after a careful inquiry, is that he made his first journey to Rome 
in A.D. 58, and returned there in 65. — M. Le Prtvost. 

* Religinso se spoliatum furto. 

' It is a tradition generally received by the church, that St. Mark 
wrote his gospel from details given him by St. Peter of the actions 
and words of Jesus Christ; but as this gospel, which is so much 



A.D. 42 ?] ST. PETER AT EOME. 195 

churches to be read for ever ; besides wbich, be composed 
two epistles -which are called canonical/ Peter worked 
manfully in Christ's vineyard, during the reigns of Tiberius 
Caesar, Cains Caligula, Claudius, and Nero, nurturing many 
excellent disciples, and, when they were well imbued wdth 
virtue and learning, sending them into different countries. 
He placed his disciple Mark, whom he loved as a son, first 
at Aquileia, and then at Alexandria ; Martial at Limoges ; 
Apollinaris at Eavenna ; Valerius at Treves ; and many 
more in different places, where, in Christ's name, they 
brought vast crowds of the Grentiles to the light of faith, 
and having regenerated them placed them in the bosom of 
our holy mother the church, by the water of holy baptism. 
One day when Peter was at E,ome, while several of the 
brethren were at table, Titus said to the apostle, " As thou 
hast cured all the sick, why dost thou let Petronilla lie 
suffering from palsy? " The apostle answered, " It is ex- 
pedient for her that it should be so ; but in order that 
no one may think that I wish, by words, to cloak my 
inability to heal her, I say to this woman, 'Eise up, Petro- 
nilla, and come and serve us.'" She rose up able to 
minister to them ; but, as soon as her attendance was no 
longer required, he ordered her to return to her pallet. 
However, when she began to be proficient in the fear of 
God, not only was she perfectly healed of her own infirmity, 
but her prayers were the means of restoring health to 
others.^ 

shorter than those of St. Matthew and St.' Luke, contains only two facts, 
and those of slight importance, which are not related by the other evan- 
gelists, we may be permitted to doubt his having drawn his information 
from a source which would have supplied a vast number of particulars 
omitted by the others. At any rate, the account given by our author must 
be considered altogether apocryphal. 

^ The authenticity of the First Epistle of St. Peter has never been 
suspected ; that of the second Avas questioned by Origen, Eusebius, and St. 
Jerome; but at the present day it is generally admitted. 

- The legend of St. Peter which Ordericus has inserted in this chapter, 
has no claims to a detailed examination. Except the last three paragraphs, 
it is a tolerably faithful extract from the apocryphal book of The Recogni- 
tions, already referred to. The foundation of the church of Antioch by 
St. Peter is generally fixed a.d, 36. His pretended journey to Rome, A.r>. 
42, has been already commented on. The date of his martyrdom is better 
established, as having occurred on the 29th of June, 66. As to the 

o2 



195 QHDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.II. Cn.III. 

Ch. III. Life and death of St. I'aul, compiled from the 
Acts of the Apostles and ancient legends — with St. Peter's 
martyrdom. 

Paul, the illustrious champion of the Almighty, a chosen 
vessel, the teacher of the Gentiles, and preacher of the 
truth, who was worthy to fill the twelfth throne among the 
apostles,^ and was caught up into heaven to hear the mys- 
teries which man must not repeat, — ought to be worthily 
extolled and continually honoured by the sons of the church 
as their learned schoolmaster. He was first called Saul, 
which means in Hebrew temptation ; because he began his 
career by tempting the holy mother church. Having after- 
wards changed his name, instead of Saul he was called Paul, 
that is to say, wonderful^ having been converted in a 
marvellous manner, from a ravenous wolf into a mild lamb. 
In Latin Paul may be taken for little ; wherefore he said 
publicly, when speaking of himself, " I am the least of the 
apostles." 

Paul was of the tribe of Benjamin, a pharisee of the phari- 
sees, born at Tarsus, a city of Cilicia, but brought up at 
Jerusalem from his childhood, and instructed in the law of 
Grod by Gramaliel. In the second year after our Lord's 
ascension, while he displayed excessive zeal for the tradi- 
tions of the elders, and became, therefore, a violent 
persecutor of the Christians, he went to Damascus, bear- 
ing letters from the high priest, commissioning him to 
persecute even to death all the worshippers of Christ who 
dwelt there. When, however, he came nigh the city, he was 
suddenly surrounded by an extraordinary light, and, hearing 
with amazement the heavenly voice of the Lord Jesus, 
he fell to the ground ; but his salvation was secured, for 
he arose divested of his former ferocity, and was led by 

episode of St. Petronilla, copied from the Acts of SS. Nereus and Achil- 
leus, and St. Peter's sending St. Martial to Limoges, St. Mark to Aquileia, 
St. Apollinaris to Ravenna, and St. Valerius to Treves, they must be 
considered as entirely apocryphal. 

* Our author expresses himself incorrectly, and contradicts what he has 
previously said, when he describes St. Paul as the twelfth apostle. It has 
already appeared that, long before his conversion, the number of the apostles 
was filled up by the election of St. Matthias. The truth is, that St. Paul 
was ordained as apostle of the gentiles, along with St. Barnabas, at 



A.D. 35J ST. TAtlL's COKYERSIOK. 197 

Lis companions of tlie journey into Damascus, "wliere, for 
three days, he was unable to move. At the end of that 
time, by God's command, he was visited by Ananias, and 
embraced the faith which he had combated, and, having 
been baptized, boldly preached it to Jews and Gentiles. 
Beginning at Jerusalem, he proceeded as far as Illyria, Italy, 
and Spain ;^ and made known the name of Christ to the 
inhabitants of many countries who had not yet heard it. 

Luke, the evangelist, Paul's companion and fellow la- 
bourer, speaks of him to the end of his work with exactness 
and dignity, pursuing the thread of his history to the omis- 
sion of others, Arator, also, a sub-deacon of the holy Roman 
church, has written a second book on this subject, in which 
he piously made a metrical version of the Acts of the 
Apostles, in which he related the labours of Paul, his 
patience in adversity, and the shipwreck he suffered. I 
have already collected from these works some brief notices 
respecting him in the preceding pages, but it is by no means 
an irksome task to recapitulate them to the glory of God. 

Saul, who is likewise called Paul, having parted from his 
companions, in obedience to. an admonition of the Holy 
Ghost, preached at Paphos, where he struck blind Elymas 
the sorcerer, who resisted the words of the faith, and con- 
verted to Christianity the proconsul Paulus. Having 
entered the synagogue at Antioch, he commanded silence 
by waving his hand, and related how the people of Israel 
went out of Egypt by passing through the sea, and spoke 
of the different miracles which were wrought in the desert. 
On another sabbath day he rehearsed Christ's passion and 
resurrection, which he illustrated by passages from the 
prophets, and increased the flock of the church by a great 
number of believers. 

At Lystra, Paul healed a man impotent in his feet from his 
mother's womb, who listened with attention to the word of 
God ; but when he saw the ancient superstition of the Lycao- 

Antioch, in the year 44, but this mission had nothing in common with 
that of the twelve apostles properly so called. 

^ We have no account of St. Paul having included Illyrium and Spain 
in his journeyings. He announced his intention (Rom. xv. 24 — 28) to 
visit the latter country, but there is nothing to show that he carried it into 
effect. 



108 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.III. 

nians, who wished to offer sacrifice to liim, he rent his 
clothes, and used eloquence and reason to restrain their 
zeal. 

After much opposition to his preaching, he handled the 
question raised by the baptized Jews, whether believing 
Grentiles ought to be baptized before they were circumcised. 
Paul, therefore, went to Jerusalem with others chosen from 
among the faithful, and consulted Peter and James, and 
the other elders, and transmitted an epistle containing their 
decision that Christians need only abstain from meats 
offered to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, 
and from fornication. 

At Philippi he cast an unclean spirit out of a young 
woman who was a Pythoness, and who gave responses to 
those who consulted her ; the demon being expelled, her 
covetous masters were deprived of the gains obtained by 
her divination. They therefore accused Paul before the 
magistrates, by whose orders he was imprisoned. In the 
night, the apostle prayed to the Lord of light, and the 
merciful guardian of his faithful people quickly heard him. 
Por there was a sudden earthquake, and the chains of the 
prisoners fell from them ; and the keeper of the prison 
having been baptized, with his whole family, Paul and Silas, 
the servants of the Grod of Sabaoth, were allowed to go free. 

Paul, preaching at Athens, was surnamed by the people 
there, the sower of the word,^ and thus received a suitable 
name from the unbelievers ; for his words were a fountain 
of eternal life to thirsty souls, and he scattered freely the 
seed of salvation for all who desired to gather it. He 
disputed with the philosophers, both Epicurean and Stoic, 
and eloquently proclaimed the true God who was called by 
the Athenians " The Unknown Grod." Dionysius the Are- 
opagite, and his wife Damaris," believed and were baptized ; 
and Paul admitted him among his most intimate friends, 
on account of his wisdom and love of righteousness. Soon 

' Seminiverbius ; in the Greek text of ^c^*- xvii. 18, CTrepnoXoyog ; in 
the authorized English version " a babbler." 

^ It is by no means certain that Damaris was the wife of Dionysius, or 
St Denys, the Areopaglte, and the text of St. Luke by no means favoiu^ 
the assertion (Acts xvii. 34). All that we know for certain of St, Denys, 
by the testimony of his namesake of Corinth, is that he was bishop of 
Athens. It appears also that he suffered martyrdom. 



A.D. 54 — 56.] ST. PAUL AT ATHEIs'S AND EPHESUS. 199 

afterwards, as Aristides the Athenian tells us, Dionysius was 
ordained bishop of Athens by the apostle, and after an 
illustrious life received the glorious crown of martyrdom. 
Paul went from thence to Corinth, where he found Aquila 
preaching, with his wife Priscilla ; he went to reside at their 
house, and there practised the art of tent-making, in which 
they were expert. There also, being admonished by Christ 
not to cease from preaching, he faithfully obeyed, and many 
were converted. 

At Ephesus, twelve men lately baptized by Paul in the 
name of the Lord, were filled Avith the Holy Ghost, and 
had the gift of divers kinds of tongues. Also, while Paul 
was healing, in the name of the Lord Jesus, those who were 
afflicted with various sorts of diseases, seven Jews, the sous 
of one Sceva, chief of the priests, took upon them to lay 
their hands on a man who had an evil spirit, calling over 
him the name of the Lord Jesus, whom Paul preached. 
JBut the demon, acting through the man who was possessed, 
made a public acknowledgment of Jesus and his disciple 
Paul. lie also suddenly rushed upon the unbelieving exor- 
cists, whom he wounded and put to flight. A great number 
of the Ephesians, having heard the truth preached to them, 
believed and w^ere baptized. Some of those who used 
curious arts, burnt their books of magic, the value of which 
they estimated at fifty thousand pence. So mightily grew 
the word of God and prevailed ; and his grace thus strength- 
ening the faithful, the party of the ungodly dwindled and 
was confounded. But Paul sent Timotheus and Erastus 
into Macedonia, while he himself stayed in Asia for a season.^ 

Demetrius, a silversmith, perceiving that the teaching of 
Paul induced the inhabitants of Ephesus to forsake the 
temple of Diana, and grieved that the profits of his trade 
were reduced to almost nothing, by the idols being con- 
demned to destruction, called together his fellow workmen, 
and, setting forth their common grievances, stirred up a 
clamorous tumult of the people. The riotous mob rushed 
furiously into the theatre, having caught Gains and Aris- 
tarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions ; but their 
uproar, Avhile they quarrelled among each other, was to no 
purpose.^ 

1 Acts xix. 1—22. 2 Acts.xix. 23—40. 



200 OEDEEICTJS YITALTS. [b.II. CH.III. 

Paul, having called tlic disciples to him, bid them fare- 
well, after exhorting them to persevere in their new career ; 
and then departed to go into Macedonia. He remained 
three months in Gi-reece. His companions were Sosipater, 
son of Birrus of Berea; and of the Thessalonians, Aris- 
tarchus and Secundus ; Grains of Derbe, and Timotheus ; 
and of Asia, Titicus and Trophimus. After the days of 
unleavened bread, Paul and Luke sailed from Philippi, and 
came to Troas in five days ; where they abode seven days. 
And upon the first day of the week, when several of the 
disciples came together to break bread, as they were listen- 
ing to a long discourse which Paul, who was ready to depart 
on the morrow, continued until midnight, a young man, 
named Eutychus, who sat in a window, fell down from the 
third loft, overcome by sleep, but was restored to life by the 
prayers of Paul, to the joy of all beholders.^ 

Erom Miletus Paul sent to Ephesus, and calling the 
elders of the church, addressed them at length on matters 
pertaining to the salvation of souls. And when he had 
finished his discourse he kneeled down and prayed with 
them all. And they all wept sore, and when they had 
embraced each other, the brethren accompanied Paul unto 
the ship. Then embarking, he came with a straight course 
unto Coos, and to Rhodes, and from thence to Patara, and, 
passing through Syria, arrived at Tyre, where he stayed 
seven days with his faithful friends in Christ. Erom Ptole- 
mais he went to Caesarea, and entered into the house of 
Philip the evangelist, who had four daughters, virgins, which 
did prophesy.^ 

Then came down from Judea a prophet, named Agabus, 
who bound his own hands and feet with Paul's girdle, and 
by the grace of the Holy Ghost clearly predicted that the 
Jews at Jerusalem would bind Paul in the same manner, 
and would deliver him into the hands of the Grentiles. All 
who heard him began to weep, but Paul said to those who 

■^ Acts XX, 1 — 12. Our author, following Origen, gives the name of 
Sosipater to the person St. Luke calls Sopater. He makes him the son of 
Birrus, instead of Pyrrhus ; of Gaius of Derbe, he makes two persons, 
Gams ; Derbeus. He always writes Titicus for Tychicus. 

* Acts XX. 1 3 — xxi. 9. St. Philip, the deacon, who must not be con- 
founded with the apostle of the same name. 



A.D. 5S.] ST. PAUL IMPEIS01S"ED AT JEEUSALEM. 201 

besouglit him not to go up to Jerusalem, " I am ready, not 
to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name 
of the Lord Jesus." ^ 

Thus supported by the firmness of his faith, Paul went up 
to Jerusalem, and related to James and the other elders 
what things God had wrought among the gentiles by his 
ministry ; and when they heard of the conversion of the 
gentiles, they magnified God the Creator of all things. 
The next day Paul entered into the temple to purify 
himself, and began to perform the ceremonies of the Mosaic 
law, in order to remove every occasion of scandal to those 
who were zealous for the laws of their fathers ; that thus 
making himself a Jew among the Jews, he might gain 
all men. But the Jews which were of Asia, when they saw 
him in the temple, stirred up the people by their malevolent 
clamours, and laid hands on him. And all the city was 
moved, and the people ran together ; and they took Paul, 
and drew him out of the temple, and forthwith the doors 
were shut. They then began to beat him, and sought to kill 
him. Claudius Lysias, the tribune of a cohort, when he 
heard that all Jerusalem was suddenly in an uproar, imme- 
diately took soldiers and centurions, and ran down to them, 
and, to prevent the populace from taking the apostle's life, 
he forcibly rescued him out of their hands, and having bound 
him with two chains, drew him out of the crowd, and com- 
manded him to be carried into the castle, that he might 
inquire of him who he was, and what he had done. With 
the tribune's consent, Paul ascended the stairs, and, speaking 
to the people in the Hebrew tongue, gave a full account 
of his conversion, and of his former conversation as a Jew, 
and oftered afterwards the best arguments for his change 
to the faith of Christ. "While he was thus judiciously speak- 
ing, the Jews, impatient at the force of his words, began to 
raise violent clamours, and furiously exclaimed : " Away with 
such a fellow from the earth : for it is not fit that he should 
live." The chief captain, therefore, commanded him to be 
brought into the castle, and scourged and tortured. Then 
Paul said unto the centurion that stood by : " Is it lawful 
to scourge a man that is a Roman and uncondemned ? " 

» Acts xxi. 10—13. (a.p. 58.) 



20li OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b.II. Cn.III. 

The chief captain, after he knew that he was a E.oman 
citizen, was afraid because he had bound him/ 

On the morrow Paul was brought before the council, 
and standing in the midst defended himself with great 
ability. But the high priest Ananias commanded them 
that stood by to smite him on the mouth. Then said Paul 
unto him : " God shall smite thee, thou whited wall ; for 
sittest thou to judge me after the law, and commandest 
me to be smitten contrary to the law ?" And they that 
stood by said, " Revilest thou Grod's high priest ?" Then 
said Paul : " I wist not, brethren, that he was the high 
priest. Por it is written : Thou shalt not speak evil of the 
ruler of thy people."^ But when Paul perceived that the 
one part were sadducees, and the other pharisees, he cried 
out in the council, " Men and brethren, I am a pharisee, 
the son of a pharisee ; of the hope and resurrection of the 
dead I am called in question. " At these words, there 
arose a dissension between the two parties, and the 
multitude was divided. Por the sadducees say that there 
is no resurrection, neither angel nor spirit ; but the phari- 
sees confess both. Some of the pharisees took his part, 
saying, " We find no evil in this man ; but if a spirit or an 
angel hath spoken to him."^ . . . And when there arose a 
great dissension, the tribune, fearing lest Paul should be 
pulled in pieces by them, commanded the soldiers to take 
him by force from among them, and to bring him into the 
castle.'^ 

And the night following, the Lord stood by him, and 
said : " Be of good cheer ; for as thou hast testified of me in 
Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Piome." And 
when it was day, more than forty Jews came to the chief 
priests and elders, and bound themselves by an oath that 
they would neither eat nor drink till they had IdUed Paul 
when on his way to the council. The tribune, hearing of 
this conspiracy from Paul's sister's son, dextrously defeated 
the plot of these wicked men. Por at the third hour of the 

* 

* Acts xxi. 14 — xxii. 29. (a..d. 58.) 
^ Exodus xxii. 28. 

^ Ordericus omits the concluding words of the sentence : " Let us not 
fi-iht againt God." 

* Acts xxii. 3(j — xxiii. 13. 



A.D. 58.] PAUL SENT TO CiESAEEA. 203 

night, he sent the apostle in chains to Csesarea under an 
escort of two hundred soldiers, and threescore and ten 
horsemen, and two hundred spearmen, and remitted the case 
to the governor Eelix in a letter which he wrote to him. 
Thus conducted to Caesarea, Paul was confined in the guard- 
house of Herod's palace, and after five days was called 
before the assembly. Ananias, the high priest, was present 
with the elders of the Jews, and the orator Tertullus framed 
an insidious accusation against Paul. The accused, with 
the governor's permission, briefly replied, and by his 
prudent answer completely refuted all that was laid to his 
charge. Pelix the governor then adjourned the assembly 
until the arrival of the tribune, and ordered the centu- 
rion to treat Paul kindly. And after certain days, Felix 
came with his wife Drusilla w^ho was a Jewess, and sending 
for Paul, heard him concerning the faith in Christ Jesus. 
And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and 
judgment to come, Eelix trembled ; but he often sent for him, 
hoping to obtain money from him. At the end of two 
years, Portius Pestus succeeded Pelix, who, walling to show 
the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound.^ 

JN'ot long afterwards Pestus went down to Caesarea, and 
there commanded the Jews to bring forward their accusation 
against Paul. In consequence they laid many and grievous 
complaints against him, which they could not prove, while 
Paul justified himself in these words : " Neither against the 
law of the Jews, neither against the temple, nor yet against 
Caesar, have I oflended anything at all." At last, through 
the under-hand arts of the Jews, and the double dealing of 
the judge, whose policy it was to conciliate them, Paul found 
it necessary to appeal to Caesar. He was also brought 
before an assembly over which King Agrippa and the 
governor Pestus presided, when, raising his hand, he gave 
an account of his calling and his faith in Christ, in a very 
eloquent speech. "When it was ended, all present admired his 
wisdom ; and the great men going aside, talked between 
themselves, saying: " This man hath done nothing worthy of 
death or of bonds. He might have been set at liberty, if 
he had not appealed unto Caesar." He was, therefore, 
delivered to Julius, a centurion of the Augustan cohort, one 
, 1 Acts x.xiii. 10 — xxiv. 27. 



204 OEDEEICTJS yiTALIS. [b.ii. cn.iii. 

Arlstarclius, a Macedonian, and Luke, being liis fellow tra- 
vellers. There were in the ship two hundred and seventy-six 
souls ; the voyage, which violent tempests rendered very 
dangerous, lasted fourteen days, during which they saw 
neither sun nor stars; and took no food as they despaired of 
being saved. Paul had tried to persuade them, to winter in 
Crete, but the earnest advice of the pilot and the master of 
the ship prevailed with the centurion and soldiers to prose- 
cute the voyage. Their heedless haste induced them to 
brave the storms of the winter season, and almost the whole 
of them would have been lost, but for the aid afforded them 
hj the merits of Paul. But they suffered much from terror 
and fatigue when they were wi'ecked on the quicksands ; and 
all the tackle of the shipwas carried away, and they were forced 
to throw overboard the wheat and all that burdened the vessel. 
Meanwhile, the angel of Grod stood before Paul, and said to 
him, " Fear not, Paul ; thou must be brought before Caesar ; 
and, lo, Grod hath given thee all them that sail with thee.^ 

After the ship had gone to pieces, it was with the greatest 
difficulty that they reached the island of Mitylene.^ And 
the barbarous people showed them great kindness, and 
kindled a fire for their comfort, because of the rain and cold. 
And when Paul was heaping faggots on the fire, a viper 
came out of the heat, and fastened on his hand. The bar- 
barians, seeing this, cried out that the man was a murderer, 
and would doubtless soon die. But Paul shook the viper 
into the fire, and, to the surprise of all, felt no harm.^ 

Publius, the governor of the island, hospitably entertained 
the shipwrecked people three days. "While there, Paul went 
to see the father of Publius who lay sick of fever and dysen- 
tery, and having prayed over him, laid his hands on him, and 
healed him. Others also of the islanders who had diseases 
came to him, and were healed. They therefore treated the 
shipwrecked crew and passengers with great respect, on ac- 
count of Paul's merits, and when they departed, supplied them 
with all that was necessary for their voyage. At the end of 
three months, they embarked in a ship of Alexandria, which 

^ Acts XXV. 1 — xxvii. 21. 

'■^ St. Luke calls this island Melita, generally supposed to be the 
present Malta. 

' Acts xxvii. 25 — xxviii. 6. 



A.D. 63.] ST. PAUL AT EOME. 205 

had wintered in tlie island, and, by God's guidance, arrived 
not long afterwards at Home ; when some of the brethren, 
hearing of Paul's arrival, went out to meet and congratulate 
him. At Eome Paid was suffered to dwell by himself, in 
the custody of a soldier ; and after three days, he called the 
chief of the Jews together, and complained to them of his 
arrest and the ill-treatment he had suffered from their 
brethren at Jerusalem. He then gave them a faithful 
account of the true faith \^'hich is in Jesus Christ. He 
dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, preaching to 
all men the kingdom of God, and teaching the things which 
concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no man 
forbidding him.^ 

I have hitherto followed the narrative of St. Luke the 
evangelist, in the Acts of the Apostles, who, omitting fur- 
ther notice of the other apostles, relates that Paul went to 
E;ome, where, for the space of two years, he preached the 
word of God without hindrance. He came to Eome in the 
second year of the reign of Nero, and defended himself 
before the emperor, who at the commencement of his reign 
was as yet disposed to be merciful. By God's help, he was 
set at liberty at the command of Nero, whom, by a figure, 
he calls "The Lion;" and quitting Pome, he journeyed 
through the nations of the west, as far as Narbonne, a 
city of Gaul. It is reported that he there built a church, 
which he dedicated in honour of the Maccabean martyrs, 
where is still seen the sign of the cross, marked in oil, 
which the apostle traced with his thumb on the wall; he then 
ordained his disciple Paul bishop of that city, who there, 
after performing many good works, terminated his career by 
a happy end.^ 

In the same manner, several others, who had been 
instructed in the doctrine of the Catholic faith by the holy 
doctor of the gentiles, shed a wonderful lustre on the church 
of God, being placed in the chair of authority to govern 
the people of God in various countries. Luke in Bithynia, 

^ Acts xxviii. 7 — 31. (a.d. 61 — 63.) 

'■^ The metropolitan church of Karbonne was neither founded hy St, 
Paul nor one of his immediate disciples, but by a person of the same name, 
one of the seven bishops sent into Gaul, about a.d. 250, as we learn from 
Gregory of Tours. 



206 OEDERICUS VITALIS. [b.II. CH.III. 

Titus in Crete, Carpus at Troas, Timothy and Archippus 
in Asia, Trophimus at Aries, Onesimus at Ephesus, Sos- 
thenes at Corinth, Tychicus at Paphos, Dionysius the Areo- 
pagite at Athens, Epaphras at Colosse, and Erastus at 
Philippi, spread the nets of faith, and drew the heathen 
nations from the darkness of ignorance to the light of truth, 
as fishes are caught from the depths of the sea. Pointing 
out to others the path of righteousness, they retained them 
in it by their words and actions. Their names are, therefore, 
written in the book of life, and all nations will proclaim 
their wisdom and celebrate their praise.^ 

It now becomes necessary for me to speak of the trium- 
phant deaths of the saints, and I shall faithfully continue 
the thread of my narrative from the materials furnished by 
the writings of the fathers. I shall have to tell how these 
glorious princes of the earth, nobly bearing the standard of 
the true Joshua, re-conquered the land of promise ; how they 
loved each other during their lives, and were not sepa- 
rated in death ; how, animated with the same spirit, they 
fought at Rome against the emperor Nero and Simon the 
magician; and how, having vanquished the enemy, they 
received on the same day their heavenly crowns.^ 

Marcellus, a Ptoman, son of the prefect Marcus, baptized 
by the apostle Peter, has described the frowardness of Simeon 
Magus and the simplicity of Peter, in a letter addressed to 
the holy martyrs Nereus and Achilleus,^ while they were 

^ St. Trophimus, the disciple of St. Paul, is a different person from his 
namesake, the bishop of Aries, one of the seven bishops mentioned in the 
preceding note. Ordericus Vitalis has made other mistakes of the same 
kind in this passage. Thus St. Luke, though he preached in many pans 
of Bithynia, never settled there, and SS. Carpus and Sosthenes were 
simply disciples of St. Paul, without any particular mission or ecclesiastical 
rank. The attributing to Onesimus the bishopric of Ephesus arose from 
confusing the disciple of the apostle with a bishop who was contemporary 
with St. Ignatius in 107. Tychicus was not sent to Paphos, but succes- 
sively to Colosse and Ephesus. As for Erastus, all that is known about 
him is, that he held the post of treasurer of some city (probably Corinth) 
before he attached himself to St. Paul. 

2 Ordericus is speaking particularly of the apostles SS. Peter and Paul, 
though the former parts of the passage may apply to the apostles and 
martyrs in general. 

^ The apocryphal account of the martyrdom of SS. Peter and Paul has 
been published by Florentinius in his Notes on the Ancient Martyrology 



LEGEIfDS OF ST. PETEE. 207 

banished to the island of Palmaria for the faltii of Christ, 
and daily combated the magicians Purius and Priscus, dis- 
ciples of Simon Magus with irrefragable arguments for the 
truth. Marcellus relates that on a certain day, while Simon 
was disputing with Peter, calling him a magician, and en- 
deavouring to excite the hatred of the Pioman people against 
him, a widow^ happened to pass with a great crowd, following 
to the grave her only son over whom she mourned witii 
loud cries. Then Peter said to the followers of Simon, " Ap- 
proach the bier, and remove the corpse. Whoever restores 
it to life may be well believed to possess the true faith." 
When the people had done as he desired, Simon said: "If 
I should bring him to life again, will you put Peter to 
death?" The multitude answered: "We will burn him 
alive!" Then Simon having conjured up his demons, 
began with their aid to operate on the bod}'-, which made 
a slight motion, and the people, observing it, raised 
shouts in praise of Simon, and threatened Peter with death. 
However Peter, having with some difficulty obtained silence, 
addressed the crowd in these words : " If this body lives, 
let it speak, walk, take food, and return home. If not, be 
assured that you are deceived by Simon." Then the people 
exclaimed with one voice : " If Simon be not able to do 
this, he shall suffer the punishment which he destined for 
Peter." Simon now, feigning to be angry, tried to run 
away ; but the crowd caught hold of him, and loaded him 
with reproaches. Peter, then extending his hands towards 
heaven, said: " Lord Jesus Christ, who saidst unto us thy dis- 
ciples : ' Gro, in my name, cast out devils, heal the sick, raise 
the dead;' restore now this child to life, that all the people 
here may acknowledge that thou art Grod, and that there is 
none other than thou, who livest and reignest with the Father 
and the Holy Ghost, through all ages. Amen." The child im- 
mediately arose, and worshipped Peter, saying : " I saw the 
Lord Jesus Christ commanding his angels thus : ' At the 
request of Peter, my faithful friend, let that orphan, and 
only child, be restored to his widowed mother.' " The people 

of St. Jerome. Ordericus has borrowed several passages from it in the 
sequel, as will be observed in passing; but this paragraph, and part of that 
which follows, is taken from another source, the legend of SS. Nereus and 
Achilleus. Act. SS. Mensis Maii, iii. pp. 9, 10. 



208 OEDEIIICUS YITALIS. [b.II. Cn.IIT. 

now began to exclaim unanimously : " There is but one 
God, the one that Peter preaches." Simon meanwhile trans- 
formed himself into the shape of a dog, and tried to escape ; 
but the populace held him fast, and, as they strove to throw 
liim into the fire, Peter rushed into the midst of the crowd 
and set him free. " Our Master," he said, "taught us to 
render good for evil." Simon, therefore, escaped, and went 
to see Marcellus, whom he had already seduced, and tied 
up at the entrance of the house an enormous dog, which 
could scarcely be held fast by the iron chain with which it 
was bound. " "We shall now see," said he, "if Paul, who is 
accustomed to come to see you, will be able to enter." An 
hour had scarcely elapsed when Paul appeared at the door, 
and, making the sign of the cross, unchained the dog, saying : 
" Go and say to Simon : Cease from employing the services 
of demons to deceive the people for whom Christ shed his 
blood." Marcellus, witnessing such wonders, ran to meet 
Peter, and throwing himself at his feet, received him into 
his house, from which he expelled Simon with utter con- 
tempt. The dog now became gentle towards every one 
except Simon, whom he continually worried ; but, one day, 
when he had got him under him, Peter ran up to him, 
exclaiming : " I command thee, in the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, not to inflict a bite on any part of that man's 
body." The animal from that moment could not touch one 
of Simon's limbs, but it so tore his clothes that no part 
of his body remained covered. Then all the people, and 
especially the children, ran after him with the dog, and 
drove him beyond the walls of the town, howling as if they 
had been in pursuit of a wolf. Unable to bear the scandal 
of this ignominious treatment, Simon did not venture to make 
his appearance for a whole twelvemonth ; but after that, he 
made himself known to the emperor Nero, and the rogue 
thus attaching himself to one of the worst of men, became 
all the worse for the connexion. 

As the end of the apostle's warfare drew nigh, the Lord 
appeared to his servant Peter in a vision, saying : " Simon 
and Nero, fully possessed by demons, are plotting against 
thee. Pear not, for I am with thee, and will grant thee the 
consolation of seeing Paul my apostle, who to-morrow will 
enter Eome. In concert with Lim, thou shalt make war 



SS. PETER AT^D PAUL AT HOME TOGETnER. 209 

upon Simon for tbe space of seven mouths, and when thou 
hast conquered, driven away, and cast him into hell, ye 
shall both come to me crowned as victors. All this took 
place. Indeed Paul arrived the very next day. Pope St. 
Linus has related when and how the apostles met, and how 
they had a conflict with Simon seven months afterwards ; 
witli full particulars of their martyrdom in a work 
written in the Greek language for the use of the 
eastern churches.^ Prom this narrative I propose to make 
some extracts in the way I have already done, and to 
compile, in as few words as I can, an abridged account of all 
the circumstances. 

Having learnt that Paul was arrived at Home, Peter was 
overjoyed, and immediately rose and went out to meet 
him. When they saw each other, they wept with delight, 
remained for a long time locked in a close embrace, and 
bathed -themselves mutually with tears. These two great 
apostles beginning to preach the word of God, the greater 
part of the mixed population believed, nor could the in- 
furiated assemblies of Jews or Gentiles make any open 
resistance to those whom the Holy Spirit had largely endowed 
with the fulness of all wisdom. 

While an innumerable multitude of persons were con- 
verted to the Lord by Peter's preaching, it happened that 
Livia, the consort of Nero, and Agrippina, the wife of the 
prefect Agi'ippa, also embraced Christianity ; and, in conse- 
quence, they separated from their husbands, and vowed to 
lead a life of chastity for love of the eternal King. 

Paul also displayed the lustre of manifold graces, and 
roused the wonder of the Roman world by signs and won- 
ders, by his great learning, and admirable sanctity." Having 
purchased a public garden outside the walls, there, assisted 
by Luke, Titus, and other faithful members of the church, 
he discoui'sed on the word of life. Meanwhile he began to 

^ Ordericus here refers to a pseudononymous work entitled, D. Lini, 
pontijicurn seoundi, de sui prcedeccssoris D. Petri apostoli passione libelhis. 
.... Item de passione D. Pauli libelhis niter. Our author has only 
made use of this second part. See the Bibliotheca Patrum maxima, t. 11, 
pp. 1 — 67. 

* The preceding paragraph is borrowed from the legend of St. Linus. 
The next, with those which follow, are extracted from the account 
attributed to Alarcellus. 

YOL. I. P 



210 OEDEEICTJS TITALIS. [u.II. CH.III. 

collect a very great multitude of hearers, and, by God's help, 
many souls were added to the faith through him ; so that 
the fame of his preaching and holiness Avas noised through- 
out the city, and his reputation spread over the whole 
neighbouring countr)^ Many officers of the emperor's 
household hastened to hear him preach, and became be- 
lievers in the Lord Jesus Christ. Some also of the guards 
of the imperial bed-chamber resorted to him, and, becoming 
Christians, left the service. Inflamed with inward fervour, 
they attached themselves to Christ, and refused to return to 
their ranks in the palace, preferring the glory conferred by 
the true faith and its virtues, to the profession of arms, 
riches, and honours. Thus every day the cause of Satan suf- 
fered loss, while the triumphs of the faithful increased. Even 
Seneca, the emperor's tutor, formed so close an intimacy with 
Paul, finding in him divine knowledge, that he could scarcely 
live for a moment without conversing with the apostle ; and 
when he was prevented from listening to liis words, he sought 
by an interchange of letters to enjoy the charms of friendly 
communication, and to profit by his good advice. It was thus 
that, through the agency of the Holy Spirit, his doctrine 
spread itself and made itself beloved ; so that he taught 
freely, and was listened to with enthusiasm by his numerous 
hearers. He disputed with the pagan philosophers and 
confounded the Jews; and almost all the world submitted to 
his teaching. Even some of his writings were read to the 
emperor by his own tutor ; a circumstance which made him 
generally esteemed : the senate also were not indiff"erent to 
his merits. 

But while these two illustrious apostles thus shed a 
divine lustre, not only amongst the Komans, but also 
amono:st all who from different countries thronged to 
Home, the capital of the world, the elders of the synagogues 
and some chief men of the gentiles, inflamed with bitter 
zeal, stirred up the hatred of the turbulent mob against 
the apostles by their impious accusations. They, therefore, 
sent Simon Magus to K^ero as he was leaving the palace, and 
commissioned him to prefer false charges against the blessed 
apostles. Simon began to speak much evil of Peter, declar- 
ing him to be a magician and a corrupter of the people. 
The wicked believed this man, who deluded them with 



ST. PETEU CONFOUNDS SIMON MAGUS. 211 

magical tricks, at wliicli they gaped witli ignorant wonder ; 
for at his command a brazen serpent moved, dogs cut in 
stone barked, bronze statues laughed and walked; while he 
himself would run and suddenly rise into the air. 

As a contrast to these impositions, Peter cured the sick 
with a word ; restored sight to the blind by his prayers ; 
drove away demons by a simple command. Meanwhile he 
even raised the dead, and drew away all those he could from 
the pernicious company of the magician. The result was 
that every religious man detested Simon, while all the 
wicked men, on the contrary, became his accomplices, and 
by false testimony accused Peter of crimes which he had not 
committed. At last these accusations came to the ear of 
jN^ero, who ordered the magician to appear before him. 
When conducted into the emperor's presence, he began to 
deceive the spectators by illusive tricks, transforming him- 
self into different shapes, so as at one time to appear a boy, 
the next moment an old man, and at another time a youth. 
Thus, by the help of Satan, he played his antics in 
different forms ; a sight which so astonished the emperor, 
that he took him for the son of God. Then the magician, 
with his accomplices, accused the apostles, and Nero gave 
orders that Peter and Paul should be brought in great 
haste before him. As early as the day after, the apostles 
and the mngician disputed before Caesar ; and, as our faith- 
ful narrative informs us, they performed many wonders. For 
the disciples of the truth declared the truth, asserting that 
the magician was throughout a thief and a rogue ; and to 
prevent the weak-minded from listening to him, protested 
solemnly that he was an infamous apostate. AV'hen Simon 
threatened to send his angels to punish Paul, the latter 
secretly requested Nero to order that a barley-loaf should 
be brought and given to him privately. This having been 
done, Peter took the loaf, which he blessed, broke, and hid 
in his sleeve : he then inquired of the magician, who boasted 
of being the son of God, what he had just done. Provoked 
at not being able to discover the apostle's secret, Simon 
called loudly to several enormous dogs, and ordered them to 
come and devour Peter before the eyes of Caesar. Behold, 
suddenly there appeared dogs of a wonderful size, which 
leaped upon Peter. The apostle, however, kneeling on the 

p 2 



212 OEDEEICUS YTTALIS. [b.II. CH.IIT. 

ground, extended his two hands, and exhibited the loaf 
he had blessed. As soon as the dogs perceived it, they 
suddenly disappeared. Thus the magician was publiclv 
exposed, and became the laughing-stock of all the world, 
as he could only exhibit the ferocity of his dogs, instead of 
the power of the angels he had promised to send against 
the apostle ; and in this manner showed that the angels 
who obeyed his orders came from the kennel, and not from 
heaven. 

At last, Simon Magus having been frequently confounded 
by the power of the apostles' words, Nero commanded that 
a lofty wooden tower should be built in the Field of Mars. 
The next day, the emperor, the senate, the Eoman knights, 
and all the people assembled there to witness the show ; 
and, by the command of Nero, the apostles were also brought 
to the place. Then Simon, having ascended to the top of 
the tower, before all the people, crowned with laurel, he 
extended his hands towards heaven, and began to take his 
flight in the air. Meanwhile, Paul, on his knees in the 
presence of the whole crowd, was praying to the Lord ; 
while Peter was attentively watching Simon's tricks, and 
waited patiently for the moment favourable for the infliction 
of divine vengeance. At last he said to his faithful com- 
panion, "Paul, raise your head a little, and look." Paul 
lifted up his eyes, full of tears, and saw Simon already flying 
through the air ; then he said : " Peter, why do you delay ? 
Finish what you have begun, for the Lord Jesus Christ 
already calls us to him." Then Peter, looking towards 
Simon, exclaimed: " Angels of Satan, who bear this impostor 
through the air to lead into error the hearts of the unbe- 
lievers, I adjure you, by Grod, the Creator of all things, and 
by our Lord Jesus, his Son, who on the third day was 
raised from the dead, that from this moment you cease to 
carry him, and let him fall." 

Immediately, obeying the voice of Peter, the demons al- 
lowed their burden to drop from the clouds, and the magician 
fell on the spot which is called the Sacred Street \yia Sacrd\, 
where his body, broken into four quarters, spread over 
four stones, which bear testimony to the triumph of the 
apostles to the present day. Hearing the crash, Paul raised 
his head, and returned thanks to Grod, the just judge. 



SS. PETER AND PAUL IN THE MAMEETINE PRISON. 213 

Nero, inflamed "wdth rage, ordered Peter and Paul to be 
thrown into prison ; while, by his orders, Simon's corpse 
was carefully guarded for three days and as many nights, 
because he was convinced that the magician would rise again 
on the third day, Paul, on the contrary, asserted that he 
was damned to all eternity. While the apostles were re- 
joicing in the Holy Grhost, and openly confessed that the 
Lord Jesus was their master, Nero, transported with anger, 
said to his prefect Agrippa : " It is absolutely necessary 
that those impious men should perish by a condign punish- 
ment ; procure, tlierefore, some iron chains, and let them 
be burnt in the Naumachia." Agrippa replied : " It is not 
right that you should order them to be executed in that 
way, as Paul appears to be innocent of the murder of 
Simon ; it is, however but just that he should lose his 
head, on account of his impiety. As for Peter, who com- 
mitted the homicide, order him to be crucified."^ The 
emperor assenting, the teachers of eternal salvation were 
immediately removed from his presence and delivered over to 
Paulinus. 

Paulinus, one of the most illustrious of the Eoman magis- 
tracy, received the charge of the apostles of Christ, and con- 
lined them in the Mamertine prison, where they were guarded 
by Processus, Martinian, and other soldiers. They remained 
in this prison for nine months, and cured by their prayers 
many sick people and demoniacs who came to them. More- 
over, as their fellow prisoners cried without ceasing, and 
united in begging for water to quench the thirst that tor- 
mented them, the blessed apostles prayed to God, and their 
prayer was quickly answered by him wliom they trusted. 
For the blessed apostle Peter, having made the sign of the 
cross on the Tarpeian rock, at the same moment a spring 
burst from the side of the hill. Then Processus, Martinian, 
and all the prisoners, threw themselves at the feet of the 
apostle Peter, and forty-seven persons, believing in the Lord, 
were baptized. The apostle offered up for them the eucha- 
ristic sacrifice and made them partake of the holy com- 
munion. 

' This paragraph, thus far, and the two preceding ones, are extracted 
from the apocryphal work attributed to Marcellus 



214 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.II. CII.III. 

At the sight of so many wonders, the officers,^ Processua 
and Martinian, said to the apostles : *' Depart wherever 
you like, for Nero has forgotten you, and will not miss you." 
Peter and Paul, being entreated by the brethren to leave 
the prison, quitted it at the end of nine months, and, passing 
along the Via Appia, arrived safe at the city gate. Then 
Paul went to visit his acquaintance and friends in the city, 
and strengthened in the faith the Eomans and the rest of 
the believers, who rejoiced greatly at his escape ; and, as 
his custom was, sowed the seed abundantly of the word of 
God, and, with his help, added for some days to the number 
of the faithful. The blessed Peter, who had the flesh of his 
leg eaten into by the fetters (the baudage falling off by the side 
of the fence in the Via Nova), had almost reached the Appian 
Gate, when the Lord Jesus Christ appeared to him. As 
soon as Peter had perceived him, he worshipped him, saying: 
"Lord, whither goest thou?" The Lord said to him: 
" Follow me, Peter ; for I am going to Home to be crucified 
a second time." The apostle, immediately following him, 
turned back towards Pome, and our Saviour then said to 
him : " Pear not, for I am with you until I introduce you 
into my Pather's house." '^ 

"When Paul returned to the city in the morning, the 
officers arrested him, and dragged him before the emperor's 
tribunal. Then Nero, remembering what had before occurred, 
gave orders that Peter should be nailed to a cross, and 
Paul be beheaded. But when Peter was led to the foot of 
the cross, his thoughts wholly occupied with heavenly things, 
he acutely felt that the Lord Jesus Christ, who descended 
from heaven upon the earth, had been raised upon a cross 
planted upright, and he entreated the executioners to reverse 
his, and crucify him with his head downwards. This they 
did, fixing his feet above and his hands imderneath. Then 
an innumerable multitude of people assembled so full of in- 
dignation that they would have committed the emperor Nero 

^ Maghtriani, called also mngisteriani, were ministerial officers of the 
lower empire. Ducange ci escribes them as agentes in rebus. 

'^ Tht se two prua graphs, and the sentence Avhich precedes them, are 
taken from a work called 77/e Acts of SS. Processus and Martinian. Act. 
SS. Mensis Jiilii, i. pp. ^^03, 304. A church built on the spot which 
tradition reports to be the scene of this apparition, took its name from St. 
Pelei's words : Domine quo vadis 9 



iL.D. G7 r] MAETTRDOM OF ST. PETEE. 215 

himself to the flames. But Peter forbade them, saying: 
" Nay, nay, my children, put no obstacle in my ^Yay ; my 
feet already walk on the road to heaven. Grieve not, but 
ratlier rejoice with me, for to-day I receive the fruit of my 
labours." 

Then after a long exhortation, in which he clearly explained 
the type of the cross of Christ, whose steps he followed, he 
prayed, and returned thanks to God, saying: "I give 
thanks to thee, good Shepherd, because the flock that thou 
bast entrusted to my care share with me this trial ; and I 
beseech thee. Lord, to let them partake with me of thy 
mercy in thy kingdom." He added: " Good Shepherd, Jesus 
Christ, I commend to thee the sheep that thou didst com- 
mit to my care, that they may not perceive that they have 
lost me, having thee for their protector, by whose aid I have 
been able to govern this flock." With these words he 
yielded up his spirit. 

Immediately, there appeared men, who had never been 
seen in that place, and whom no one had been able to see 
there, either before or afterwards, and they said that they 
were come from Jerusalem for Peter's sake. These men, in 
concert with the illustrious Marcellus, secretly cai-ried ofl' 
the body of the apostle, and deposited it under a turpentine 
tree, near the Naumachia, in the place which is called 
the Vatican ; testifying that the friends of our Lord 
Jesus Christ were ordained to be the mighty patrons of the 
Eomans.^ 

I shall now make some brief extracts from the history of 
the martyrdom of St. Paul, the teacher of the Gentiles, 
showing how he fought a good fight, and finished his course, 
and obtained the reward of his heavenly calling, inserting 
the account in this place to the praise of the ineffable 
Saviour." 

After Paul had left the prison, as before related, he 
returned to the garden, where he lodged before; and 
there great numbers of his friends resorted to him 
with much joy. At last one day, towards evening, 

^ The preceding three paragraphs are borrowed from the account pub- 
lished under the name of St. Marcellus. 

- Here our author again takes up the apocryphal story of St, Linus, 
which he follows in this and the six following paragraphs. 



216 ORDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.II. CH.III. 

as he was inculcating his saving doctrine, and teaching 
the crowds in an upper chamber, Patroclus, the em- 
peror's cup-bearer, having been invited by some of his 
own intimate friends, withdrew from his master's presence, 
and repaired at nightfall to Paul that he might hear 
the lessons of everlasting life. But on account of the 
crowd he could not get near the master, to hear con- 
veniently the word of Grod which he fervently loved : he 
therefore got up into a very high window, and there sat. 
^ow as Paul prolonged his discourse until a late hour, the 
young man became drowsy, and through the snares and 
malice of Satan, fell asleep, and falling from the window of 
the room, which was on a very high floor, expired. The news 
of this accident was speedily carried to Nero as he was 
returning from the bath, and being extremely attached to 
the young man, he was much concerned, and appointed 
another to be cup-bearer in his place. 

Meanwhile Paul, who still continued his instructions within, 
immediately knew, through the Holy Spirit, what had hap- 
pened, and informed those present of the accident, ordering 
them to bring forthwith the lifeless body to him. As soon 
as the corpse was brought into the room, Paul addressed 
the people, and exhorted them to pray with a full faith to 
the Lord Jesus for the resurrection of the dead man. All 
present fell on their knees to join in prayer, which being 
concluded, Paul said: "Young Patroclus, rise up and relate 
what the Lord has done for you." Whereupon Patroclus 
suddenly arose as if from sleep, and began to glority Al- 
mighty Grod. Then Paul sent him away rejoicing with the 
other officers of Caesar's household.^ 

While Nero was lamenting the death of Patroclus, and 
abandoning himself to extreme grief, he heard those about 
him say that Patroclus was alive and standing at the gate 
of the palace. On hearing this, the emperor was seized 
with fear, and forbade him to enter the palace and appear in 
his presence. At last, listening to the persuasions of his 
friends, he gave Patroclus permission to come in, and when 
he saw him safe and sound, and showing no signs of death, 

^ This tale is one of the repetitions, so frequent in the apocryphal 
legends, of the miracle in which St. Paul restored to life the young 
Eutychus of Philip pi 



LEQEIfDS OP ST. PAUL. 217 

he was overwhelved with amazement; and having conversed 
with him for awhile, perceived that he was become a Chris- 
tian ; and, unable to restrain his rage, gave him a blow on 
the cheek, which caused Patroclus to rejoice the more in 
the Lord Jesus. 

Then Barnabas and Justus, Paul, the soldier Arion of 
Cappadocia, and Pestus the Galatian, all attendants and 
friends of Caesar, said to their master : " "Why did you buiiet 
this young man who is well taught, and gave true answers? 
We also are soldiers of the invincible king, Jesus Christ 
our Lord." When Caesar heard them all, with one mind 
and one voice, call Jesus the invincible king, he ordered them 
to be thrown into prison, resolving to torture cruelly those 
he had fondly loved. He also commanded a strict search 
to be made for all the setters forth of this great King, and 
published a cruel edict that as many as were discovered 
should be tortured and punished without trial. In conse- 
quence, a strict search was made for the faithful by the 
officers, and a great number of them were found and brought 
into the presence of Caesar. 

Amongst these, Paul, always in bonds for Christ's sake, 
was led before the emperor in chains. All the other Chris- 
tians looked upon him as their master, and justly honoured 
him whom the Lord had pronounced to be a chosen vessel, 
each of them preferring him to himself in all things. Nero, 
therefore, without any witness could easily understand that 
Paul commanded the soldiers of the great King. Having 
asked him why he had furtively intruded himself into the 
jurisdiction of the Poraan state and enticed his soldiers to 
desert the imperial service, and enlist under the banner of 
his own King,^ Paul, full of the Holy Spirit, boldly pro- 

^ However apocryphal, and even absurd, are many of the details ot this 
legend, the writer seems to have penetrated the true motive of these per- 
secutions. Under the large toleration allowed by the religious system of 
the Romans in the time of the emperors, the introduction of a new god 
might have been received with indifference, or even with favour ; but, in 
addition to the exclusive character of the new faith, the ruling powers 
became evidently alarmed lest the kingly character attributed to Christ 
should interfere with their temporal power. This view of the case was 
adroitly put forward by the Jewish Sj-.nhedrim when Christ was arraigned 
before the Roman procurator; but Pilate either believed our Lord's 
disclaimer of " a kingdom of this world," or thought him too insignificant 
a person to cause any serious disturbance, and therefore handed him over 



218 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.III. 

claimed before all present, the power of Almiglity God, and 
invited them all to partake of the bounties of his hand which 
can dispense the richest gifts to every one according to his 
deserts. He also admonished the emperor himself to pay 
dutiful allegiance to the supreme King. Lastly, he asserted 
that his King would come to judge the quick and the dead, 
and destroy the world by fire. At these words, Nero Cassar 
was inflamed with anger, and commanded that all tlie sol- 
diers of Christ should be burnt at the stake. But Paul 
was treated as one guilty of high treason, and a decree of 
the Senate was passed, condemning him according to the 
E-oman laws to lose his head. Having been delivered to 
the prefects Longinus and Megistus, and the centurion 
Acestus, to be executed without the walls. Paul preached to 
them bv the way, without intermission, the word of salva- 
tion. The apparitors and officers also who were hastily 
despatched by Nero to seek for them, used their utmost 
endeavours to hunt out the Christians who concealed them- 
selves, in order to put them to death. In consequence, such 
immense numbers of the faithftd were massacred, that the Ro- 
man people, becoming exasperated, made a forcible entrance 
into the palace, with the intention of laying violent hands on 
Caesar himself. Then Nero, frightened at the clamours of 
the people, issued another edict commanding that the Chris- 
tians should be allowed to live in peace. This rendered it 
necessary that Paul should be brought before him a second 
time; but as soon as Nero saw him, he vehemently ex- 
claimed : " Take away the magician, take away the sorcerer ; 
cut off the impostor's head, and sweep from the face of the 
earth this perverter of the people's minds." But Paul 
firmly declared that after death he should live eternally, 
and be with his invincible King, and that, to prove the truth 
of his words, he would show himself visibly alive to the 
emperor himself after they had beheaded him. Paul was 
now led rejoicing to the place of execution, unceasingly 
publishing the words of life to his executioners, and to all 
who accompanied liim. AYith the aid of the Holy Spirit, 
he showed the emptiness of idolatry, proved its nothingness, 

to his accusers to be dealt with accorditj'i to their law. and he was finally 
sentenced, on his own confession, for what they called blasphemy, that is 
the assertion of his divine nature. 



A.D. G7 ?] MAETTKDOM OF ST. PAUL. 219 

and admirably set before them the true faith and the know- 
ledge of the true God ; concluding his discourse with a 
magnificent description of the damnation of the repro- 
bate, and the glorious rewards of the righteous. He 
did not speak in vain, for his divine teaching suddenly pro- 
duced its fruits ; touching and inflaming the hearts of the 
crowds who listened to him, and converting the shouts of the 
new converts into wailings for their sins. 

In the meantime, as these holy occupations caused some 
delay, while the dense crowd rent the air with their cries, 
Nero sent Parthenius and Phereta to see if his orders had 
been carried into eflect, and hasten the apostle's execution, 
if he were still alive. In these men also Paul endeavoured 
to plant the seeds of salvation, but, evil prevailing, and their 
hearts being hardened, his labour was in vain. 

As he went towards his place of martyrdom, followed by 
innumerable multitudes, he met at the gate of the city of 
Home, Plautilla, a noble matron, to whom he said : " Adieu, 
Plautilla, daughter of eternal salvation." He then requested 
her to give him the kerchief she wore on her head, to bind 
his eyes at the time of his sufiering. The lady, in tears, 
immediately presented him the kerchief, and com. mending 
herself to his prayers, retired a little out of the crowd, as the 
apostle had commanded her. Paul, observing that she was 
subjected to insults by the pagans, who reproached her with 
believing in a magician and an impostor, spake words of 
comfort to her, ordered her to wait for his return in some 
unfrequented place, and told her that she would receive, by 
means of her kerchief, an unmistakeable token of his death. 
He then in few words instructed Longinus and those of his 
companions who believed, how and by whom they could be 
baptized after his death. Arriving at the place of execution, 
he turned towards the east, lifted up his hands to heaven, 
and prayed in Hebrew for a long time with the tears trick- 
ling down his cheeks, and concluded with returning thanks 
to God. After this, taking leave of the brethren, he 
blessed them, and having bound his eyes with Plautilla's 
hood, he knelt down on both knees, and stretched out his 
neck. The executioner struck him with all his might, and 
cut off his head, which, after it was separated from the body, 
pronounced with a clear voice the name of Jesus Christ in 



220 ORDElilCUS VITALIS. [b.II. CH.III. 

Hebrew. A stream of milk immediately gushed from the 
body upon the soldier's clothes, and blood flowed after- 
wards. The hood, which he had bound over his eyes, 
disappeared. Such an intense light burst from heaven at 
the moment of his decollation, attended by delicious per- 
fume, that the mortal eyes could not bear the brightness, 
and no human tongue could give a description of the fra- 
grance. All who witnessed these wonders were filled with 
admiration, and, for a long time, gave praises to the invin- 
cible King of Sabaoth. But Parthenius and Phereta 
returned to the city, and when they reached the gate, found 
there Plant ilia giving glory to the Lord ; but they presently 
asked her in derision, why she did not cover her head with 
the hood she had given to Paul. She, inspired with the 
ardour of faith, answered nobly : " vain aud wretched 
men, who know not how to believe even the things that 
vou see with your own eves and touch with your own hands ! 
I have indeed the kerchief I gave, now gloriously tinged 
with that precious blood." She then told them with tri- 
umph that Paul had come from heaven, attended by an in- 
numerable company of angels clothed in white, and restored 
her hood, thanking her for her kiudness towards him, and 
adding the promise of an eternal reward. Then Plautilla 
drew the hood^ from her bosom, and showed it to them 
dyed red with blood. On seeing this the men were struck 
with terror, and quickened their pace to reach the palace, 
and inform Caesar of what they had seen and heard. Upon 
receiving the intelligence, the emperor was greatly aston- 
ished, and, horribly alarmed, began to consult the philoso- 
ophers, his own friends, and the officers of state as to the 
meaning of all that had been reported to him. 

About the ninth hour, while they were all wondering at 
these events, and inquiring and conversing about them, Paul 

^ This article of female attire, which became the object of so much 
superstition, is variously called in the legend, as quoted by our author, 
panniim, a cloth, napkin, or kerchief, panniculum, and mafora, otherwise 
mavora, a covering for the head {Ducanre Glossar.), but never velum or 
velamen, a veil, the character assigned to it by modern writers. It appears 
to have been either a hood, or a kerchief, whicli, wrapped round the head, 
still forms the graceful head-dress of Italian females of the lower order, 
and must also be familiar to many readers as that of the Madonnas of 
Carlo Dolce and Sassa Ferrata. 



A.D. 67.] THE rmsT get^'eeal peksecutiok 221 

entered the palace althoiigli the doors were closed, and standing 
before the emperor, said to him : " C?esar Nero, behold Paul, 
the soldier of the eternal and invincible King, stands before 
you ! You will now, perhaps, believe that I am not dead, 
but live by the power of my God. As for you, wretched man, 
unutterable woes await you shortly, the bitterest punish- 
ment and eternal death ; because, among your other crimes, 
you have shed like water the blood of the faithftd." Having 
said these words, lie suddenly disappeared ; while Nero, on 
hearing them, was struck with unspeakable horror ; and 
having almost lost his senses, was at a loss how to act. At 
last, by the advice of his friends, he ordered Patroclus and 
Barnabas to be set at liberty, with all those who had been 
thrown into chains with them. Longinus, also, and his 
companions came to Paul's sepulchre early in the morning, 
as he had appointed, and there saw two men praying, 
and Paul standing between them. Terrified at this wonder- 
ful sight, they dared not approach nearer ; but then Titus 
and Luke, awaking from the trance into which they had 
fallen in the fervour of their prayer, saw the prefects 
and the centurion, who had been the instruments of Paul's 
death, hastening towards them, with natural alarm they im- 
mediately took to flight. But the officers, calling to them in 
gentle accents, they immediately stopped, and having heard 
their profession of faith, baptized them with religious joy. 

At this time, the first thunder-cloud of a terrible perse- 
cution burst over the Christians, who furnished admirable 
examples of resolution and constancy for those that fol- 
lowed. In Tuscany, Torpes, one of the great officers of 
Nero, was beheaded, after suflering various tortures ; at 
E,ome, Processus, Martinian, and forty-six of their com- 
panions were baptized by the blessed apostle Peter. Lon- 
ginus and two others were converted by Paul, and received 
the washing of salvation at the hands of Titus and Luke. 
All these, followed their spiritual teachers step by step, for 
their faith and martyrdom. At Milan, Nazarius, Gervasius, 
Protasius, and Celsus, a boy, sufiered for Christ.^ Thus 
Nero added war against God to his innumerable crimes, and 

1 It hardly need be remarked that we possess no authentic accounts of 
any of these persons, whose acts in the martyrologies are completely 
apocryphal. 



222 ORDEEICTJS YITALI3. [b.IT. CH-III.' 

incurred the hatred of the army and E-oman people, who 
decreed that he should be publicly scourged to death. On 
hearing this sentence, he trembled with fear, and, struck with 
intolerable alarm, the wretched prince absconded, and was 
never seen again. Some relate that, while wandering about 
after his flight, his limbs became stiff from hunger and cold, 
and he was devoured by wolves.^ 

Such are the notices respecting the two most eminent 
senators of the church, which I have collected faithfully, 
extracting from the accounts of their remarkable acts, 
contained in a great number of volumes, a short abridgment 
for the information of posterity. 

Peter preached for seven years to the circumcision, and 
held the see of Antioch for another seven years. He went 
to Kome in the time of Claudius Csesar, to oppose Simon 
Magus, and there preached the gospel for twenty-five years, 
being the first bishop of Eome. He was crucified in the 
thirty-sixth year after Christ's passion, on the third of the 
calends of July [June 29], and his body was interred by the 
Aurelian Way, near the palace of Nero on the Vatican.' 
On the same day, Paul, after nobly suffering innumerable 
pains and labours, was beheaded at the second milestone 
on the road to Ostia, in the gardens situated ad aquas Sal- 
vias, [at the Salvian waters.'] Both the apostles suffered at 
Bome during the reign of the emperor Nero, Avhen Bassus 
and Tuscus* were consuls ; the first is honoured with the 
devotion of all the inhabitants of that city near the Trium- 
phal AVay, the second enjoys similar honours on the road 
to Ostia.^ Bome, the capital of the world, glories in having 

^ The conclusion of this paragraph is taken from the apocryphal work 
attributed to St. Marcellus. Tha received opinion is that the tyrant Nero 
took refuge in the cottage of one of his freedmen, and ended his days by 
suicide. 

* The martyrdom of the two apostles took place, not in the thirty-sixth, 
but in the early part of the thirty-fourth year after our Lord's crucifixion. 

^ It was on this spot that the church of Sto. Paulo fuori muri was 
afterwards erected. 

* Tuscus, one of the two consuls here mentioned, is a supposititious 
personage. C. Lecanius Bassus was consul in G4, two years before tlie 
date which seems to be the right one. 

5 Notwithstanding the respectable traditions which support the state- 
ment, there is some difficulty, as it has been already intimated, in believiiig 
that for the purpose of opposing Simon Magus, or even with the object of 



LEGENDS OF ST. ANDRETT. 223 

for her patrons sueli exalted saints, to whose temples the 
faitliful resort from all })arts of the globe, in order that, by 
assistance of these powerful advocates, thej may be protected 
from all their adversaries and all liostile influences. All 
who with becoming devotion implore their intercessions, 
quickly ex|>erience their aid, through the mercy of Grod, the 
supreme King, who, in the unity of Trinity, reigus through- 
out all ages. Amen. 

Ch. TV. The acts of Sf. Andrew the apostle— and his mar- 
tyrdom, collected from the legends. 

Andeew, the brother of Simon Peter, accordino- to 
the Hebrew etymology, signities handsome or responding ; 
but in Greek is derived a-o 70Z d'jd^hc, that is, a viro, 
and means virile. To this apostle Scythia and Achaia were 
allotted, for the field of his ministerial labours ; in which 
last, in the town of Patras, he died suspended on a cross, 
upon the second of the calends of December [jN"ovember 
30]. We possess a short but excellent work, containing 
particulars of many wonderful acts of St. Andrew. Al- 
though tlie name of the author is unknown to me, yet some 
account of these will, I think, be very acceptable to the 
reader. I propose, therefore, to make brief extracts from 
the narrative, to the glory of the Almighty Messiah, and 
insert them in my own work. 

When Matthew, apostle and evangelist, published the 
word of salvation to the Myrmidons, he was seized by some 
cruel men who put out his eyes, and threw him into prison 
and chains. Meanwhile, the apostle Andrew, by command 
of the angel of God, went down to the sea-shore ; and 
having found a ship, immediately embarked, and the winds 
being favourable, made a quick passage to the town where 
St. Matthew was confined, in a loathsome prison. Here, 
seeing his fellow apostle and the other prisoners, in great 

founding ii church at Rome, Peter undertook a journey there as early as 
the year 42, from wliich he had to return to Jerusalem in 44. It is 
equally difficult to admit that St. Peter and St. Paul suffered martyrdom 
at Rome the same day, the one on the Vatican, the other on the road to 
Ustia, two miles from the city. We learn from Prudentius that in the 
fourth century it was supposed, and this is a more probable story, that the 
same meadow was watered with the blood of the two apostles. 



22i OEDEETCUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.IV. 

affliction, he wept bitterly ; but when they had prayed 
together, the whole place suddenly shook under them, and a 
light shone in the prison. The eyes of the blessed evan- 
gelist were also restored to him, and their fetters being 
unloosed, Matthew and the rest of the prisoners were set 
free, and quitted the dungeon. AYbile, however, Andrew 
was preaching the word of Grod to the inhabitants of the 
country, they seized him, tied his legs together, and dragged 
him through the street of the town, so that his hair was 
torn out by the roots, and blood flowed from his head. 
At last, the prayers of the apostle being heard, great fear 
fell on the inhabitants of Myrmidonia,^ who presently set him 
at liberty. Then prostrating themselves at his feet, they 
eagerly listened to his preaching, and, divinely influenced, 
believed in the Lord and were baptized. After this, Andrew 
departed, and, returning to his own country, there touched 
the eyes of a blind man who immediately recovered his 
sight. 

Demetrius, the governor of the city of Amasia,^ having 
heard of the miracles which Andrew performed in the name 
of Christ, came in tears to throw himself at the feet of the 
apostle, beseeching him to restore to life a young Egyptian 
who had died of fever. The kind apostle consoled him in 
his affliction, repaired with him to the house of mourning, 
and after he had prayed, the child arose in perfect health. 
All who saw this miracle rejoiced, believed, and were bap- 
tized. 

Sostratus, a Christian youth, having been tempted by his 
mother to commit incest, ran oft' to the apostle ; but the 
woman, full of spite, accused her son of the crime before the 
proconsul. The young man remained silent through modesty, 
but St. Andrew defended him, and publicly rebuked the lewd 
woman for her iniquity. The proconsul, in anger, ordered 
the young man to be tied up in the leathern sack used for 
parricides, and to be thrown into the river, and Andrew to 

^ The preaching of St. Matthew among the Myrmidons is a fact com- 
pletely apocryphal, as well as all the other events mentioned by our author 
as connected with the history of St. Andrew. The whole of this legend 
is also borrowed from the Pseudo Abdias, lib. iii. 

* There is no such town in Achaia, the country of St. Andrew, accord- 
ing to the preceding paragraph. There were several of the name, but all 
situate in Asia Minor. 



ST. ANDEEW'S MIIIACLES. 225 

be taken to prison. But while he was praying, a violent 
earthquake, attended with frightful claps of thunder, threw 
the proconsul from his seat, and the rest all fell on the 
ground. The mother of the lad was struck by lightning, 
and burnt to death. Then the proconsul threw himself 
at the feet of the apostle, saying: "Have compassion on 
us, thou servant of God, for we are perishing, and the earth 
will swallow us up." By the prayers of Andrew, the earth- 
quake ceased ; the air became serene, and, going round, he 
restored all those who were agitated with fear. The pro- 
consul received the word of God, and, believing in the Lord 
with his whole family, was baptized by the apostle. 

Gratinus of Sinope,^ having an attack of fever, fell 
seriously ill, and at the same time his wife became swollen 
with the dropsy. His son also, while washing in the 
women's bath, was grievously tormented by a demon, which 
deprived him of his reason. At the request of the proconsul, 
Andrew ascended a chariot and came into the town, and as 
soon as he entered the house of Gratinus, drove out the 
demon, and cleansed and healed the young man. He 
rebuked a man and his wife who were foul with adultery, 
and cured them, after having received a promise that they 
would amend their lives ; afterwards, when both were re- 
covered, they received the faith of Jesus Christ, and were 
baptized with great joy, and their whole house. 

At Nice, seven demons lurked among the tombs by the 
wayside, and stoned those who passed by at mid-day, having 
already killed a great number. At last, hearing that the 
apostle was approaching the gates, the whole city was in a 
tumult of joy, and the inhabitants, going out to meet him 
with branches of palm-trees, exclaimed : " Thou man of God, 
our salvation depends on you." They then explained to 
hiui the state of affairs, and heard in return from the 
apostle's lips all the rules of faith and religion. They were 
immediately filled with joy, believed in the Lord, and con- 
fessed that Jesus Christ was the Son of God. Andrew then 
retui'ned thanks to God for their instant conversion ; and, 
commanding the demons to appear before the people in the 
shape of dogs, banished them to arid and barren wastes, 

^ There is no more a town of this name in Achaia than one of that of 
Amasia. Sinope was a town of some importance in Paphlagonia. 
YOL. I. Q 



226 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.IT. 

where they could hurt no one. Thus armed with the power 
of God. he delivered the city of Nice, baptized the citizens 
who believed, and appointed Celestine/ a good and wise 
man, to be their bishop. 

At the gate of Nicomedia Andrew met a young man lying 
dead on a pallet, whose aged parents were following to the 
grave the corpse of their son, weeping bitterly. Grieved at 
seeing their "tears, he inquired what was the cause of the 
youth's death. But they were afraid and returned no 
answer; their servants answered his question, saying: 
"While he was alone in his room, seven dogs suddenly 
appeared and leaping upon him, miserably tore him, so that 
he fell down dead." Then Andrew knew that this was the 
work of the seven demons he had driven out of Nice, and 
sighing towards heaven he begged of God the life of the 
deceased. Having concluded his prayer, he turned himself 
towards the bier, and said : " In the name of Jesus Christ, 
rise up." To the great astonishment of the people, the 
young man arose, and attached himself to him to whom 
he owed his restoration to life. The apostle took the young 
convert with him as far as Macedonia, and instructed him 
in the words of salvation. 

Having quitted the town, he went on board a ship, and 
entered the strait called Hellespont, intending to sail to 
Byzantium, when suddenly the sea became rough, and a 
violent gale sprung up which nearly sank the ship, so that 
the sailors expected to perish every moment. At length 
the blessed Andrew prayed to the Lord, at whose command 
the wind was still and the sea tranquil, so that a favourable 
voyage soon broughtj them, delivered from their peril, to 
Byzantium. 

As they approached the shores of Thrace, a great 
multitude of men appeared with drawn swords, and brandish- 
ing lances in their hands, ready to fall upon those who 
came within their reach- But the blessed Andrew made the 
sign of the cross towards them, and prayed to God for the 
preservation of his followers. Then the angel of the Lord, 
passing through the band with great radiance, touched their 

* In the Pseud o Abdias this person is called Calixtus. We are now 
fairly laiided in Asia, as those words are inserted after Nice in the original 
work. 



ST. ANDEEW'S MIRACLES. 227 

swords and, falling on tlie ground, they allowed the man of 
God and those who accompanied him to go through unhurt. 
The apostle Andrew arrived at Perinthus, a maritime city of 
Thrace, where he found a vessel which was to sail with all 
speed for Macedonia. The angel of God commanding him 
to embark in it, when on board he preached the word of 
God, and the pilot and all the sailors believed in the 
Lord. 

There was at Thessalonica a young nobleman extremely 
rich named Exous. He went to the apostle without his 
family knowing it, and having heard him preach the word of 
God believed in the Lord, and, leaving his parents and 
property, attached himself to him. His relations searching 
for him, found him at Philippi, and used their utmost 
endeavours to detach him from the apostle by employing 
presents and threats, but were not able to do so. Andrew 
whom they treated with contempt, preached to them the 
word of salvation, and, having got together a numerous 
band, they threw fire upon the house, and being furnished 
with bundles of rushes and sedges and with torches, 
they began to succeed in their elForts to reduce it to ashes. 
Then the young man, having called upon the name of Christ, 
poured upon the flames a bottle of water, and the divine 
power extinguished the fire in an instant, as if it had not 
been lighted. Enraged at the failure of their attempts, 
they brought ladders to scale the walls, and put to the sword 
all who were in the house ; but they were struck blind by 
the power of God, so that they were unable to see how to 
ascend the ladders. Then Lysimachus, one of the citizens, 
acknowledged the hand of God, and strongly rebuked his 
neighbours for their folly, saying : " Why, O simple mortals, 
do you consume your strength in fruitless attempts ? God 
himself fights for these men, and you do not perceive it ! 
Cease this folly, lest the anger of Heaven should destroy 
you." At these words they were pricked to the heart, and 
while the darkness of night was thickening around them, 
they were illuminated by light from heaven. Going up 
they found the apostle praying ; and, prostrating themselves 
t)n the floor, entreated his forgiveness, which they received. 
He then kindly raised them up, and, being strengthened in 
the faith, they praised the Lord. However the parents 

Q 2 



228 OEDEEICIJS yiTALIS. [e.II. CH.IT. 

of the young man ■were not among the number of those 
who believed ; and cursing their child, they returned to their 
own country, where, at the end of fifty days, they both 
expired in the same hour. Then the young man received 
his whole patrimony from his fellow-citizens, by whom he 
was much beloved, and attaching himself to the apostle, he 
distributed amongst the poor the revenue of his estates. 

Some time after they both departed together for 
Thessalonica, where the citizens thronged about them in the 
theatre with great rejoicings. While Exous was preaching 
to them the word of God, the blessed Andrew, admiring his 
wisdom, listened in silence. After this, at the request of the 
multitude, he ordered them to bring to him Adimathus, the 
sick son of Carpianus. This young man, having received 
from his father an assurance that he would be healed, be- 
lieved his words, and putting on his clothes, rose from the 
bed on which he had lain twenty-three years, and, run- 
ning swiftly, so that he left his parents behind him, 
repaired to the theatre, fell down at the apostle's feet, and, 
to the amazement of the people, returned thanks for the 
recovery of his health. A certain Thessalonian, having 
implored the apostle to heal his son who was possessed with 
a devil, Satan, the master of a thousand artifices,^ suffocated 
him in a secret chamber. The father, having found his 
son dead, and being in great affliction at his bereavement, 
yet strong in faith, did not give up all hope, but had the 
corpse carried to the theatre by his friends, and told his 
case to the apostle. The latter, turning to the people, ex- 
claimed : " O men of Thessalonica, what can it profit you 
to witness the performance of miracles, if 3^ou do not 
believe?" However, as they promised to believe if they 
saw the miracle, the apostle Andrew said to the dead man : 
" In the name of Jesus Christ, rise up, young man !" And 
he immediately arose, and the people astonished, faithfully 
kept the promise they had made to receive the faith. 

Medias of Philippi, begged St. Andrew with tears, to have 
. compassion upon his son, who was very ill ; and the bene- 
volent apostle kindly listened to his request, and, taking him 

1 Mille Artifex; one of the names which it was pretended the devil 
sometimes gave himself as will be seen hereafter in the legend of St. 
Marcellus. 



ST. AKDEEW AT PKILIPPI. 229 

bj the hand, went with him to Philippi. As thej were 
entering the gate of the city, an old man came up to them, 
and implored his interference in favour of his sons, who 
were thrown into prison by Medias for some offence they 
had committed. The apostle exhorting him to be merciful, 
Medias threw himself at his feet, and, in the hope of obtain- 
ing the recovery of his son, pardoned not only the two sons 
of the old man, but also seven other prisoners for whom no 
one had said a word. "When they were set at liberty, the 
apostle healed Philomede, who had been twenty-two years 
infirm. 

The people then calling upon the apostle to cure their 
sick also, Andrew, trusting in the Lord, said to the young 
man whom he had just healed : " Visit all the sick at their 
own homes, and command them to rise up in the name of 
Jesus Christ, who has restored you to health." He imme- 
diately obeyed the apostle's word, and the people believed 
when they saw the miracles, and offered many presents to 
the man of God ; but as he preached the word of life to all 
without reward, he refused to accept of anything, but in- 
vited all men to come and receive the faith. He also healed 
gratuitously the daughter of Nicholas, who was in a 
languishing state ; although her father offered him a very 
valuable present, that is to say, a gilded chariot with four 
white mules, and the same number of horses. 

The fame of the apostle's miracles on the sick spreading 
throughout Macedonia, Quirinus, the proconsul, was in- 
censed against him, and he sent soldiers to Thessalonica to 
lay hands upon Andrew ; but when they saw the brightness 
of his countenance, they dared not touch him. The people 
of the place who believed in Grod receiving information that 
a band of soldiers was coming there to do harm to the 
apostle, they became so exasperated that they were ready to 
fall on them with swords and staves ; and although the 
apostle forbade, they could scarcely refrain from murdering 
them. Again the proconsul sent a band of soldiers, who, 
when they saw the apostle, became so agitated that they 
were not able to utter a single word. The third time, the 
proconsul despatched a large body of troops, one of whom 
was possessed with a devil, and made use of the most violent 
language against the proconsul in his absence. The demon 



230 OEDERICUS TITALIS. [b.II. CK.IY. 

afterwards came out of the soldier, wlio fell down on the 
ground and expired. At last, the proconsul came himself 
transported with fury, but, although he stood near the 
apostle Andrew, was not able to see him until he heard him 
speak. This wretched man, seeing the holy servant of Grod, 
loaded him with abuse and threats. But the benign saint 
endeavoured to calm the fury of the judge with gentle 
words ; and, pouring forth prayers to the Lord, restored 
the dead soldier to life. The proconsul, however, still per- 
sisted in his insane fury, and the next morning ordered that 
wild beasts should be let into the arena, and the blessed 
apostle led to the spot, and thrown to the wild beasts. 
The savage guards then dragged Andrew by the hair towards 
the arena, threw him in, and let loose upon him a ferocious 
and horrible boar. The animal walked three times round 
the holy man of Grod, but did him no harm. By order of 
the proconsul, another boar^ was brought by thirty soldiers, 
and driven into the place by two hunters ; but it would not 
touch Andrew, while it tore the huntsmen in pieces. At 
last, giving a horrible grunt, it fell down and expired. 
While the people, for this deliverance, were celebrating the 
praises of the Lord, an angel was seen to descend from 
heaven to comfort the holy man of God, who was still in the 
stadium. At last the cruel proconsul, boiling with rage, 
commanded that a most ferocious leopard should be let 
loose; but as soon as it was at liberty, disregarding the 
apostle, the animal ascended the steps to the proconsul's 
seat, and, leaping on his son, instantly strangled him. 
Utter madness must have possessed the proconsul, for 
he was not at all grieved at what had happened, nor did he 
speak a word. Then the blessed man comforted the people 
with the love of God, and, to strengthen their faith, 
promised to restore to life the proconsul's dead son. 
Prostrating himself upon the ground, he prayed for a con- 
siderable time, and then, taking the hand of the deceased in 
his own, raised him up in the name of the Lord. The people 
witnessing this miracle magnified God, and would have killed 
the proconsul Quirinus, who in his unbelief had dared resist 
God's saint ; but the apostle would not permit them. The 
proconsul retired to the pretorium in confusion. 

^ According to the supposititious Abdias it was a bull. 



ST. AKDEEW'S MIEACLES. 231 

Moved by the entreaties of a certain Tvoman, the blessed 
Andrew followed her to a farm where there was a serpent 
fifty cubits long which devastated the whole country. At 
the approach of the apostle, the serpent made a loud hissing, 
and, erecting its crest, glided towards the persons present to 
their great consternation. Then the holy man of God said 
to it : " Hide thy head, cruel monster ! thou hast raised it 
since the creation of the world for the destruction of the 
human race. Submit thyself to the servants of God, and 
die." The serpent immediately uttered a tremendous groan, 
and, coiling round the trunk of a large oak-tree that was 
near, vomited a stream of poison and blood, and expired. 
The apostle afterwards went to the farm-house belonging to 
the woman, where he found her little child lying dead, having 
been struck by the serpent. He then sent the parents to 
see that the reptile whicli had killed the infant was itself 
dead. After they had left the place, the apostle said to the 
proconsul's wife : " Go, and restore the child to life." She, 
nothing doubting, approached the corpse, and said : " In the 
name of my God, Jesus Christ, rise up whole;" and the 
child instantly arose, to the great joy of all present, who 
returned thanks to God. 

On the following night, the blessed Andrew saw Peter and 
John in a vision, when it was revealed to him that in a short 
time he would be hung on a cross, and thus be a partaker 
of the same suffering as the Lord Jesus at his crucifixion, 
"Wliereupon he called together the brethren, and related 
the vision to them, explaining its meaning, and endeavour- 
ing to console them in the afl9[iction which the announcement 
of his sudden departure from this world had caused them. 
During five days he instructed them in saving truths, and 
having, by devout prayers, commended the flock of his 
church to God, he departed for Thessalonica.^ 

The proconsul, Lisbius, endeavouring to resist the designs 
of God, sent soldiers on several occasions to take Andrew, 
but his abominable attempts were foiled ; and, on the arrival 
of the apostle, Lisbius was cruelly scourged by two demons. 
Upon this he sent for the man of God, and confessed his 
iniquity to him in the presence of all the people. He then 

1 Our author has forgotten to add that from Thessalonica St. Andrevr 
repaired to Patras, where the events that follow took place. 



232 OEDEEICTIS VITALIS. [b.II. CH.IT. 

willingly heard the word of God from the apostle's lips, and 
being healed of his wounds, believed in God, in whose laws 
he thenceforth diligently walked. 

Calista, the proconsul's wife was extremely jealous of 
Trophima, who formerly had been his concubine, but who, 
being now united to another man, adhered to the apostolic 
doctrine. She therefore, unknown to Lisbius, sent for her 
steward, and ordered him to condemn the woman as a 
prostitute, and to send her to the stews. Trophima being 
therefore conducted there, and given up to the bawd, made 
incessant prayers to God. When the lewd presented them- 
selves, she held out the gospel which she carried in her 
bosom, and suddenly their libidinous desires were ex- 
tinguished. One day a gay young man of very licentious 
habits drew near her, and would have violated her, but she 
resisted him, and, during the struggle, the gospel fell to the 
ground. Then Trophima, in the extremity of her distress, 
lifted up her hands to heaven, and, bursting into tears, said : 
" Do thou. Lord, save me from pollution, for whose name I am 
devoted to chastity." The angel of the Lord immediately 
appeared to her, and the debauched youth fell down at her 
feet, and expired ; she, however, comforted by divine grace, 
blessed God, and raised the young man to life in the name 
of Christ, and the whole city ran to witness the spectacle. 

Calista repaired to the bath with her steward, and while 
they were in the water together, a horrible demon appeared 
before them, and struck them both dead. This sudden 
catastrophe was followed by great lamentations, and was 
announced to the apostle and the proconsul. Calista's 
nurse, who, on account of her great age, was obliged to 
be carried, implored the apostle to restore her mistress to 
life. Although the husband was justly irritated when he 
heard of the foul offence she had committed, the gentle 
apostle ordered the corpse to be laid where it could be 
generally seen, and, approaching the body, and having 
prayed, touched the head of the woman, saying : " Arise, in 
the name of Jesus Christ, my God." The woman im- 
mediately rose up, and begged to be reconciled to Trophima. 
At the sight of these divine miracles the proconsul Lisbius, 
under the guidance of the apostle, made progress in the 
faith, and faithfully obeyed his counsels in all things. 



ST. ANDREW AT PATEAS. 233 

One day when they were both sitting on the sea-shore, 
and many persons were there listening with the greatest 
attention to the word of God from the apostle's lips, a dead 
body was thrown by the waves at the feet of Andrew, 
who soon brought it to life again after he had offered up 
a prayer to God. The body was that of a young man 
named Philopater, son of Sostratus, a Macedonian citizen. 
He bewailed the loss of his companions who were drowned, 
and supplicated Andrew to restore them to him ; upon 
which the apostle addressed his prayers to heaven, and the 
waves, obeying his commands, brought to the shores thirty- 
nine corpses, which he restored to life, commanding each 
of the brethren who were there to lay his hand upon a 
corpse, and to say to it : " May Jesus Christ, the Son of 
the living God, raise you from the dead." In this manner 
thirty-nine men came to life again, and glorified the Lord 
Almighty. 

After performing many miracles and good works, of which 
it would be impossible for me to give a particular account, 
the blessed apostle Andrew went to Patras,^ where 
Maximilla the wife of the proconsul Egeas,^ who had suc- 
ceeded Lisbius lay seriously ill. Then Effidima,^ who had 
been converted by the preaching of Sosias, besought the 
apostle to visit Maximilla, lying sick under an attack of 
fever. He repaired to the bed-chamber of the sick woman, 
preceded by Effidima ; and, having prayed, the fever dis- 
appeared, and the woman was cured. The proconsul now 
offered to the holy man of God a hundred silver pieces, 
which he would not even look at. "While the blessed 
apostle was at Patras performing a great number of miracles, 
and many were led to embrace the faith of Christ by these 
displays of corporal succour, Stratocles, the brother of the 
proconsul Egeas, arrived from Italy. He had with him a 
slave named Algmana,^ of whom he was extremely fond, and 
who, having been attacked by a demon, lay in the court, 
foaming at the mouth. This caused much disturbance, and 
Stratocles, whose grief was unbounded, at the instance of 

^ In the original legend, St. Andrew returns to Patras, after a journey 
to Corinth and Megara. 

■^ These names should be written Ageates and EphiJama, or Iphidamia. 
' Alcman. 



234 ORDERICUS YITALig. [b.IT. CH.TT. 

Maximilla and Effidlma, sent for the blessed Andrew, who, 
by his prayers, healed the demoniac boy. In consequence 
Stratocles believed in the Lord; and, strengthened in the 
faith, attached himself to the apostle, in order to hear him 
preach the word of God. Egeas had left for Macedonia ; 
and Maximilla, in the fervour of her spiritual love, sought 
continual opportunities of receiving from the apostle the 
heavenly doctrine, and piously devoted herself to him. The 
proconsul therefore became highly incensed against the 
apostle, and indignant, because his wife, after she had re- 
ceived the doctrine of salvation, would no longer share his 
bed. 

I shall now endeavour to relate briefly the martyrdom^ of 
the most blessed Andrew, inserting carefully in my work 
the account which the pious devotion of our holy mother the 
church has preserved in her libraries, and faithfully recites. 
The priests and deacons of the churches of Achaia were, 
doubtless, eye-witnesses of it clearly, and they described it 
well for the instruction of all the churches founded in the 
four climates of the globe.'^ 

The proconsul Egeas, on his return from Macedonia, 
went to Patras, a city of Achaia, and began to compel the 
believers in Christ to offer sacrifices to idols. St. Andrew 
went to see him, and reasoned with him to bring him over 
to the true faith ; but wisdom could not penetrate his per- 
verse mind. Then the liberal steward of divine knowledge, 
although his attempts to profit the impious Egeas were not 
crowned with success, abundantly supplied the food of his 
heavenly doctrine to others who were predestinated to life. 
He discoursed with wisdom on the mystery of the cross, 
showing plainly why God was made man and suffered for us, 
and fully explained the history of our Lord's passion, and 

1 Ordericus Vitalis always uses the word passion to describe the final 
scenes of suffering and death which closed the career of the primitive 
martyrs. The theological sense of the word is, perhaps, generally under- 
stood from its application in the formularies of the church to our Lord's 
last sufferings, but it has been thought most advisable in these cases to 
substitute the word martyrdom. 

^ Our author often speaks of the "four climates," as we do of the four 
quarters of the globe, and as the theory of the zones is now antiquated, 
the modern phraseology might have been adopted but for its involving an 
anachronism in the state of geographical knowledge. 



ST. Andrew's surrEEiNGS. 235 

the common advantages which mankind had derived from it. 
Irritated at this discourse, Egeas ordered the apostle to be 
seized, and thrown into prison, where multitudes visited 
him from almost every part of the province, intending to kill 
the proconsul and liberate the apostle by forcing the prison 
doors. But Andrew restrained them by his salutary counsels, 
spending the whole night in teaching them, and, recalling to 
their memory the patience of the Lord Jesus, earnestly 
entreated the people not to offer any obstacle to his 
passion. 

The next day the proconsul Egeas sent to have the apostle 
brought before him, and, sitting on the tribunal, employed 
every means to gain him over ; but the saint, whose faith 
was built on God, firmly resisted both his threats and his 
fair words. Egeas at last ordered him to be stretched out and 
lashed with seven scourges of three thongs ; ^ but, after re- 
ceiving these stripes, the brave champion of Christ set forth 
the merits of the cross, and, notwithstanding the fury of the 
tyrant, firmly maintained the truth of his averments. 

Then the enraged proconsul, exasperated to the last 
degree, ordered the apostle to be attached to the cross, com- 
manding the ministers of torture to bind his feet and hands, 
and stretch his limbs as if he was placed on the wooden 
horse, that his sufierings might be protracted, because, if he 
were fastened with nails, he would die too soon. As the 
holy man was led along by the executioners, he was followed 
by a great concourse of people who clamoured loudly, say- 
ing: "What has this just man, the friend of Grod, doue, 
that you are leading him to be crucified?" But Andrew 
walked with composure and cheerfulness, begging tlie crowd 
not to hinder his passion, and continuing to teach his saving 
doctrine. When he had arrived at the spot which was to 
witness his last struggle, and saw the cross at a distance, he 
exclaimed in a loud voice : " Hail, O cross, consecrated by 
having borne the body of Christ, and adorned by having his 
limbs attached to thee as if they were precious jewels ! 0, 
good cross, that hast received from these thy lustre and 
beauty ; long desired, dearly loved, sought for unceasingly, 
and now, at last, prepared for my longing soul!" Having 

^ Septem ternionibus flagellis ; the French translator renders the phrase 
sept fouets tresses, but, as usual, avoids the difficulty. 



236 OEDERICUS TITALIS. [b.II. CH.IV. 

given utterance to this and mucli more full of love and devo- 
tion, the apostle stripped himself, and gave his clothes to 
the executioners, who drew near the cross, on which they 
stretched his limbs, and suspended him with cords. In this 
cruel manner they executed the orders of the impious pro- 
consul. A crowd of more than twenty thousand men stood 
round, exclaiming that the holy man was suffering unjustly ; 
among whom was Stratocles, the brother of Egeas. St. 
Andrew comforted the minds of the faithful, exhorting them 
to patience under worldly afflictions, because martyrdom 
was the best road to an eternal reward. 

Meantime, the multitude thronged to the palace of Egeas, 
shouting with one accord, " What sentence is this you have 
pronounced, proconsul ? You have given an unrighteous 
judgment. Grant us the life of this just man ; restore to 
us this holy man ; do not put to death a man who is dear to 
God." Egeas, hearing these and other such cries of the 
people, was seized with fear, and promising to take the 
apostle down, immediately went with them towards the place 
of execution. As soon as St. Andrew saw him, he exhorted 
him to believe in Christ, and to have recourse to the faith 
for his salvation while it was still in his power. All this 
time, suspended from the cross, he serenely triumphed ; and, 
enjoying the vision of Christ, whom he had loved with all his 
soul and long desired to see, in his excessive joy he ex- 
claimed : "I now see my King; I now adore him; I am come 
into his presence." Then the executioners, handling the 
cross,were unable to touch him ; and, though they all made suc- 
cessively repeated efforts to loose him, the arms of those who 
attempted to take him down became benumbed. Then St. 
Andrew cried with a loud voice, and poured forth a devout 
prayer to God. After having prayed for a long time to 
Jesus, his good Master, he was suddenly surrounded in the 
sight of all the people, by an extraordinary light flashing 
like lightning from heaven, too bright for human eyes to 
bear. This luminous appearance continued about half an 
hour, and, at the moment when it vanished, Andrew, the 
illustrious champion of Christ, gave up the ghost, and 
went with it to meet the Lord. Maximilla, a woman of 
senatorial rank, respectfully removed his body ; and, having 
caused it to be embalmed, interred it in a well-chosen spot. 



ABOUT A.D. 70.] ST. ANDEEW's MAETTEDOM. 237 

But Egeas was seized by a demon as he was returning 
to his palace, and died tormented by the evil spirit, on the 
public road, in the presence of all the people. As for Strato- 
cles, the brother of Egeas, he would not touch the smallest 
portion of his fortune, but withdrew, (tarrying with him the 
body of the holy apostle Andrew. All the inhabitants of the 
province were seized with such a consternation that not a 
person remained who did not believe in the Saviour, our 
Grod. It is reported that, from the sepulchre of St. 
Andrew, manna like flour, and oil of an exquisite odour flow, 
which indicate to the inhabitants of that country what will 
be the fertility of the year. If the produce be small, the 
earth gives her fruit sparingly ; if, on the contrary, the yield 
be abundant, the harvest is also great.^ 

Glorious apostle of Jesus Christ ! inspired by a singular 
aflection for thee, I have briefly described the course of 
thy life so happily adorned with divine grace, to the praise 
of thy omnipotent Master to whom thou didst remain 
faithfuUy devoted until death. Gentle Andrew, kindly take 
under thy patronage me, thy devoted servant, and recom- 
mend me, sinner that I am, by thy pious prayers, to the 
Creator's mercy, in whose worship I desire, with his aid, to 
remain constant through good and evil. As thou didst, 
when hanging on the cross, exhort the cruel Egeas, thy 
persecutor, to embrace the true faith, succour unceasingly 
the faithful sons of the church, who, with the utmost devo- 
tion of their hearts and the modulations of their voices, 
address to thee this pious canticle : " Blessed Andrew, the 
gentlest of the saints, obtain for us the pardon of our 
offences ; and by thy intercession, raise up us who are 
weighed down by the burden of our sins. We are tossed 
among the turmoils of a reeling world, and groan in our 

^ This apocryphal account of St. Andrew's martyrdom may be seen in 
Surius, under the date of the 30th of November ; but, with the exception 
of an unimportant addition at its close, describing the marvels connected 
with the tomb of the saint, the particulars are entirely supplied by the 
pseudo-Abdias, to which reference may be made for the complete legend. 

We have very few authentic notices respecting St. Andrew, the traditions 
respecting him having been only collected in the fifth century. It is 
generally believed that having travelled through Sogdiana (Capital 
Saniarcand), Colchis, European Scythia, Pontus, Epirus, the Pelopon- 
nesus, and Achaia, he suffered martyrdom at Patras about the year 70. 



238 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.V. 

weakness. Beseecli the majesty of the Lord that he will 
grant us the enjoyment of the true light. Amen ! " 

Ch. Y. The calling — life — sufferings — banishment — acts — 
and death of St. John the evangelist, from the gospels 
and legends. 

Tames and John, the sons of Zebedee, were named by Christ 
Eoanerges, or, what would read much better, Boane- 
reem,^ that is to say, the sons of thunder ; on account of the 
strength and greatness of the faith with which they kept 
inviolably, and taught in all its purity, the law of the Lord. 
James [Jacobus] signifies he that supplants, but John the 
grace of God, or in whom is grace. These elect brethren 
well merited such distinguished names, as, by supplanting 
of vice, they obtained a brilliant victory over the crooked 
serpent on the stage of this frail life, and became the 
especial friends of Grod, and, fuU of his manifold grace, 
enlightened our holy mother the church with the doctrine of 
truth. I have inserted in the preceding Book of this work,' 
a plain and short account of the blessed James, carefully 
abridged from the writings of ancient authors ; relating 
liow he carried the gospel into Judea and Samaria, and how 
he suffered martyrdom by the command of Herod, the sou 
of Aristobulus, on the accusation of the chief priests and 
pharisees. I now enter on the inquiry what has been 
written respecting John the divine,^ the beloved disciple of 
Jesus Christ ; desiring to make a brief summary of aU that 
relates to him, to the glory of the God of Sabaoth. I shall 
consult what Mellitus* wrote to the Laodiceans and the 

• ^ This correction was suggested by St. Jerome. 

^ We find the legend of St. James the Great, not in the first, but in the 
present book, page 176. It is borrowed, as before stated, from the pseudo 
Abdias. 

^ Theologo. It has been already remarked in the first book, that our 
author adopts this title of St. John the Evangelist from the writings of the 
Fathers, and the acts of the council of Ephesus. It was constantly used 
by the Greeks; and they gave him also the title of Symmista, the co- 
initiated, borrowed from Clemens Alexandrinus. 

* The following narrative is, as our author states, extracted with great 
exactness, and for the most part literally, from the apocryphal history of 
St. John, attributed to a supposititious Mellitus, bishop of Laodicea. It 
was published at Lucca in the Martyrology of Florentinus, in the vear 
1688. Seep. 130, &c. 



A.D. 95.] ST, JOHN BANISHED TO PATMOS. 239 

other faithful brethren scattered over the face of the earth, 
and what other celebrated antiquarians have published 
relating to St. John, especially Jerome, the commentator 
on the holy scriptures, in his preface to the Apocalypse. 

John, the apostle and evangelist, was chosen to perpetual 
celibacy by the Lord Jesus Christ, who loved him more 
than all the other disciples, insomuch that he allowed him 
to recline on his bosom at the paschal supper, and after- 
wards committed to him the care of his own mother, when 
he was the only disciple standing by the cross ; thus 
appointing to the guardianship of a virgin, one whom he 
had called to perpetual chastity at the time when he thought 
of marrying, "While John was publicly preaching the word 
of Grod in Asia, and incessantly bearing testimony to Jesus 
Christ both to Jews and Grentiley, an accusation against him 
was forwarded to Rome by the malicious enemies of the 
truth. By order of Domitian, who, after the example of 
^ero, raised the second persecution of the Christians, he 
was carried off from Ephesus, and brought before CaBsar and 
the senate, near the Latin gate. Standing firm in the true 
faith, as immovable as a strong and lofty mountain, he was 
thrown into a caldron of boiling oil, by Domitian's command, 
on the second of the nones [6th] of May ; but, protected 
by the divine grace, he came out of it unhurt. On that day, 
in every year the faithful devoutly celebrate a festival to 
his memory. He was then banished to the isle of Patmos, 
where he wTote the Apocalypse, in which the condition and 
order of the church are described, as foreshown to him, 
in seven stages, together with the depths of tribulation 
and the rewards of good deeds. 

At length, by the providence of God, who disposes aR 
things aright, the same year that John was banished, the 
Roman senate condemned Domitian to death for his cruel- 
ties ; ■^ and declared also, by a general decree, that all the^ 
orders issued by the emperor should be considered null and 

^ These words probably refer to some tradition of an intended marriage 
of St, John, which has not reached us. 

■■* St. John's immersion in a cask of boiling oil, and his banishment to 
the Isle of Patmos, one of the Sporades, in the Egean Sea, took place 
May (J, A.D. 95. Domitian was not assassinated during the course of the 
same year, nor for a year afterwards, but in September, 96. 



210 OEDERICUS TITALIS. [b.TI. CK.Y. 

void. In consequence of this decree, St. John the apostle, 
who, by command of Domitian, had been banished with 
ignominy, returned to Ephesus with honour, amid general 
rejoicings. For the whole population of Ephesus went out 
to meet him on his return, and both men and women, in the 
faithful expression of their joy, exclaimed as if with one voice, 
" Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord." 

As John was entering the city, behold they were carrying 
to the grave the corpse of Drusiana, who, loving him fer- 
vently, had desired to see him before her death. The 
widows, and the poor, parents and orphans, all wept together, 
and exclaimed : " St. John, the apostle of God, you see us 
bearing to the grave Drusiana, who, following your holy 
counsels, fed us all, served God in chastity and hiunility, 
and, sighing for your return, said daily : ' O that I could see 
with my own eyes the apostle of God before I die !' " Then 
the blessed John having conmianded them to put down the 
bier, and to uncover the corpse, said with a loud voice : 
" Drusiana, may my Lord Jesus Christ restore thee to life ! 
Rise up on thy feet, and return to thy house, and there pre- 
pare refreshment for me." Immediately she arose, and 
obeyed the apostle's command with great joy, as well she 
might, for it seemed to her that she had been awakened not 
from death, but from sleep. And then the people ceased 
not shouting, for the space of three hours : " There is but 
one God, he whom St. John preaches ; there is but one Lord, 
Jesus Christ." 

At that time, two brothers, who were extremely rich, sold 
their inheritance by the advice of Crato the philosopher, and 
bought diamonds of singular value, which they crushed in 
the forum before all the people ; thus making an osten- 
tatious exhibition of their contempt for the world. St. John 
happening to be passing through the forum, witnessed this 
display, and pitying the folly of these misguided men, kindly 
gave them sounder advice. Sending for Crato their master, 
who had led them into error, he blamed the wasteful de- 
struction of valuable property, and instructed him in the 
true meaning of contempt for the world according to 
Christ's doctrine ; quoting the precept of that teacher, his 
own master, when, in reply to the young man who inquired 
of him how he might obtain eternal life, he said : " If thou 



LEGENDS OF ST. JOHN. 241 

wilt be perfect, go and sell all that thou hast and give to the 
poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and coins 
and follow me." ^ Crato the philosopher, acknowledging the 
soundness of the apostle's teaching, entreated him to restore 
the jewels which had been foolishly crushed to their former 
condition. St. John then gathered up the precious frag- 
ments, and while he held them in his hand, prayed for some 
time, with his eyes raised to heaven. His prayer being 
concluded, and all the faithful present having said Amen, 
the broken pieces of the jewels became so closely uiiited 
that there remained not the slightest appearance of any 
fracture. Then Crato the philosopher, with all his disciples, 
threw himself at the apostle's feet, believed, and were bap- 
tized; and Crato, preaching openly the faith of the Lord 
Jesus, became a true philosopher.^ Moreover, the two 
brothers, who before destroyed their property to no purpose, 
now, in obedience to the evangelical precept, sold their 
jewels and distributed the price in alms to the poor of 
Christ. And a multitude of believers began to attach 
themselves to St. John and to follow his steps. 

Atticus and Eugenius, two brothers,^ and noble Ephesians, 
imitated the conduct of the youths already mentioned; 
selling all that they had and distributing to the poor, and 
becoming followers of the apostle as he went about the 
cities preaching the word of God. It happened that as 
they were entering Pergamus they beheld their own slaves 
parading in garments of silk, and making a display of worldly 
vanities. The devil's malice shot the arrow, when the pride 
of the two brothers was wounded at seeing their slaves 
swaggering and gay, while they were poor and reduced to a 
single cloak. The blessed apostle, comprehending the wiles 
of Satan, directed that bundles of straight twigs and small 
pebbles Irom the sea-shore should be brought to him. 
"When this was done, he called on the name of the Lord, 
and the twigs were turned into gold, and the pebbles into 
precious stones. Then the holy apostle said to the brothers : 

• Matt. xix. 21. 

* Either this Crato, or another of the same name, is subsequently men- 
tioned by Ordericus in book ii. c. 1 1 of the present history. 

^ In the original legend the brothers, whose names are here given, are 
the same as those mentioned in the preceding paragraph, 
VOL. I. B 



242 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.T. 

" Go, for seven days, among the goldsmiths and jewellers, 
and let me know when you have tested your gold and dia- 
monds." The brothers accordingly went round the work- 
men's shops, and returning at the end of the seven days 
informed the apostle that the goldsmiths declared the gold 
to be pure, and the jewellers pronounced the stones precious. 
Then St. John said : " Go, now, and re-purchase the lands 
which you sold, for you have lost the heavenly inheritance. 
Clothe yourselves in robes of silk, that you may be as gay 
as the rose for a season. The flower is delightful both for 
its scent and colour, but soon fades. You envied the ap- 
pearance of your slaves, and regretted that you had reduced 
yourselves to poverty ; flourish then for a while that you 
may decay and perish ; be rich in this world, that you may 
be stripped of all in the next. Is not the hand of the Lord 
powerful to make his servants abound in wealth and above 
measure glorious ? But he has appointed a trial of the 
soul, that men may believe that these will obtain eternal 
riches, who for his sake have relinquished their worldly ad- 
vantages." 

While the blessed John was delivering these edifying 
precepts and others like them, and descanting nobly on the 
misery and contempt of the world, on apostacy, and perse- 
verance in well-doing, it happened that a young man named 
Stacteus was followed to his grave by his mother who was a 
widow. In her deep affliction the mother, with the crowd 
of people attending the funeral, threw themselves at the 
apostle's feet, and besought him with many tears, that in 
the name of God he would restore this young man to life, 
as he had done in the case of Drusiana, and kindly relieve 
the distress of his mother and his newly married wife. 
Then the apostle knelt down and prayed for some time 
weeping, thrice rising from his supplications, lifting his 
hands to heaven and praying in secret. Then he directed 
the body to be loosed from the grave-clothes, and calling on 
the youth by name, commanded him to arise and give a true 
account of what he had seen while he was dead. Then 
Stacteus arose, and worshipping the apostle began to rebuke 
his disciples : " I saw," he said, " your angels weeping, 
while Satan's angels were rejoicing at your humiliation. I 
saw the kingdom prepared for you, and chambers garnished 



ST. JOHX AT EPHESUS. 243 

with bright jewels, full of delights, feasts, riches ; endless 
life, eternal light, and all the joys which you have lost. I 
saw also the chambers of darkness, for which, alas ! you have 
made the exchange, — full of dragons and pit-falls, full of 
hissing flames and torments, full of corruption and sorrow." 
While Stacteus was describing these and similar scenes, tho 
crowd of people who listened to him were struck with 
amazement. But Atticus and Eugenius, with the young 
man raised from the dead, threw themselves at the apostle's 
feet together, and entreated him to intercede with the Lord 
on their behalf. At length, St. John gave this answer to 
their entreaties, that they should do penance for thirty days, 
during which time their chief prayer to God should be that 
the golden twigs should be restored to their primitive state, 
and the stones become as worthless as they were at first. 
It turned out, however, that the thirty days elapsed without 
the gold being changed into twigs, or the jewels into peb- 
bles. The brothers then came to the apostle in great 
distress, and besought his clemency with many tears and 
prayers. Compassionating their grief and penitence, and 
moved by the intercessions of the multitude on their behalf, 
the apostle then ordered the twigs to be carried back to 
the wood, and the pebbles to the beach, restored to their 
own nature. Upon which, the two brothers recovered the 
grace they had forfeited, so that, as they had done before, 
they cast out devils, healed the sick, gave sight to the blind, 
and performed many miracles in the name of the Lord. 

While the name of John was in every one's mouth, and 
his character reverenced, not only at Ephesus, but through 
the whole province of Asia Minor, that city became the 
scene of tumults raised by the idol-worshippers. The 
heathen, roused to frenzy, dragged John to the temple of 
Diana, and used all their efforts to induce him to join in 
their impure sacrifices. But he, inspired by the Holy 
Spirit, proposed to them that they should accompany him 
to the church dedicated to Christ, and, invoking the aid of 
Diana, lay it in ruins by her power ; while, if they failed of 
success, he would, in the name of the God he served, over- 
throw the temple of Diana and destroy her image. Reason 
would convince them that, if he did this, they ought to 
abandon their vain superstition, and follow the path of the 

II 2 



244 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.II. CH.V. 

true and right faith. A proposal of this sort was suited to 
the popular impulse, although some few objected to affairs 
being put on such an issue. And now John gently ex- 
horted the crowd to stand aloof while he with a devout 
mind prayed audibly to Almighty God. Immediately the 
temple and all its shrines fell to pieces and were ground to 
powder, like dust scattered by the wind from the face of 
the earth. The same day twelve thousand heathens, not 
counting women and children, were converted and received 
baptism in the name of the holy Trinity. Then Aristo- 
demus, who was chief pontiff of all the idol temples, at the 
instigation of the evil spirit, stirred up the commonalty to 
a new insurrection, in which citizen was ready to fight 
against citizen. Upon which John, whose loving mind was 
bent on preserving peace, addressed himself to Aristodemus, 
saying : " Tell me, Aristodemus, what I can do to abate 
your indignation." The pontiff replied: " If you desire 
that I should believe in your Grod, drink the poison which I 
will give you, and should you escape death it will be manifest 
that yours is, indeed, the true (rod." The apostle assent- 
ing to this proposal, Aristodemus, to strike terror into him, 
went to the proconsul and begged of him two culprits who 
lay under sentence of decapitation for their crimes. Having 
obtained his consent, they were brought into the forum, 
and there, having drunk poison in the presence of the 
apostle and all the people, forthwith expired. Then 
the blessed John, standing over their dead bodies, fear- 
lessly took into his hands the poisoned cup, and making 
the sign of the cross over it, with devout prayers, he re- 
counted to all who were within hearing the marvellous 
works of Grod. Having ended his discourse, he armed him- 
self with the sign of the cross, and, draining the cup to the 
dregs, remained uninjured, offering thanksgiving to Grod. 
Upon which the spectators shouted: "There is one only 
true Grod, and John is his prophet." 

Meanwhile, Aristodemus, after narrowly watching the 
apostle for the space of three hours, and perceiving that he 
neither looked pale nor exhibited any signs of fear, was so 
far from yielding to the truth that he hardened his heart 
against it, though the by-standers complained loudly of his 
withholding his belief. At last, he required that the 



ST. John's mieacles. 245 

prisoners who had died by the poison should be restored to 
life, upon M^hich all doubt would be removed from his 
mind. The crowd, however, were incensed with rage, and 
threatened that they would set fire to his house and throw 
him into the flames if he ventured further to persecute 
the Lord's apostle. AVTiereupon, John, perceiving that a 
desperate conflict was impending between the faithful and 
the unbelievers, interposed and thus addressed the sur- 
rounding throng : " Patience is an exemplary virtue, one of 
the divine graces which it is our duty to imitate. If then 
Aristodemus is still held in the bonds of unbelief, let it be 
ours to set him free ; and I will never desist from my 
undertaking until I have found a remedy for his disordered 
mind, like a slvilful physician who perseveringly adapts his 
cure to the various forms of his patient's disease. In the 
case of this distempered man, if what has been done already 
fails of restoring him to a sound mind, we must do some- 
thing which hitherto has not been tried." He then called 
Aristodemus to him and invested him with his own tunic, 
while he himself stood covered with his mantle, and gave 
these directions to the pontift': " Go, and, stretching yourself 
upon the corpses of the deceased malefactors, say : " John, 
the apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ, hath sent me unto 
you, that in his name you may be restored to life, and that 
all may know that life and death obey Jesus Christ, my 
Lord and master." Aristodemus obeyed the apostle's com- 
mand, and, struck with astonishment at the restoration of 
the dead men, worshipped John, and, hastening to the 
proconsul, eagerly related to him all that had occurred, and 
then with a wise determination, he said to the proconsul: "Let 
us go to the apostle, and implore his pardon on bended 
knees." This they accordingly did, and John, lovingly 
receiving them, ofiered up on their behalf prayer and thanks- 
giving to God, and enjoined on them a week's fasting. At 
the expiration of this, the apostle baptized them, with their 
parents, their kindred and their whole households ; and they 
destroyed their idol images, and dedicated a church to the 
honour of St. John, in which he was afterwards buried. 

AVhen, at last, the blessed John was ninety-nine^ years of 
age, the Lord Jesus Christ appeared to him with his disciples 
^ In the original legend we read seven. 



2i6 OEDEEICTJS TITALIS. [e.II. CH.T. 

saying : " Come unto me, for it is time that thou shouldest 
sit do\Yn to feast, with thy brethren, in my kingdom," 
Then John, arising, prepared to depart ; but the Lord said 
to him : " On the Sunday, which is the anniversary of my 
resurrection, three days hence, thou shalt come unto me :" 
and having thus spoken ascended to heaven. On the Lord's 
day following, therefore, the whole multitude of the faithful 
assembled with John in the church erected in his name, 
where he celebrated the divine mysteries from cock-crowing 
to the third hour, when he addressed the congregation, 
saying: ''Brethren and fellow servants, co-heirs and par- 
takers of the kingdom of God, ye know what gifts and 
graces, and signs and miracles, together with doctrine, our 
Lord Jesus Christ hath vouchsafed to you through my 
ministry. Henceforth continue without csasing to walk in 
his commandments, for the Lord is pleased now to call me 
out of this world." 

Thereupon he caused a grave to be dug near the stately^ 
altar, and the earth thrown up to be carried out of the 
church. He then descended into the grave, and, lifting up 
his hands to the Lord, said: " O Lord Jesu Christ, at thy 
summons I come, with thanksgiving, to the heavenly ban- 
quet to which thou hast graciously vouchsafed to invite me, 
knowing that I have desired thee with my whole heart. 
Beholding thy face, I am restored to life even from the 
tomb. The odour of thy presence sheds in my heart desires 
of everlasting life. Thy voice is sweeter than honey, and 
thy words far beyond angelic eloquence. I have committed 
to writing thy works which my own eyes have seen, and thy 
words which I heard with my own ears. And now, Lord, I 
commend to thee thy children which their virgin mother the 
church hath regenerated in thy name by water and the 
Holy Grhost. Receive me now, that I may join the com- 
pany of my brethren, with whom thou appearedst to call me 

o thy presence. Open unto me the gate of life and lead 
me to the heavenly banquet, in which all thy faithful dis- 
ciples feast with thee. For thou art the Christ, the Son of 
the living Grod, who, according to the will of the Father, 

didst become the Saviour of the world. To thee, therefore, 

^ Quadratum, four-square. — Duchesne. The reading of the French 
Historical Society is quqdraiam, applied to the grave. 



ST. John's death. 247 

we give thanks for ever and ever." And when all the 
people had answered " Amen !" the apostle was surrounded, 
for the space of an hour, with a light so effulgent that no 
eye could bear to look on it. It was then discovered that 
the grave had been filled up, and contained manna only, 
whicli the place produces to the present day,' being distin- 
guished by the multitude of miracles in honour of him who 
was in an especial manner our Lord's beloved disciple. 
Crowds resort to the spot, pouring out prayers and suppli- 
cations to God, receiving through the merits of St. John, 
the apostle and evangelist, answers to their petitions, and 
obtaining by his intercession the relief they implore from 
their diseases and sufferings. Among whom let me, sinner 
that I am, present myself, humbly paying my devotions, and 
pouring forth my heart in prayer, with faith and hope, to 
the beloved disciple of our Lord : — 

" O blessed John, our Lord's familiar friend, who wert 
chosen by the same Lord Jesus Christ to be a virgin, and, 
being loved more than others, and, specially taught in the 
heavenly mysteries, became his most distinguished apostle 
and evangelist, I humbly implore thy aid ; beseeching thee, 
that unworthy as I am, yet being thy devoted follower, thou 
wouldest vouchsafe to listen to my petitions. Pity, I be- 
seech thee, the pains and sorrows which I continually suffer, 
and, regarding my manifold infirmities of body and troubles 
of mind, cause them to be effectually removed by virtue of 
thy living merits and devout prayers to the Lord on my 
behalf, that being cleansed from my sins I may be worthy 
to join, without ceasing, in the heavenly worship, and with 
the white-robed company of the faithful, offer eternal praises 
to the Lord God of Sabaoth. Amen!" 

Ch. VL Life of St. James the Less — Account of his 
'martyrdom from Segesippus. 

James the less, the son of Alpheus, is called in the 

Gospel our Lord's brother, because Mary, the wife of 

^ The manna produced at the tomb of St. John is spoken of by St. 
Augustine, Gregory of Tours, and other ecclesiastical writers as late as the 
eighth century. Our author appears to adopt the opinion put forth by 
St. Ephrem and others, that St. John did not actually die, or that he was 
immediately restot-ed to life. The opinion was founded on a well known 
passage in his gospel, ch. xl 22, 23. 



2 IS ORDEKICUS TITALIS. [b.II. CH.YT. 

Alpheus, who is named by John the Baptist Maiy the wife 
of Cleophas, was the aunt of our Lord's mother. Im- 
mediately after the ascension, James was ordained by the 
apostles bishop of Jerusalem, which see he filled during 
thirty years. He was held in deep reverence by all the 
other apostles, both on account of his great sanctity and his 
kindred to our Lord ; so that, however they were dispersed 
in their mission of preaching the gospel through distant 
regions, they, from time to time, resorted to him as their 
common father, and humbly implored his counsels, as their 
master, when occasion required. At length, in the seventh 
year of Nero's reign, while James was preaching Christ the 
Son of God, at Jerusalem, he was thrown headlong from 
that temple by the Jews and stoned to death, and buried 
there near the temple on the first of May.^ 

JEegesippus,^ a holy and learned man, who lived near the 
apostles' times, mentions James the Just in the fifth book of 
his Commentaries ; relating that after the death of Eestus^, 
who succeeded Felix as proconsul of Judaea, while the pro- 
vince was without a governor and chief before the appoint- 
ment of Albinus, James, the brother of the Lord, was 
cruelly martyred by the Jews. He was sanctified from his 
mother's womb ; wine or strong drink he never tasted, nor 
ate flesh ; steel never approached his head, nor were his 
limbs anointed with oil, and he never used the bath. He 
wore no garments made of wool, but contented himself with 
a wrapping of coarse cloth. He spent his time in solitary 
prayer for the pardon of his people, until, by continual 
kneeling, his knees became callous, like those of a camel. 
His marvellous self-denial and rigid virtue obtained for him 
the surname of the Just, and of Oblias, which signifies the 
defence of the people. 

^ St. James the Less had the government of the church at Jerusalem 
committed to him by the other apostles, a few months after our Lord's 
ascension. He suffered martyrdom by order of the high-priest Ananias 
about Easter in the year 62, and consequently in the eighth year of Neros 
reign. 

^ Hegesippus, the oldest of the church historians, was bom about the 
beginning of the second century, and died about a.d. 180. Some fragments 
only of his Ecclesiastical History are extant The present legend of St. 
James the Minor is an extract from it. See jEuoebius's -Eccl. Uiit. ii. 23, 
and iv. 22. 



MAHTYRDOM OF ST. JAMES THE LESS. 219 

A person belonging to one of tlie seven Jewish sects 
liaving asked him what was meant by Jesus being the 
door/ he replied: "It means the Saviour." The Jews, 
indeed, are divided among themselves into seven sects, all 
of vhich have departed from the way of truth. Thus the 
Pharisees and Sadducees, the Essenes and Galileans, the 
Hemero-baptists, the Masbuthseans, and the Samaritans,^ 
glory iu distinct names, and hold and defend with obstinacy 
the various doctrines which they severally adopt. Some of 
these, through the ministry of James, were converted to the 
faith of Christ. But when many of the principal Jews 
believed in Jesus, the scribes and pharisees were in great 
consternation, and said : " What remains, but that all the 
people should speedily believe that Jesus is the Christ r" 
They then, acting in concert, presented themselves to James, 
and courteously besought him to ascend a pinnacle of the 
temple at the feast of the passover, and bear a true testi- 
mony concerning Christ to the multitudes of Jews and 
Gentiles assembled at the feast, both from the neigh- 
bourhood and from distant countries. The apostle was 
filled with joy at the opportunity thus aiforded him ot 
declaring the truth, and gave his consent to what they 
entreated, though not according to what those wicked men 
designed ; for the just man knew that this was directed by 
divine inspiration, and therefore it was that he acceded to 
their request. Standing, accordingly, on a pinnacle of the 
temple, he addressed the people with a loud voice, showing 
clearly and without doubt that Jesus, the Son of God, had 
fulfilled all that the prophets had foretold concerning him. 

The apostle James, having now concluded his faithful dis- 
course, the multitudes shouted with joy, " Hosanna to the Son 
of David ! " But the pharisees and other enemies of the truth 
were greatly troubled, and, taking counsel together, ex- 
claimed, " Oh! Oh! The Just one also is deceived." Then 
was fulfilled what is written in the book of AVisdom, " We 
will take away the just, for he is unprofitable to us."^ The 
pharisees now ascending to the place where he stood, said 

^ St. John X. 7. 

"^ Our author has borrowed this enumeration of the Jewish sects from a 
quotation of Hegesippus in the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius, v. c. 22. 
3 Wisd. xi. 12. 



250 or.DEiiicus vitalis. [b.ii. en. tit. 

to liim : " We entreated thee to disabuse tlie people of their 
error concerning Jesus, but thou hast given it strength ;" to 
which James replied, "I have opened their eyes to their 
error, and given them to see the truth." The pharisees 
therefore finding that the multitude received with joy the 
preaching of the apostle, and believed in Christ, threw him 
from the summit of the temple and began to stone him. 
But he fell on his knees praying, " Lord, my Grod and 
Father, forgive them, for they know not what tliey do." 
While he was thus praying, and stones were being showered 
upon him, one of the priests, a son of Rechab, cried out, 
*' Spare him, I beseech ye, spare him, what do ye ? The 
Just one whom you are stoning prays for you." Then one 
of the pharisees, in a frenzy of rage, seized a fuller's beam 
and struck the apostle violently on the head and beat out his 
brains. Thus was the martyrdom of the confessor of 
Jesus Christ accomplished, and he was interred near the 
temple on the calends [1st] of May.^ 

Shortly afterwards, Vespasian waged war against the 
Jews, which the wisest of them believed was ordained by 
divine Providence as a retribution for their cruelty to James 
the Just, as is clearly seen in the works of Josephus, the 
celebrated Hebrew historian. While the unbelieving Jews 
were exposed to double peril, the church of God, triumphing 
in a true faith and saving grace, invokes the help of her 
intrepid warrior in her daily conflicts with pure devotion 
and in these exalted words : " Have compassion, Jacob 
the Just, brother of our Lord, on us who are pufled up with 
pride and vainglory and polluted with the lusts of the world ; 
mercifully hear our prayers, and procure for us the joys of 
the divine light. Thou who didst pray for thy enemies, 
vouchsafe thy aid to us who are devoted to thee, that we 
may obtain the everlasting reward. Amen." 

Ch. VII. Life of St. Philip — Legend from Ahdias of the 
conversion of the Scythians — Predicts his own death. 

Philip is interpreted the lamp's mouth ; by which name it 
is signified that he was entirely open to the infusion of a 
twofold charity, obeying the divine commands and imbued 

^ The martyrdom of St. James took place about the 10th of April, 62, 
and not the 1st of May, aa our author states, probably from that day 



LEGEND OF ST. rillLIP. 251 

with sacred graces; so that,llke a shinin<^ lamp, he enlightened 
barbarous races by his bright example and true doctrine. 
Born at Bethsaida, a town of Galilee, he was among the first 
who followed the steps of Christ. After our Lord's ascension 
he preached the gospel during twenty years to the Grauls or 
Galatians, and Scythians, thus bringing different nations to 
the knowledge of the true light. It happened while he was 
in Scythia that, being seized by the heathen and dragged 
before an image of Mars to compel him to sacrifice to the 
idol, an enormous serpent issued from the base of the statue 
and struck dead the son of the pontiff", who was serving the 
fire for the sacrifice, as well as the two tribunes who govern- 
ed the province, and whose officers held the apostle Philip in 
bonds. The venom exhaled by the serpent also infected 
all who were present, so that they began to faint and to ex- 
hibit symptoms of severe disorder. 

Then Philip exhorted them all to believe in God, and to 
throw down and break in pieces the statue of Mars, fixing 
in its place the cross of our Lord, as the object of their 
adoration ; adding that, if they did this, the languishing 
would recover, the dead be restored to life, and the deadly 
serpent be put to flight in the name of Christ. Those 
who were suflfering immediately exclaimed in the bitterness 
of their pains : " Bestore our strength and Ave will cast down 
the statue." The apostle thereupon called for silence and 
exorcised the serpent in the name of the Lord, commanding 
it to depart forthwith, and without injuring any one, betake 
itself to the wilderness and dwell in solitary places far from 
the paths of men. Upon this, the fierce serpent went forth and, 
gliding quickly away, was no more seen. The apostle also in 
the name of the Lord raised to life the son of the pontiff" and 
the tribunes who had been struck dead, and also restored 
to health the crowd who were infected by the serpent's 
venom. All those who had persecuted Philip repented, 
and were ready to worship him, supposing him a god. 
But he, diligently instructing them for a whole year, imbued 
their minds with the knowledge of the supreme God, and 

having been selected by the church for celebrating his feast. The oldest 
martyrologies placed it on the 25th of March. Its being transferred to the 
1st of May seems to have arisen from the dedication on that day of a 
church built to his honour at Rome in the sixth century. 



252 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CII.VIII. 

zealously sowed in. the hearts of the believers all that 
belonged to the true faith. Many thousands were thus con- 
verted and baptized by the apostle. 

By the abundant aid of divine grace, Philip also built 
many churches, and ordained in them bishops and priests, 
with the other ecclesiastical orders. Being recalled to Asia 
by a revelation, he took up his abode at Hierapolis, where 
he eradicated the malignant heresy of the Ebionites, who 
deny that Jesus was the Son of Grod, and do not believe 
that he took a true human body in the virgin's womb. 
Two of Philip's daughters accompanied him, consecrated 
-sdrgins, by whose ministry the Lord increased the numbers 
of such holy women. The apostle himself, seven days 
before his death, assembled the priests and deacons, with 
the bishops of the neighbouring cities, and predicted in 
their presence that he should live only seven days longer, 
and he enjoined them all to stand firmly in the faith, and to 
be always mindful of the doctrine of the Lord. Then the 
blessed apostle, having exhorted the people at great length, 
departed in the Lord in the eightieth year of his age and on 
the 8th of May, his sacred remains being interred at 
Hierapolis. Some years afterwards his two daughters were 
buried there, one on his right the other on his left ; and 
many miracles are performed by the merits of the apostle in 
answer to faithful prayers ; and there resort affianced 
spouses, and joyfully chant with loud voices : " Prostrate 
before thy tomb, Philip, mouth of the lamp, we beseech 
thee to cause our petitions to reach the ears of the Almighty 
Judge, that we may be saved from the punishment we have 
deserved and obtain the heavenly joys for which we pray. 
Amen.^" 

Ch. YIII. The early ecclesiastical legends to he received 
with caution — Extracts from those relating to St. Thomas 
— His acts in India — His martyrdom — Translation of his 
relics to Edcssa. 

Thomas signifies an alyss, and Didymus a tivin, because 
this apostle, like our Saviour, was full of grace and heavenly 

" This legend of St. Philip is almost literally borrowed from the false 
Abdias, forming the tenth book. All that is really known of this 
apostle is, that he preached the faith in Phrygia, where he was interred. 



CHAEACTER OP THE LEGENDS. 253 

gifts. He preached tlie gospel to the Parthians and Medes, 
the Hircanians and Persians, the Bactriaus and Indians, 
and suffered martyrdom in the city of Calamine the 12th of 
the calends of January [21st of December] not long 
afterwards he became illustrious by numerous miracles in 
the city of Edessa. 

We find many variations in the accounts given of the 
apostles, arising both I'rom tlieir remote antiquity, and from 
the vast distance of the regions in which the labourers in 
Christ's field preached to the barbarians, who so widely 
differed from the Romans both in their customs and in their 
languages. We may therefore have our doubts of some 
things which have been handed down to us respecting the 
holy apostles, because they have come to us from authors 
but little known ; and more especially because pope Gelasius 
and other learned doctors have pronounced them to be 
apocryphal. The illustrious prelate, St. Augustine,^ also 
hesitated respecting some works of this description, and has 
furnished an example against Paustus the Manichean, in his 
scrupulous researches in regard to the life of St. Thomas. 
What I have remarked on these contradictions, which are 
discovered in ancient records through all parts of the world, 
is not intended to disparage the accounts of the miracles of 
holy men, but that whatever is recorded of the apostles or 
other saints by the diligence of early writers should be 
examined with extreme caution,^ for the confirmation of the 
faith and the edification of manners. I will now, in the 
name of Grod, pursue briefly my narrative of St. Thomas's 
journeyings, which were abundantly fruitful, his preaching 

•with his two daughters, who were virgins, and are often confounded with 
the daughters of Phih'p the deacon. It is supposed, from a passage in 
Irenaeus, that the apostle survived at least till the year 81. 

' St. Augustine against Faustus the Manichean, xxii. 79. 

^ Considering the age in which Ordericus Vitalis flourished, this caution, 
and the doubts just before expressed as to the apocryphal character of 
many of these early ecclesiastical records, do credit to the author's judg- 
ment and candour. The passage may be taken as a sort of protest, once 
for all, that although he has inserted in his history large extracts from 
these legends, they must be taken for what they are worth. Considered as 
religious romances, many of them are curious specimens of the popular 
literature of the age in which they were written. 



254) ORDEEICTJS yiTALIS. [b.ii. cn.Tiii. 

Christ with glorious success, and his painful passage, hy 
martyrdom to eternal life. 

Thomas Didymus being at Caesarea, the Lord Jesus Christ 
appeared to him and commended him to Abbanes the minis- 
ter of Gondafor, king of the Indians, who invited him to 
return with him to India, and build a royal palace after the 
Koman manner. During the voyage Thomas conversed 
mysteriously with Abbanes on the Icnowledge of his art, and 
engaged to execute wonderful works of all kinds in marble 
and wood. On the seventh day they reached Andronopolis, 
after a prosperous voyage, and as they were landing were 
struck with the sounds of voices sinc-int]: to the music of flutes 
and pipes and harps. They learnt that the king of that city 
was celebrating the nuptials of his daughter Pelagia with 
Dionysius. Heralds proceeded through the streets, proclaim- 
ing that all should come to the royal banquet, whether rich or 
poor, nobles, citizens or strangers ; and that whoever refused 
would offend the prince. Abbanes and Thomas, therefore, 
presented themselves among the guests ; but Thomas, as was 
his habit, took no part in the merriment and the feast, but 
was wholly occupied in heavenly contemplation. Meanwhile, 
a Hebrew female singer, with a flute in her hand, went round 
the tables singing such melodies as any of the guests required; 
but when she came near St. Thomas, she stood lingering be- 
fore him, for observing that he neither ate nor drank, but that 
his eyes were raised to heaven, she comprehended that he was 
a Hebrew, and a worshipper of the Lord of heaven. Rejoic- 
ing therefore at finding one of her ov^ti race, she began sing- 
ing in her mother tongue : " The God of the Hebrews is one 
only God ; the Creator of all things ; who made the heavens 
and the earth, and laid the foundations of the seas." On 
hearing this, the apostle prayed more fervently, desiring the 
Hebrew girl to repeat the sacred words she had sung, with 
greater care. The steward of the feast, however, rebuked St. 
Thomas because he neither ate nor drank, buSeting him on 

^ In other legends of this saint, the name of this place is written Man- 
drinopolis. It is supposed to be the present Aden, a small sea-port at the 
mouth of the Straits of Babelmandel, at the entrance of the Red Sea, now 
well known from its having become a station on the overland route to 
India. 



LEGEND OF ST. THOMAS. 255 

tVie face. The apostle then predicted in Hebrew what would 
presently befall him before the end of the banquet. And 
thus it happened ; the steward going forth to draw water 
from a fountain, a lion attacked him, and, after sucking his 
blood, departed. Dogs came and devoured his limbs, and 
one of these animals, which was black, came into the guest- 
chamber carrying in his mouth the right hand which had 
bufteted the apostle. The guests were struck with astonish- 
ment at this spectacle, but the Hebrew singer, who alone 
understood the apostle's prediction, threw down her flute, 
and running to him began to kiss his feet, exclaiming: "This 
is either a prophet or an apostle of God: for when the 
steward struck him he foretold this catastrophe in t]ie 
Hebrew tongue, saying, ' I shall not rise from this banquet 
until I see that hand brought hither by a black dog.' " 

The king, inquiring the cause of the disturbance and 
hearing what had happened, called the apostle aside, and 
entreated him to give his blessing to his daughter and her 
husband. St. Thomas therefore accompanied the king to 
the bride-chamber, and placing his hands with prayer on 
the heads of both the espoused, gave them his blessing in 
the name of God, repeating also the names of the patriarchs. 
The apostle was then leaving the chamber, conducted by the 
bridegroom, when a branch of a palm-tree loaded with iruit, 
suddenly appeared in the hand of the young prince. It 
filled him with delight, and he ran quickly to the bride and 
plucked the fruit for her to taste ; and when they had both 
partaken of it, they suddenly fell asleep, and both dream.ed 
the same dream. They saw, as it were, a mighty king 
with a jewelled crown and ornaments, who stood between 
them, and embracing both, thus addressed them : " My 
apostle hath given you his blessing, to the end that ye may 
be partakers of everlasting life." On their waking, each 
told the other the vision they had seen, when, behold St. 
Thomas stood in their presence, saying : " My Lord and 
King, who just now spoke to you in the vision, brought 
me in hither, although the doors are shut, in order that the 
blessing I gave you may be brought to good effect. Tours 
is the innocence which is the queen of all virtues, and the fruit 
of everlasting salvation. Yirginity is the sister of angels, and 
the earnest of all felicity; virginity is the victory gained 



256 ORDERICUS VITALIS. [b.TI. CH. VIIT. 

over the passions, the trophy of faith, a triumph over the 
enemy, and an assurance of eternal rest. For from corrup- 
tion springs uncleanness, from uncleanness guilt, from 
guilt dismay. 

St. Thomas having discoursed thus, and more at large, in 
praise of virginity, and on the foulness of lust, with the 
many inconveniences which frequently arise from carnal 
intercourse, Dlonysius and Pelagia thankfully listened 
to the teaching of the apostle, and thereupon two angels 
appeared to them : " We are angels," they said, " sent by 
God, in consequence of the apostle's blessing, that as long 
as you observe his precepts, we may offer to the Lord all 
your petitions." 

Instructed by these and other pio'is monitions, the husband 
and bride threw themselves at the apostle's feet, saying, 
" Confirm us in all truth, that nothing relating to the 
knowledge of Grod be wanting to us." The apostle answered, 
" I will come to you the following night, and fully instruct 
you before I depart." He came accordingly, and having 
initiated them both into the mysteries of eternal life, he 
sanctified them by the water of baptism. After these events 
he resumed his voyage ; but in the course of time he sent 
them one of his disciples, whom he ordained priest, in order 
that he might be stationed and establish a church in that city, 
in which a multitude of people were converted to God. It 
became the seat of St. Thomas the apostle, and the Catholic 
faith is held there to the present day. Dionysius became 
bishop, his wife received from his hands the consecrated veil, 
and after his death completed her twofold martyrdom ; 
having renounced her marriage rights, she refused also to 
sacrifice to idols. She was consequently beheaded for' her 
confession of Christ ; and the following inscription was 
placed over her tomb in the Greek tongue : " In this place 

LTES THE WIFE OF DlOISTTSIUS THE BISHOP, AND DAUGHTEK 

OF Thomas the apostle." 

On their arrival at Hierapolis, a city of India,^ Abbanes 

^ It was the tradition of the church in the time of Origen that St, 
Thomas carried the faith among the Parthians, and even into India. The 
French editors of Ordericus consider that there is no evidence of the 
apostle having penetrated into the south of the peninsala, " Malgr^ la 
pretention des Portugais d'avoir retrouve des traces et des monuments de 



ST. THOMAS IN INDIA. 257 

presented himself before his king Gondafor, and informed 
him that he had brought with him a skilful architect whose 
name was Thomas. The king consulted with him on the 
plans of the palace he proposed building, and pointed out to 
him the site on which he intended to erect it. Thomas 
then took a rod, and measuring the ground said ; " Here I 
shall place the gates ; the entrance will be towards the east ; 
this first space will be the vestibule ; next will come an 
ante-chamber ; then the hall of audience ; the fourth space 
will be the banqueting room ; the fifth, the winter chamber ; 
the sixth the summer chamber ; the seventh, the room for 
burning perfumes ; the eighth, the warm baths ; the ninth, 
the gymnasium ; the tenth, the kitchens ; the eleventh, the 
cisterns and tanks ; in the twelfth will be the hippodrome 
and circular portico for the promenade."^ The king having 
considered this arrangement, said to Thomas ; " You are, in- 
deed, an architect, and deserve to build palaces for kings ;" 

son s^jour sur la cote de Coromandel." It is, however, well known in 
England that there is a church of native Christians of great antiquity on the 
coast of Malabar, whose traditions are that it was founded by St. Thomas ; 
and the primitive simplicity and purity of their doctrine and institutions, 
■with their secluded and independent existence, afford considerable pre- 
sumptive evidence that their claims mav be admitted. Geddes, in his 
history of this church, says that on the discovery of Malabar by the 
Portuguese in 1504, they found the south inhabited by the Christians of 
St. Thomas, so calling themselves on account of their having been con- 
verted to the Christian faith by the apostle of that name. They have 
always, or at least for 1300 years, been under the patriarch of Babylon. 
Dr. Claudius Buchanan, who visited them a few years since, says in Jiis 
Chrisiian Researches^ " We have as good authority for believing that the 
apostle died in India as that St. Peter died at Rome." St. Thomas is said 
to have landed from Aden at Cranganore, near which, at Paroor, is the 
oldest Syrian church dedicated to that apostle; and the tradition is that he 
continued there till he went to Melapoor and St. Thomas' Mount in 
Coromandel, where he was martyred. 

^ M. Le Prevost, the French editor of Ordericus, considers this curious 
enumeration of tlie various parts of a palace, which differs essentially from 
the ancient arrangement, to have been borrowed from a description of the 
palace of the dukes of Spoleto, about A.i). 814, in which there are found 
Byzantine innovations on the plan of the old Roman houses. This inter- 
esting account has been published by Mabillon (Rerum Italic, ii. p. 11) 
and by Muratori {Annali (TllaliayW. 11), and has been republished by 
Mazois {Raines de Fompeia), who renders important assistance in deter- 
mining the author's precise meaning. See note to the Paris edition of 
Urdericus (1838), torn. i. p. 311. 

VOL. I. S 



258 ORDEEicrs vitalis. [b.ii. en. VIII. 

and the king departed, leaving with him a hirge sum of 
money. 

The apostle, however, began to journey through the 
provinces and cities, preaching the word of God, baptizing 
those who believed, and distributing alms abundantly among 
the poor. He thus converted immense multitudes to the 
Lord, ordained priests, and built cliurches, and for two 
years, during the absence of Gondafor, established the 
faithful. However, when the king returned and learnt how 
the apostle had been employed, he ordered both him and 
Abbanes to be thrust into the lowest dungeon, bound in 
chains. But while he was thinking of having them flayed 
alive and then burnt, his brother Gad died, and as he was 
much beloved there was great lamentation. The barbarians, 
according to their usages, wrapped the corpse in purple and 
fine linen, adding jewelled ornaments, and the king com- 
manded a monument to be erected to his brother of purple 
stone, and his body to be deposited in a sarcophagus of 
porphyry. While the workmen were preparing these mag- 
nificent works which delayed the performance of the funeral 
rites. Gad himself, the dead man, rose again the fourth day 
at the first hour, to the great astonishment and terror of 
all : and the wailings, which according to Indian custom 
accompany a royal funeral, were hushed into silence. 
Meanwhile Gad blamed the king his brother for designing 
to flay and to burn the favorite of Heaven, w^hom the angels 
obeyed. He related that he had seen in heaven a wonder- 
ful palace, planned in the manner Thomas had proposed, 
and reported besides much more on the merits of that holy 
man, and the secrets of heaven. He then hastened to the 
prison, freed the apostle from his fetters, and throwing 
himself at his feet entreated his pardon for Gondafor. 

As the apostle was taking his departure, the king himself 
now rendered more humane, came to meet him, and prostrat- 
ing himself before him entreated his forgiveness. And 
now the apostle, finding the opportunity favourable, applied 
himself to preaching amongst the barbarians and proclam- 
ing the truth. Among other things he said : " Jesus Christ, 
my Lord, hath shown you great favour in that he hath revealed 

' The word memoria is here used in the sense of monumentum. St. 
Augustine uses the phrase, memoria marmorata, a tomb of marble. 



ST. THOMAS TRAYELS TO UPPER INDIA. 259 

his secrets to you. Lo, your provinces are full of cliurches ; 
prepare yourselves, therefore, that you may be sanctilied." 
Such words and many more he addressed to the princes, 
instructing them in the faitli and the true religion. 

All India speedly heard the report of the wonders which 
the Lord wrought by the hands of his apostle, and great 
multitudes of people were gathered to him from the cities 
both far and near. They proposed to pay him divine honours, 
offering him sacrifices of calves and rams, as they did to 
their gods. Meanwhile king Grondafor, by the apostle's advice, 
commanded them to wait a month until the whole province 
was assembled, and that they should then do what he directed. 
Accordingly, at the expiration of thirty days, multitudes of 
people assembled on the plain at the foot of mount Gazus, 
among whom there were a great number afflicted with divers 
disorders. The apostle then desired them to gather all the 
sick into one body, and placing himself in the midst, he 
spread forth his hands to heaven and prayed on their behalf. 
When his prayer was finished, a ray of light darted upon 
them with such force that they all thought themselves on 
the point of being destroyed by lightning. They fell pros- 
trate on the ground with the apostle, and remained in that 
position for nearly half an hour, being sensible that the 
gracious presence of God was among them ; for many who 
had fevers, and the dumb, and the blind, and the lame, and 
those who had other disorders, were healed by the power of 
the Creator. All now rose from the ground, at the apostle's 
command, and each one, full of joy for his recovery, glorified 
the Lord. 

Then the blessed Thomas mounted on a rock where he 
could see all the people, and be seen of them, and calling 
for silence explained to them fully his true doctrine. The 
Sunday following, nine thousand men were baptized, besides 
women and children. The apostle afterwards, in conse- 
quence of a revelation, undertook a journey to Upper India ; 
and there all the people hastened to hear him, and, being 
witness of the signs and wonders which he wrought, were 
so astonished that they did not dare to despise his preachino-. 
He cast out devils, gave sight to the blind, cleansed the 
lepers, healed all diseases, both rheums and fevers, and 
raised the dead. 

s 2 



260 OEDERICUS VITALIS. [b.II. CH. VITI. 

A certain woman named Sintlce, wlio had been blind for 
six years, was so cured that no sign was left of her former 
infirmity. Hearing of this, the curiosity of Mygdonia, wife 
of Carisius, a cousin of the King Mesdeus, was excited, and 
disguising herself she mingled among her handmaids while 
the holy St. Thomas was preaching a saving discourse on 
the true God. The whole multitude believed at the apostle's 
teaching, and after a fast of seven days received baptism. 
Mygdonia, however, after hearing the apostle's discourse, 
would not again enter her husband's bed. Upon this, 
Carisius went to the king in great anger, and obtained per- 
mission to have the apostle arrested and thrown, into prison. 
Eut Sintice conducted Mygdonia to the prison, and by 
bribing the gaoler obtained access to the apostle's dungeon. 
When he was informed of the faith of Mygdonia, he com- 
manded her to return immediately to her own house, care- 
fully close her chamber, and expect him. Accordingly at 
midnight the apostle appeared in the chamber as he had 
promised, and comforting Mygdonia instructed her in the 
faith and appointed her a seven days' fast. On the eighth, 
he returned in a similar manner, and baptized the believing 
woman, and all others who received the faith. Meanwhile 
Carisius, whose sister King Mesdeus had married, begged 
that the queen Treptia might be sent to his own wife to 
endeavour to recall her to her conjugal duties. King 
Mesdeus consenting, the queen went to Mygdonia, and lavish- 
ing caresses on her, used every effort to induce her to return 
to her former habits. But she, now confirmed in the faith 
of Christ, earnestly refused, and becoming a champion in 
the cause of truth, in her turn contended with Treptia, and 
ended by persuading her to yield to Christ. For she 
replied to that queen with endearing words, adroitly in- 
stilled into her mind a regard for the apostle, and gained 
her heart by a discourse of this kind : " My sister Treptia, 
if you knew all I have learnt, you would consider him not as 
a man but a god, for he gives hearing to the deaf, he has 
restored health in all tnanner of disorders, and sometimes 
he has even raised the dead. He teaches that there is 
another and immortal life, free from pain and all sorrow. 
This very night he restored life to a dead man ; for Sim- 
forus, the captain of the soldiers, went to the prison and, 



ST. Thomas's miracles and mabttedom. 261 

taking upon himself the safe custody of the apostle, received 
him from the gaoler and conducted him to his own house. 
The apostle having prayed, restored to life the only son of 
the captain, who lay dead. Even now he remains in that 
house, teaching all who come to him, and healing all dis- 
orders," Treptia answered : " If it be as you say, let us go 
and see this man ; and if I find these things to be true, I 
also will immediately accept the faith. It is unwise not to 
seek eternal life, and not to believe such extraordinary 
gifts." They went therefore to the captain's house, but 
having entered were unable to obtain access to the apostle, 
who was engaged in laying his hands on people labouring 
under various infirmities. The queen, at the sight of so 
many miracles, exclaimed in astonishment, " Cursed of God 
be those who do not believe the works of salvation." Then 
a man was brought in by the apostle's command suffering 
from elephantiasis, of horrible appearance, with a hoarse 
voice, and his face rough with scabs. The apostle wept 
over him, and praying a long time on bended knees, laid his 
hand on him, supplicating God. Next, a boy appeared with 
a cheerful aspect, and, leading a leper from a retired corner, 
stripped him of his clothes, his skin also peeling off" from his 
body like a tunic, or as when one flays a calf. Being 
brought to the apostle, he signed him with the sign of the 
cross, and having baptized him, caused him to be clothed in 
new white garments. At this spectacle the people magni- 
fied God, and the queen kissing the apostle's feet entreated 
to be baptized ; and he, perceiving that the time of his de- 
parture from the body was at hand, baptized her with the 
rest who were present. 

On the queen's return, she announced her conversion to 
the king, and expressed her determination to continue in 
the faith. Then the king's heart was troubled, and his 
anger being raised against Carisius, he exclaimed, " AVhile 
I was endeavouring to recover your wife, I have lost my 
own; for Treptia is become worse to me than Mygdonia to 
thee." Whereupon he sent for St. Thomas, commanding 
him to be brought into his presence with his hands bound 
behind his back. The king on seeing him, commanded him 
to use his influence with the women he had deceived to 
induce them to return to their conjugal duties. Upon his 



2G2 ORDEEICDS VITALTS. [b.II. Cn.YIII. 

refusing this, and endeavouring to bring his persecutors to 
a saving faith, the king ordered iron plates to be heated, 
and the apostle to be placed upon them, standing with bare 
feet, until he fainted from pain. Immediately, however, a 
spring burst forth, and cooled the iron plates. Next, by the 
advice of Carisius, he was thrown into the furnace at the 
baths : but they were unable to heat the batlis, and the 
apostle again departed unhurt. At last they attempted to 
compel him to offer sacrifice to the image of the sun. The 
statue was of gold, standing in a golden car drawn by four 
horses, and appeared to hold the reins loosely, while the car 
was whirled rapidly through the sky. In the temple 
heathen priests led the dance with barbaric rites, and 
virgins sung hymns to the melody of their lyres, with flutes 
and timbrels, and fillets and censers. The king and his 
courtiers having brought the apostle to the temple and 
exhorted him to sacrifice to this image of the sun, address- 
ing the demon in the Hebrew tongue, he commanded him 
to come forth and obey his orders. The demon, having 
made his appearance, stood before the apostle, so that he 
was visible to him only ; and the apostle talked with the 
devil in the Hebrew tongue, while no one knew what he 
said, or with whom he was conversing. 

When, at length, St. Thomas had worshipped the Lord in 
the idol-temple on his bended knees, and in presence of the 
king had enjoined the demon, in Christ's name, to do injury 
to no one, but immediately to destroy the molten image, 
the idol instantly dissolved and melted like wax at the fire. 
Then all the priests raised shrieks, and the pontiff pierced 
the apostle through the body with a sword. The king and 
Carisius took to flight, and there was a great tumult among 
the people, as the greater part shouted for the apostle, and 
sought for his murderer that they might burn him alive. 
The apostle's body was honourably borne with hymns of 
praise to the church, and being embalmed with precious, 
aromatics, great signs and miracles were wrought there, for 
demoniacs were freed, and all diseases were healed.^ 

^ These acts of St. Thomas are not borrowed directly from the false 
Abdias, but from some other legend which has altered some of the details, 
and shortened the conclusion. See note, p. 257, respecting the mission ot 
St. Thomas to India. 



EELICS OF ST. THOMAS AT EDESSA. 2G3 

A long time afterwards the Syrians obtained a promise 
from Alexander, emperor of Rome, on his return from the 
Parthian war after defeating Xerxes, that he would send to 
the petty kings of India to demand that the remains of 
St. Thomas should be restored to them.^ The body of the 
apostle was therefore transported from India, and deposited 
in the city of Edessa in a silver coffer, suspended by chains 
of the same metal. There no idolaters, no heretics, no 
Jews can live. 

Abgarus^ was chief, or king of Edessa, when he had the 
honour to receive the letter written by our Saviour's hand, 
which is read by a newly baptized child, standing over the 
gate of the city, when any barbarous tribe advances to 
attack the place. The very same day the letter is read, the 
invaders either make peace, or retreat, in terror both of our 
Lord's letter, and of the prayers of St. Thomas the apostle, 
surnamed Didymus, who having touched the Lord's side 
cried out, " Lord, thou art my God." 

Greorge Florence Grregory, the venerable archbishop of 
Tours, writes that he had heard some particulars respecting 
St. Thomas from one Theodore w^ho had lately travelled in 
India, and on his return related what follows, as well as 
other circumstances. 

" In India, at the place where the body of the blessed 
apostle St. Thomas was first deposited, there is a monastery 
and church of vast size, and built and ornamented with 
great care. In this church the Lord works a great miracle. 
A lamp burning before the tomb of the apostle gives, day 
and night perpetually, a splendid light, by God's special 
provision, though it is neither fed with oil nor supplied with 
wicks. It is neither extinguished by the wind, nor is it 
injured by any accident, nor does the flame diminish, re- 
ceiving its increase by virtue of the apostle in a manner 
unknown to man, who can only attribute it to divine power. 

1 Our author speaks of the expedition of Alexander Severus against the 
Parthians under their king Artaxerxes, founder of the dynasty of the 
Sassanides, which was undertaken in the year 233. But we find nothing 
in the history ox that emperor to countenance the demand here attributed 
to him. It is, however certain, that as early as the fourth century, the 
body of St. Thomas was supposed to be translated to Edessa. 

* Agbarus. 



264 OHDERICUS YITALTS. [b.II. CH.YIIT. 

At the city of Edessa where, as we have already said, the 
blessed remains of the apostle are deposited, at the feast of 
the anniversary of his translation, a great concourse or 
people assembled from foreign countries both in performance 
of vows and for the purposes of commerce, and during a fair 
held for thirty days there is free liberty to buy and sell 
without payment of any tolls. In these days, which happen 
in the fifth month, great and unusual favours are conferred 
on the people. No quarrels take place in the throng, and 
neither flies infest tainted meat, nor is there scarcity of 
water for the thirsty crowd ; for although during the rest of 
the year water is drawn from the wells at a depth of a 
hundred feet ; during the fair, if you only pierce the surface, 
springs burst forth abundantly. There can be no doubt 
that these wonders must be, attributed to the apostle's 
power. "When the days of the feast are expired, tolls are 
again levied, the flies return, the springs dry up ; but rain 
sent by Grod's providence so washes the whole court of the 
church from the filth and rubbish accumtdated during the 
fair, that that you would suppose the pavement had not 
been even trod upon."^ 

Almighty God, our just and compasionate judge and 
patient rewarder, glorifies his saints, crowning them with 
ineflable honour, chastises mankind by his terrors, and in 
punishing, saves them by penitence. Let us supplicate him 
while we groan in this valley of tears, let us give him thanks 
for his unspeakable benefits, and let us hasten to him by 
keeping his commandments. Let us also pray to St. 
Thomas the apostle, surnamed Didymus, and confiding in 
his intercession, say in our chaunts : 

" Thomas, who didst touch the side of our Lord, we 
beseech thee by those sacred wounds which have taken away 
all the sins of the world, cleanse us from our guilt by thy 
prayers. We feel the cruel wounds of our sins ; we groan 
in our trouble, and pray with tears : in pity off'er for us thy 
powerful intercession to Grod the thunderer. Amen. " 

1 The preceding paragraph is literally transcribed from Gregory of 
Tours, De Glor. Martyr, i. 32. 



ST. BARTHOLOMETV. 265 

Cii. IX. Acts of f^L IjartJiolomew — Le(/end of his preaching 
and miracles in India — Description of his personal habits 
— His onartijrdom — His rslics translated to JLipari and 
Deneventum. 

Bahtiiolomew is a Sjriac word, signifying the son of him 
who suspends the water.^ It fell to this apostle's lot to 
preach in Lycaonia ; afterwards he carried the gospel into 
Assyria and the third India. At length, when dwelling at 
Albano, of the greater Armenia, he was flayed alive by tho 
barbarians, and beheaded by order of King Astyages, being 
interred on the 9th of the calends of September [24th 
August.] His sacred body was at first translated to the 
island of Lipari, and thence to Beneventum in the year of 
our Lord 809, where it is held by the fiiithful in pious 
veneration. Our careful researches will now be directed 
to the examination of the whole history of his passion, and 
the following brief account is inserted from ancient manu- 
scripts. 

According to historians, India is divided into three 
regions, which are reported to have contained five thousand 
towns, and nine thousand people.^ The first India extends 
as far as Ethiopia ; the second to the Medes ; the third to 
the extremity, where it is bounded on one side by the region 
of darkness, on the other by the ocean. It was to this part of 
India Bartholomew came, and entering a temple in which 
stood the idol Astaroth,^ he made it his resting place ac- 
cording to the custom of pilgrims. On the apostle's arrival 

^ ^ The word Bartholomew is evidently Syriac. Our author's version of 
i\., filiiis yiispendentis aquas, which is given literally in the text, seems like 
the vi(pf\7] ytpha Itvg, ** the cloud-compelling Jove," of Homer ; but it 
is difficult to conjscture its origin. It is probable that Bartholomew reallv 
means the son of Tholomaea, or Tholomi, referring to the place of the 
apostle's birth, as Simon the Canaanite is called in the Syriac Cananaia. 

' We cannot suppose that Ordericus would assign a population of only 
9000 souls to a country containing 5000 towns. There must, therefore, be 
some error in the MSB., though they seem all to agree, and the enumera- 
tion is made in words, and not in figures. 

^ The worship of this idol, the Syrian Astarte, was early introduced 
among the Hebrews (1 Sam. xii. 10), and encouraged by Solomon and 
Jezebel. Astarte was represented as a female, and like the Egyptian Isis 
and the Ephesian Diana, typified the moon, while Baal was woi-shlpped as 
the sun. 



266 OEDEBICTJS VITALIS. [b.II. CK.VIII. 

Astarotli became dumb, giving no answers to those who 
consulted the idol, nor being able to succour those who were 
injured. The temple now became full of diseased people, 
Astaroth making no reply to those who daily offered sacri- 
fice ; the infirm therefore, who where attracted there from, 
distant parts, miserably bewailed their sufferings, and the 
idol- worshippers, neither profiting by their sacrifices, nor by 
cutting themselves according to their custom, went to 
another city where a demon named Berith^ was worshipped, 
and offering him sacrifice, inquired respecting the silence of 
their own god, and other recent occurrences. The reply 
was this ; " Your god is held captive, bound in chains of flame, 
that he cannot utter a word, nor scarcely breathe, since 
Bartholomew the apostle of God arrived in this country." 
They then asked him who this Bartholomew was ; to which 
the demon answered : " He is the friend of the supreme God, 
and is come into this country for the purpose of expelling the 
gods worshipped by the Indians." The votaries of Astaroth 
said : " Tell us by what tokens we may distinguish him 
among the millions we see." The idol replied : " His hair 
is black and curling, his skin fair, his eyes full, his nose 
regular and straight, his ears covered by his long hair, his 
beard is long and but slightly grey, and his stature is of 
the middle height, neither long nor short. He wears a 
white tunic, without sleeves, fastened with purple clasps, over 
which is a white mantle having ruby coloured gems in the 
corners." For twenty-six years he has worn the same 
clothes, which are neither soiled nor have they grown old. 
So also the sandals worn on his feet during the same period 
exhibit no signs of decay. A hundred times in the day he 
bends his knees before God, a hundred times in the night 
he rises to pray. His voice is clear as the sound of a 
trumpet. The angels of God are his companions, and per- 

* See Judges viii. 33, and ix. 4, where this idol is called Baal-Berith. 

'"* M. L. Provost remarks that our author, or we should rather say the 
legend he copies, has given St. Bartholomew a dress, the Byzantine 
magnificence of which is little accordant with apostolic simplicity. The 
colobium, here translated tunic, was a vestm.ent without sleeves, or having 
them very short and close-fitting, in opposition to the full sleeves of the 
dahnalic, which was substituted for it in the dress of the priests by Pope 
Silvester. However this may be, the whole description of the apostle 
is highly graphic and characteristic. 



LEGEND OF ST. EARTHOLOMEW. 267 

mit him neither to suffer fatigue nor hunger. His aspect is 
always the same, the same spirit animates him, he is always 
serene and happy. He foresees all things, knows all things, 
and speaks and understands the languages of all the nations 
of the earth. Even now he is aquainted with your inquiries, 
and my replies respecting him. The angels of God obey him, 
and are his precursors." Having said thus much and more, 
the demon was silent. 

On their return, these people searched all the places fre- 
quented by strangers, narrowly observing their persons and 
dress ; but for two days they were unable to discover the 
apostle. At length a demoniac named Seusticus cried out : 
*' Apostle Bartholomew, thy prayers send fire through me." 
Upon which the apostle said : " Hold thy peace, and come 
out of him." And the man, who for many years had been 
tormented by an evil spirit, w^as freed from his power. 

Polemius,^ the king of that country, having heard of these 
occurrences sent to Bartholomew, entreating him to heal his 
daughter who was a lunatic, and bit with her teeth, or tore 
or beat, all who came within her reach. The apostle imme- 
diately arose, and accompanying the king's messenger, 
commanded the girl to be released from the fetters with 
which she was bound : and when the attendants were afraid 
to come near her, the apostle said : " I hold in chains the 
enemy who had taken possession of her ; go then and loose 
her, let her wash and eat, and bring her to me to-morrow 
early ;" they did, therefore, as the apostle commanded, and 
the demon was no longer able to torment her. Then the 
king loaded two camels with gold and silver, and precious 
stones and garments, and sent them to the apostle, but as 
he was not to be found, they were brought back to the 
palace. 

At the first dawn of day on the morrow, when the king 
was yet in his chamber, and the door securely closed, the 
apostle appeared to him, all alone, and instructed him in the 
true belief, and the doctrines of salvation. He treated, in 
order, of the incarnation of the Son of God by the immacu- 
late virgin, and of the thrice-repeated temptation, and the 
threefold victory. 

1 In the false Abdias, this prince is called PolymiuSy and the demoniac 
mentioned in the preceding paragraph, Pseustius. 



268 ORDEKICUS TITALIS. [b.II. CH.IX. 

The king Polemius, yielding to the apostolical teaching, 
particularly ordered the idol priests to sacrifice on the 
morrow. When therefore they were sacrificing at day break, 
the demon broke silence, complaining of the torments to 
which he was subjected by the angels. At the apostle's 
command he also openly confessed the frauds by which he 
had injured the people. Then the apostle said to the multi- 
tude ; " See what a god is this, that you thought could heal 
you. Hear now the true Grod, your Creator, who dwells in 
the heavens ; and if you desire that I should pray for you, 
and that all the sick now present be restored to health, 
overturn this idol, and break it to pieces. AVhen this is 
done, I will consecrate the temple in Christ's name, and will 
here sanctify all by his baptism." Upon this the king 
commanded ropes and pulleys to be brought, but with all 
their efforts, the crowd was unable to throw down the 
image. Then the apostle said to them " Loose the fasten- 
ings." And when all were loosened, he commanded the 
demon to go forth and demolish the image ; and he immedi- 
ately obeyed, and broke in pieces the idols of every descrip- 
tion. All therefore who were eye-witnesses shouted with 
one voice : " There is but one Grod who is almighty, and 
him his apostle Bartholomew preaches." Then the blessed 
apostle spread out his hands to the Lord, and prayed long 
for the salvation of all present. And when the multitude 
answered "Amen," an angel of the Lord, having wings 
and shining like the sun, appeared, and taking his flight 
round the four sides of the temple, engraved with his finger 
the sign of the cross on the corner stones. The apostle 
commanded the people also to make with their fingers the 
sign of the cross on their foreheads. He then showed them 
a gigantic Egyptian, blacker than soot, his features keen, 
his beard long, and his hair hanging down to his feet, his 
eyes flashing fire, and emitting sparks like red hot iron.* 
Sulphureous flames issued from his mouth and his nostrils, 
he had bristly feathers, and wings like the sphinx,^ his hands 
vrere bound behind him, and he was secured by chains of fire. 
This malignant devil, having been seen by all the people, was 
set free by the angel, and receiving a command that he 
should depart into desert places, where none of human kind 
^ The false Abdias for sphinx, reads hystrix, a porcupine. 



MAETYEDOM OP ST. BAETIIOLOMEW. 269 

dwelt and -there await the day of judgment, uttering a 
fearful shriek with his terrible voice, he flew away and was 
seen no more. At the same time the angel of the Lord 
ascended to heaven in the sight of all. 

Hereupon King Polemius, with his wife, his two sons, and 
his whole army, and all the people who were healed, and 
the inhabitants of his own city and of the neighbouring 
towns belonging to his kingdom, believing, was baptized ; 
and laying aside his diadem and his purple, devoted himself 
to the apostle. Meanwhile, the priests and idolaters 
assembled from all the temples, and thus complained to king 
Astyages, the elder brother of their prince : " Your brother 
has become the disciple of a magician who takes possession 
of our temples, and breaks in pieces the images of our 
gods." While they were making these sorrowful complaints, 
the priests of other cities came with lamentations to repeat 
the same tale. Astyages, incensed, sent a thousand armed 
men in company with the priests to take the apostle 
whei'ever they could find him, and bring him in chains 
before him. Being brought to the king, and questioned by 
him concerning the true God, he replied W'ith firmness. 
Meanwhile, it was told the king that his god Waldack had 
fallen down, and was reduced to atoms. Then he rent his 
purple robe, and commanded the blessed apostle to be 
scourged with rods, and afterwards beheaded. And an 
innumerable multitude of people from twelve cities, who 
were believers, came with pomp and hymns, and transported 
his body to a spot where a noble church was dedicated to the 
apostle, and there they deposited his sacred remains. On 
the thirtieth day after the deposit, the king Astyages and 
all the priests were taken possession of by the devil, and 
coming to the church acknowledged the apostle, and by the 
just judgment of Grod fell dead. And great fear fell upon 
the unbelievers ; and those who witnessed the manifest 
vengeance of Grod were converted to the faith, and baptized 
by the priests whom the apostle Bartholomew had ordained. 
The king Polemius had, in consequence of a revelation, been 
ordained bishop by the apostle, with the acclamhtions of 
the clergy and people. He worked miracles, and lived twenty 
years in his episcopate, when, having well ordered and 
established the infant church, he departed to the Lord. 



270 OKDEllICUS VITALTS. [b.II. CH.X. 

Many years passed away ; and again a persecution was 
raised against the Christians. And when the heathen saw 
the concourse of people which flocked to the tomb of the 
blessed Bartholomew, offering him incessantly the incense 
of their prayers, they were roused by envy to carry off his 
body, and enclosing it in a leaden chest, they cast it into 
the sea. But by God's providence, the leaden coffin, float- 
ing on the waves, was carried to the island of Lipari, 
where it was revealed to the Christians that they should 
receive it with honour. It was therefore interred with 
suitable attendance, and a magnificent church built over 
the tomb, with a choir of monks to perform divine worship.* 

Cn. X. 'S'^. Matthew preaclies in 3Iacedonia, and finally 
in Etliiopia — According to the legend of Ahdias, he dis- 
concerts the magicians, and converts the king and nation — 
His martyrdom — JVrites his gospel in Hehreiv. 

Mattiiew, or Levi, as he relates in his own gospel, was 
a tax-gatherer, but being called from among tlie publicans 
he was added by our Lord to the number of his apostles, 
and endowed with much grace. He first preached the 
gospel in Judea ; afterwards in Macedonia. At length he 
suffered martyrdom in Ethiopia while he was celebrating 
mass, under Hyrtacus Adelphus, after he had converted 
and baptized in the faitb of Christ the king Eglippus with 
many thousands of his people. He thus happily departed 
in the Lord on the eleventh of the calends of October [21st 
of September]. The following account of the preaching 
and passion of the blessed evangelist is copied from ancient 
histories. 

* This legend is borrowed almost literally from the false Abdias. 
Nothing certain is known of the preaching of St. Bartholomew, or the 
circumstances attending his death. The received opinion is, that he carried 
the faith into Arabia Felix ; but the city of Albano, where the scene of 
his martvrdom is laid, was the capital of Albania on the shore of the 
Caspian Sea. The Emperor Anastasius, having built the city of Daias in 
Mesopotamia in 509, is said to have caused the relics of St. Bartholomew 
to be translated there, it is not mentioned from whence. About the same 
time they were believed to be deposited in the Isle of Lipari, according to 
the tradition followed by our author. Being profmed by the Saracens in 
808, they are said to have been collected by a Greek monk, and carried 
to Beneventum the year following. 



LEGEND OF ST. MATTHETV. 271 

The apostle Matthew, after writing his gospel in Judea 
in the Hebrew tongue, by the divine command went among 
the Ethiopians, where he worked many miracles, and brought 
multitudes to salvation. Having come to the great city 
Nadaber, he detected the artifices of the magicians Zaroes 
and Arphaxath, who said that they were gods, and thus 
imposed upon the king Eglippus and his people. They 
rendered men motionless as long as they pleased : they had 
the art to blind them, and cause them to become deaf; 
serpents inflicted wounds at their command, which they 
healed by their incantations. Their fame spread through 
all Ethiopia, so that crowds flocked to these magicians from 
the furthest parts of the country, and the dupes worshipped 
their deceivers. Indeed, as the proverb says, fear causes 
more reverence to the workers of evil than love to the 
kindly disposed. 

The merciful Lord, therefore, in his providential care for 
mankind, sent Matthew the apostle to the relief of the 
Ethiopians thus doubly black, both naturally and morally. 
The Ethiopian Eunuch Candace,^ who had been baptized by 
Philip the apostolic deacon, upon seeing Matthew, threw 
himself at his feet rejoicing, and brought him with great 
reverence into his house. The friends of Candace resorted 
to him, and hearing the word of life, believed in the Lord 
Jesus Christ, many being baptized, when they perceived 
that the apostle nullified all the mischief which the magicians 
cAused to men. In fact, these impostors wounded all whom 
they got in their power that they might have the credit of 
healing them ; and those passed for being cured whose 
wounds no longer appeared. Eut Matthew, the apostle of 
Christ, not only healed those who had been hurt by the 
magicians, but all others who were brought to him, under 
whatever diseases they were labouring. He also taught 
divine truth to the people, so that all Avere astonished at 
his eloquence, he being able to discourse with ease in the 
Greek, Egyptian, and Ethiopic tongues. Candace, having 
asked him questions in confidence, and in a kindly way, 
the apostle clearly explained to him that the confusion of 

^ Candace was not the name of the eunuch baptized by St. Philip, but 
of the queen in whose service he was. Acts viii. 27. It appears to have 
been a name common to several queens of Ethiopia. 



272 ORDEEICUS VITALIS. [e.II. CH.X. 

tongues occurred at Babel from man's presumption ; and 
again how the Diety incarnate redeemed mankind, and over- 
threw the old enemy by Christ's humiliation; and how the 
Holy Spirit kindled the flame of inspiration in his elect 
servants, imparting to them the gift of tongues, and making 
them fully to understand the hidden wisdom of the holy 
scriptures. While the blessed apostle was engaged in freely 
opening to his hearers many life-giving truths from the 
treasures of wisdom, some one came and reported that the 
magicians, with their serpents, were near at hand. These 
serpents were crested, their breath was as a flame of fire, 
and their nostrils gave forth a sulphureous odour, sufiBcient 
to destroy those who inhaled it. Then St. Matthew crossed 
himself, and in spite of the remonstrances of Candace the 
eunuch, went forth to meet them ; and as soon as he stood 
before the magicians, both the serpents lay down sleeping 
at his feet. Upon this the apostle said to the magicians, 
" AVhere is your art ? E-ouse the serpents from their sleep, 
if you are able." They accordingly endeavoured by their 
magical charms to rouse up the serpents, but entirely failed. 
A crowd had now assembled, and were astonished at what 
they saw. At length the blessed apostle commanded the 
tierce snakes, in the name of the Lord, to retire peaceably 
to their own place, departing without doing harm to any 
one. The serpents forthwith, raising their heads, began 
to depart, and passing through the open gates of the city, 
were never more seen. 

The holy evangelist then addressed the people, who were 
full of joy, in an affectionate discourse, recounting to them 
in order the original state of man, the delights of paradise, 
the envy and craft of the apostate angel, the fall of Adam 
the first man, in consequence of his prevarication, and his 
recovery by the passion of the Son of God. "While the 
apostle was thus largely discoursing on these abundant 
themes, bis audience were suddenly startled by a tumult of 
grief in which lamentations were made for the death of 
Euphranon, the son of the king Eglippus. The magicians 
conducted his obsequies, and not being able to restore hinl 
to life, assured the king that his son was caught up by the 
gods into their assembly above, persuading him that he 
should be numbered among the divinities, and a temple 



ST. MATTHEW PEEACUES IN ETHIOPIA. 273 

erected to his honour. But the queen Euphenisia received 
a wiser counsel from the faithful Candace, and holding the 
magicians in utter contempt, sent nobles of rank to bring 
Matthew to the king. Upon his entering the palace, she 
threw herself at his feet, and fervently and devoutly en- 
treated him to restore her son to life. The blessed apostle 
commended her sincere faith, and pra^^ed to Almighty God 
to give life to the dead. Then taking the young mail's 
hand, he commanded him to arise in the name of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and immediately the young man rose up. 

At the sight of such a miracle the king was struck with 
fear, and causing a crown and purple robe to be offered 
liim, sent heralds through all the towns and provinces of 
Ethiopia, proclaiming : " Come to the city, and see the 
Lord manifested in the guise of man." Great multitudes, 
therefore, assembled with tapers and lamps, with incense 
and offerings of various kinds for sacrifice : but St. Mat- 
thew thus addressed them : " I am no god, but the servant 
of Almighty God, who has sent me to free you from your 
errors, and bring you to the knowledge of the true God, 
that you may worship him. Take away this splendid crown, 
and the silver and gold ; go and erect a temple to the 
Lord, in which you may assemble and hear the word of 
,God together." 

On hearing this, the crowd departed rejoicing, and sixty 
thousand men set about building a temple to God, so that 
the church was completed within thirty days. Matthew 
called it the Church of the E-esurrection, in memory of the 
restoration of the king's son. It became his apostolic seat 
for twenty-three years, and he attached to it priests and 
deacons, ordained bishops in the cities and towns, and 
founded many churches. The king and queen, and the 
different tribes of Ethiopia received the baptism of Christ, 
and the magicians in terror made their escape into Persia. 
Innumerable miracles were worked by St. Matthew, which 
it is impossible to recount in detail. The blind received 
sight, paralytics were cured, demoniacs liberated, and even 
the dead were raised to life. 

The most Christian king Eglippus departed to the Lord 
in extreme old age, and Hyrtacus Adelphus succeeded to 
the government. He desired to marry Iphigenia, the 

TOL. I. T 



274 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.X. 

daugliter of the late king, a consecrated virgin who had 
received the veil from the apostle's hands,. and now presided 
over a company of more than two hundred virgins. Hyrta- 
cus, hoping for success in hia suit through the apostle's 
influence, negociated with him for that purpose: "Take," 
said he, " the half of my kingdom, so that I may be united 
in marriage with Tphigenia." Then the blessed Matthew 
commanded the king, and Iphigenia, and all the people, to 
assemble in the church on Sundav to hear the word of 
Almighty Grod ; which was done accordingly. While strict 
silence was observed in the congregation, the apostle dis- 
coursed concerning celibacy, and a fitting matrimony with 
its proper results, expatiating on these subjects with wisdom 
and eloquence. He showed clearly that indulgence in food 
and the conjugal connexion were not sinful, though they 
may involve some degree of pollution. " Bodily unclean- 
ness," he said, " might be purged by alms and good deeds, 
while sins could not be washed away but by the tears of 
penitence. If any one, after eating carnal food, presumes 
on the same day to partake of the spiritual food of 'the body 
of Christ, he is guilty of a double crime, indecency and 
presumption ; not because he satisfied his appetite, but 
because he aspired to the privileges of the eucharist against 
order, and justice, and the laws of God. Thus, homicide 
and falsehood, though in themselves sins, may yet appear 
justified by their motives. For instance, if any one tells an 
untruth to protect an innocent person, and thus shields him 
against his enemy ; or, if a judge condemns to death one 
malefactor, to save the lives of many innocent persons ; in 
such cases the results are good and profitable. This plainly 
appears in the homicides of Goliath and Sisera, of Haman 
and Holophernes. Thus also when marriages are contracted, 
they are founded on a right principle, if they are engaged 
in with justice and sanctity. But if a king's servant should 
presume to lift his eyes to his master's betrothed bride, he 
would clearly commit not only an offence, but so grievous a 
crime, that he would deserve to be cast alive into the flames. 
His crime would be, not that he married a wife, but that he 
committed injustice against his superior." By this discourse 
and others of the like nature, the apostle -St. Matthew dis- 
suaded King Hyrtacus from marrying the consecrated virgin 



MAETTEDOM OF ST. MATTHEW. 275 

Iphigenia, sliowing that he would incur the divine wrath if 
he presumptuously contracted matrimony with her. This 
only roused the king's wrath, and he departed in anger, 
while the apostle, full of determination and cheerfulness, 
continued his exhortations and prayers. Then he bestowed 
his blessing, before all the people, on Iphigenia, who had 
thrown herself at his feet, and gave the veil to all the vir- 
gins who were present. The whole congregation having now 
received the sacred mysteries, the mass being celebrated, 
returned to their homes, but the apostle remained near the 
altar where he had just consecrated the Lord's body, and was 
praying with uplifted hands when he received his death-blow. 
For then a soldier sent by Hyrtacus stabbed the apostle in the 
back and thus made him a martyr to Christ. On this being 
reported, the populace rushed to the palace with torches, and 
it was not without difficulty that the priests and deacons 
and other religious persons, by their pious remonstrances, 
prevented them from burning the king with all his court. 
Meanwhile, Iphigenia gave to the priests and clergy all the 
gold, and silver, and jewels she possessed, to enable them to 
build a church worthy to be dedicated in honour of the 
apostle, and the rest she ordered to be distributed among 
the poor. Hyrtacus, on his part, first employed the wives 
of his nobles, and afterwards the magicians, to persuade her 
to agree to his wishes. At last, when his suit entirely failed, 
he caused the building where she dwelt MT.th the other vir- 
gins, serving Grod day and night, to be surrounded with 
ilames. But when the fire was raging on all sides, an angel 
of the Lord appeared in company with Matthew the apostle, 
and comforting the sacred virgins, promised them speedy 
deliverance. Accordingly, before long, the Almighty sent a 
powerful wind, which swept the conflagration entirely away 
from the abode of his servant the virgin, and wrapt in flames 
the king's palace, until it was entirely consumed, with all 
his wealth. He made his escape, indeed, with great diffi- 
culty, saving his only son ; but from that time he never 
enjoyed a moment's happiness. A powerful demon took 
possession of his son, and dragging him rapidly to the tomb 
of Matthew the apostle, the devil himself bound his hands 
behind him, and forced him to confess his father's crimes. 
As for the king, he was attacked by elephantiasis, and fell by 

T 2 



276 CEDERICTJS YITALIS. [b.TI. CH.XT, 

his own hand, having phmged his sword through his bowels, 
and thus expiated the apostle's martyrdom. All the people 
insulted his remains, and taking Behor, the brother of Iphi- 
genia, who had been baptized by the apostle, raised him to 
the throne. He was twenty-five years old when he began 
his reign, which lasted sixty-two years, during which he 
maintained a firm peace with the Romans and Persians. All 
the provinces of Ethiopia were supplied with churches, and 
many wonderful miracles were wrought at the place of the 
martyrdom of St. Matthew the apostle. He was the first 
v/ho published a gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he 
wrote in the Hebrew tongue, and which was discovered on 
his own revelation, in the reign of the emperor Zeno.^ Our 
holy mother the church observes the festival of his memory 
on the eleventh of the calends of October [September 21], 
and lifts voice and heart to his honour with a sweet melody: 
" Holy Matthew, powerful with thy twofold gifts, without 
ceasing pray to Christ our Lord for us, that we hereafter 
may escape the eternal gulf! " 

Ch. XI. SS. Swion and Jude receive JPersia for their 
province — Their acts and martyrdom. 

Simon the Canaanite, or Zelotes, — so called to distinguish 
him from Simon Peter, as well as from the traitor Judas, 
who was called also Simon Iscariot, — was of Cana, a village 
of Galilee, where the Lord turned water into wine. Egypt 
was the station in which he was allotted to preside. 

Jude, the son of James, had three names; for he was 
called Thaddeus and Lebbeus as well as Jude. He preached 
in Mesopotamia and the interior of Pontus. Both Simon 

^ This legend of St. Matthew is, like the preceding ones, extracted from 
the fictitious Abdias, with some omissions. So little is known of the life 
and death of this apostle, that it is not even certain he suffered martyrdom. 
His gospel is generally believed to have been composed in Hebrew, or 
rather in Syro-Chaldaic, soon after the death of Jesus Christ, or at least 
before any of the others. It was soon afterwards tianslated into Greek. 
The fact of a discovery of a MS. of this gospel in the tomb of Barnabas, 
about the year 488, has been already noticed, p. 1 1 2. It could not have 
been the original text, as our author alleges, but a Greek version, as the 
gospel of the day was read from it on Holy Thursday in the chapel of the 
palace at Constantinoole after it was there deposited by order of the 
Emperor Zeno, 



SS. STMO?f AKD JUDE. 277 

and Jude having travelled into Persia in company, after 
converting vast multitudes of the people of that country to 
the faith of Christ, suftered martyrdom on the fifth of the 
calends of November [October 28]. 

Crato, the disciple of these apostles, has given a long 
account of their acts during thirteen years, and their 
sufferings in Persia, comprising them in ten volumes, which 
Africanus the historian translated into Latin. Abdias also, 
who was ordained by those apostles bishop of Babylonia, 
wrote their memoirs in the Hebrew tongue, which were 
translated into Greek by his disciple Eutropius, from which 
a Latin version was also made by Africanus.^ From these 
works I propose to make a short extract for the use of those 
who may wish to know the history of their preaching from 
the beginning, and by what end they left this world and 
departed to the realms above. 

Now the holy apostles Simon and Jude, having gone into 
Persia by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, met there the 
two magicians, Zaroes and Arphaxath, who had fled from the 
presence of St. Matthew the apostle in Ethiopia." The doc- 
trine of these men was depraved, and full of deadly 
blasphemy against the Lord and his prophets. The apostles 
having arrived in Persia, fell in with Warardach, the general 
and commander of the king of the Babylonians, whose name 
was Xerxes, and who had engaged in war against the 
Indians, in consequence of their having invaded his frontier. 
On the apostles' arrival, the demons, who delivered false 
oracles to those who sacrificed to them, became dumb in all 
their temples, whereupon their worshippers resorted to the 
temple of a neighbouring city for advice. There the 
demons uttered groans, and intimated to those who came to 

1 " All the facts here alleged are apocryphal. We have no knowledge 
of any disciples of the apostles of the names of Crato or Abdias. There 
was no occasion for Julius Africanus, a Greek writer of the third •century, 
to translate into Latin the stories attributed to the fictitious Abdias, because 
they were originally composed in that language." — M. Le Prtvost, note to 
the Paris edition. It has escaped the learned editor's memory that a 
Crato, called '* the philosopher," became the disciple of St. John at 
Ephesus, according to the account before given by Ordericus, p. 241 ; but 
he may not be the writer referred to in the text. 

* See the legend in the account of St. Matthew, p. 271 of the present 
Volume. 



278 OEDEEICIJS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.XI. 

consult tliem that their own gods could not speak in the pre- 
sence of Simon and Jude, the apostles of God. Then 
"Warardach, the general, caused the apostles to be searched 
for, and on their being found, inquired who they were, and 
whence they came ; to which they replied that they were 
Hebrews, and were come there on the errand of the salva- 
tion of men. Upon his entreating them to restore the 
power of speech to their gods, they poured forth a prayer, 
and gave permission. But the fanatics were immediately 
led away by the demons, who predicted that a great battle 
would ensue, and vast numbers be slain on both sides. The 
apostles ridiculed this prediction, while the general was 
greatly alarmed ; but at their instance he deferred till the 
morrow despatching ambassadors to demand peace. The 
heathen priests being incensed against the apostles, and 
exclaiming that low persons, in tattered garments, ought not 
to be allowed to speak, or be listened to in a city so magnifi- 
cent as Babylon, the general ordered both the apostles and 
these outrageous priests to be kept in custody till the 
morrow, and by the advice of the former, waited till then 
the issue of the affair. 

The day following the word of the apostles was accom- 
plished. The envoys of the general returned, mounted on 
swift dromedaries, with the ambassadors of the Indians, and 
brought intelligence that all had happened as the apostles 
had predicted. In short, the Indians restored the territories 
they had invaded, payed tribute, and concluded a treaty of 
lasting peace. The general, finding that the apostles had 
told the truth, as the event manifested, was enraged with 
the priests, and causing a great tire to be kindled, ordered 
them, with their accomplices, to be cast into the flames. 

The apostles, mindful of our Lord's commands, threw 
themselves at the general's feet, scattering dust on their 
heads, and implored the pardon of their enemies, proclaiming 
loudly, to the admiration of all present, that such was the 
teaching of the Grod of the Christians. 

In the end, Warardach ordered the priests to be numbered, 
and an account taken of all their possessions, in order that 
they might be made over to the apostles. The number of 
the priests attached to the temples was found to be a 
hundred and twenty, each of whom received from the taxes 



LECtETs'DS of SS, SIMON A^'D JUDE. 279 

a pound in gold : but the cliief priest received four times as 
much as the others. Their wealth in gold, and silver, and 
vestments, and cattle was so immense that it could not be 
reckoned. All this the general offered to the apostles, but 
they utterly rejected the gift, and commanded it to be dis- 
tributed to the poor. 

At length, however, the general, having reported these 
proceedings to the king, enlarging on the apostles' merits, 
Zaroes and Arphaxad, who were then at court, took occasion 
to depreciate them, endeavouring to instigate a persecution 
of them, unless they consented to worship their gods. The 
general, on his part, defended the apostles ; and at length a 
disputation was appointed to take place in the king's pre- 
sence. The magicians, having here spoken freely before all 
the people, the advocates on the other side were dumb, and 
for tlie space of nearly an hour no one of those who before 
were so eloquent and loquacious could utter a word. At 
length the magicians permitted them to speak, but they 
found themselves unable to walk, and stepping backwards, 
could see nothing, though their eyes were open. The spec- 
tators were much astonished at this prodigy, and reverenced 
the magicians, more however from fear than love. This 
spectacle was exhibited from dawn of day till the sixth hour, 
when the advocates returned home in confusion. 

The general related all this to the apostles, who were 
much beloved by him, and he assembled in his house the 
advocates who had been thus foiled, presenting them to the 
apostles of Grod, that they might learn how, in obedience to 
their instructions, they could triumph over the magicians. 
The advocates, seeing before them men in mean attire, were 
disposed to hold them in contempt; but Simon checked 
their insolence by his shrewd remarks. He reminded them 
distinctly that articles of little worth were often inclosed in 
coffers of gold, enriched with diamonds ; w^hile precious jewels 
were deposited in common boxes of wood ; and that splendid 
vases were filled with vinegar, while rich wines were stored 
in vessels presenting externally a foul aspect. Thus a mean 
exterior not unfrequently conceals the eminent virtues of 
persons, who by their merits are especially pleasing to the 
supreme Creator. 

Then the holy apostles gave salutary counsel to the advo- 



280 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.II. Cn.XI. 

cates, and commended him to God by prayers, signing them 
on their foreheads with the sign of the cross. Upon this, 
Zebedee and the other advocates, coming before the king, 
began to deride the magicians, who fonnd no means of 
harming them. At length, in their rage, they brought in a 
number of serpents, to the great alarm of all the spectators. 
The king immediately summoned the apostles, who on their 
arrival filled their mantles with the serpents, and hurled 
them boldly against the magicians. The serpents instantly 
began to gnaw their flesh, till they howled like wolves, to 
the great joy of all who witnessed the tortures of those 
impious men. The king and all the people said to the 
apostles, " Let them die." Eut they answered : ''We are 
sent to bring back from death to life, not to cast down from 
life to death." Then they prayed, and commanded the ser- 
pents to withdraw their venom from the magicians, and 
depart to their own place. But the magicians suflered still 
greater tortures when the serpents again gnawed their flesh 
and sucked their blood to eradicate the venom. AVhen the 
serpents were departed, and the afflicted magicians, by the 
apostles' advice, had neither eat, nor drunk, nor slept, for 
three days, the apostles came to visit them, and instead of 
returning evil for evil, healed their wounds. But the magi- 
cians still persisted in their malice, and as they had fled 
from the presence of St. Matthew the apostle, in Ethiopia, 
so they now retreated, covered with confusion, before the 
two apostles, and raised against them the fury of the idola- 
ters through the whole of Persia. They went about 
offering sacrifices in all the temples, and by their incanta- 
tions caused men to be suddenly motionless, and then free 
to move ; suddenly blind, and again restored to sight ; now 
deaf, and then able to hear. Thus they imposed on those 
who sacrificed to idols, and were like themselves. 

At the entreaty of the king and his general, the apostles 
continued in Babylonia, working great wonders in the name 
of the Lord, making the deaf to hear, the lame to walk, the 
blind to see, and cleansing the lepers, and driving the 
demons out of the bodies they had taken possession of. Li 
consequence they made many disciples, out of whom they 
ordained priests, and deacons, and clergy, in the churches. 

The daughter of a very opulent satrap, who had been. 



IMIKACLES OF SS. SIMON" A?fD JUDE. 281 

seduced, was in great danger during cliildbirtb, and the 
deacon Eustosinus was consequently accused of having 
debauched her. Tlie apostles, hearing of this, required the 
parents of the girl and the deacon to appear before them, 
and had the infant also brought, which was born the same 
day, at the first hour. Having commanded the infant to 
speak, it said in a very clear voice: "This deacon is a chaste 
and holy man; he has never polluted his flesh." The 
parents insisted on learning who was the father of the child, 
but the apostles replied: "It is our duty to absolve the 
innocent, but not to make known the guilty." 

Nicharon, the king's friend, while engaging in warlike 
exercises, was shot by an arrow in the knee, which could 
not by any means be drawn out of the bone. Tlien the 
blessed Simon invoked the Lord Jesus, and applying his 
hand, immediately drew out the arrow, and the man was 
instantly healed, so that not even a sign of the wound 
appeared. 

Two most ferocious tigresses, having escaped from their 
dens, devoured all that came in their way. Then the people 
fled to the apostles of God, who invoked the name of the 
Lord Jesus, upon which the savage animals, which never 
could be tamed, became gentle as lambs. During the day 
they remained like sheep among the people, and returning 
in the evening to the apostles' cell, became its guardians 
when the apostles visited other cities. Erom hence they 
took occasion mildly to instruct the people, pointing out 
what men gifted with reason ought to do, and how they 
ought to obey God, by the example of the brute animals 
thus exhibited to their observation. 

At the entreaty of the king and the people the apostles 
abode at Babylon one year and three months, during which 
period more than sixty thousand men, besides women and 
children, were baptized, the king and all his courtiers being 
the first to receive the faith. For they saw that by a word 
the sick were cured, the blind received sight, and the dead 
were raised. Abdias, who had accompanied the apostles 
from Judea, and had himself seen the Lord Jesus with his 
own eyes, was ordained bishop, and the city [of Babylon] 
was full of churches. All which being duly regulated, the 
apostles departed, followed by crowds of disciples, to the 



282 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.XI. 

number of two hundred and upwards, and they went 
through the twelve provinces of Persia and the cities thereof. 

It is now time that the passion of the holy apostles 
should be related. The magicians Zaroes and Arphaxad, 
of whom mention has been already made, committed abomi- 
nations throughout the country, pretending to be of the 
race of the gods, but always fleeing from the face of the 
apostles. They only remained in any city until such time 
as they understood the apostles were at hand. There were 
seventy priests of the idol temples in Sanir, who received 
from the king a pound in gold each, four times a year, when 
they celebrated the feast of the sun, that is to say, at the 
beginning of spring and summer, autumn and winter. The 
before-named magicians raised all the opposition in their 
power against the apostles, and by preceding them had it in 
their power effectually to do so. 

The holy apostles, having passed through all the 
provinces, took up their abode at Hanir in the house of 
Sennes their disciple. But on a sudden, about the first 
hour of the morning, the priests rushed in a body to the 
house of Sennes, shouting terribly that the enemies of their 
gods should be given up. In short, they seized the holy 
apostles, and dragged them to the temple of the sun. On 
their entering the temple, the demons cried out through 
some who were possessed : " AVhat have we to do with you, 
O apostles of the living Grod ! since your entrance here the 
flames consume us." In a chapel of the temple towards 
the east there was a chariot of gold drawn by four horses, in 
which was the statue of the sun encircled by rays also 
wrought in gold. In another chapel the image of the moon 
was wrought in silver, having a car drawn by a yoke of 
oxen, ail in the same metal. "While the priests and ma- 
gicians, with the people, were urging the apostles to worship 
the idols, they were conversing together in the Hebrew 
tongue on a vision of the Lord, whom they beheld calling 
them into the midst of the host of angels. The angel of 
the Lord also appeared to them, and comforted them. Then, 
procuring silence, they addressed the people, pointing out 
to them in a reasonable manner their error of idly wasting 
on the creature the worship which is due to Grod only ; and 
that it was injurious to him to enclose in buildings made 



MAETYEDOM OF SS. SIMON A?fD JUDE. 283 

"witli hands the sun and the moon which he had created 
from the beginning, and set in the heavens to give light 
through all generations. AV'hile all were in amazement, 
Simon commanded the demon to break in pieces the image 
of the sun and his chariot ; Jude also, in like manner, com- 
manded the image of the moon to be broken. Then two 
Ethiopians, with their black skins and naked bodies, and 
horrible features, were seen by all the people to come forth, 
and while crushing the images uttered hoarse and lamentable 
cries. Meanwhile the infuriated priests rushed on the 
apostles, and slew them while they were rejoicing and giving 
thanks to Grod. Sennes, their host, also suffered with them, 
because he refused to sacrifice to the idols. At that very 
time, when the heavens were perfectly serene, they shot 
forth bright flashes of lightning, which rent the temple into 
three parts from the highest pinnacle of the roof to the 
lowest foundation. Zaroes and Arphaxad were struck by 
the lightning and burnt to ashes. 

Three months afterwards King Xerxes confiscated the 
property of the priests, and translated the bodies of the 
apostles with great pomp to his own city, in which he 
erected an octangular church, each of the angles containing 
eighty feet, so that its circuit embraced eight times eighty 
feet, the height being one hundred and twenty. It was 
built entirely of hewn blocks of marble, squared and faced, 
and the chapels were panneled with gilt plates. In the 
centre of the octagon was placed a sarcophagus of pure 
silver. Four years of incessant labour were employed in 
the erection, and it was completed on the birth-day of the 
two apostles ; that is to say, the fifth of the calends of 
jSTovember [2Sth October], and worthy to be dedicated to 
the honour of the saints.^ The faithful who venerate their 
martyrdom, which they suffered even unto death for the 

^ This is another of the legends borrowed from the fictitious Abdias. 
Nothing certain is known respecting the preaching and death of these two 
apostles. Others have made St. Simon the Cananite journey in Lybia, 
and even as far as England. As for St. Jude, cousin of cm* Lord, and 
brother of St. James the Less, some made him exercise his apostleship in 
Lybia, others in Persia. What appears more decided, is that he was 
married and left children. According to Eusebius, two of his grandsons, 
brought before Domitian as descendants of David, were sent home by that 
prince, and lived till the time of Trajan. 



284 OKDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.IT. CH.XIII. 

sake of our Lord Jesus Christ, obtain heavenly gifts on that 
spot. We also, who, hoping in the Lord, are engaged in 
writing these memorials, set forth the praises of the blessed 
apostles who belong to the company of those who feast 
triumphantly with the great King, while we devoutly sing 
to their honour in the courts of Jerusalem, with the children 
who cried Hosanna to the Redeemer: — 

"Blessed Simon and illustrious Thaddeus,^ behold our 
grief and tears, that we, who through our fall deserve eternal 
punishment, may, by your intercession, obtain admission to 
heaven. Amen." 

Cn. XII. Election of St. Matthias — He preaclies in Jiidea 

— and is there martyred. 

Matthias, one of the seventy disciples, having been elected 
by lot among the apostles in the place of Judas, preached 
in Judaea, w^here he suffered martyrdom for Christ. His 
feast is celebrated on the sixth of the calends of March 
[24th February], when the reverend choir in devout pro- 
cession thus chants their prayer to him : " O Matthias 
the just ! raised by lot to the throne of the twelve, free us 
from all the bonds of guilt that, through thy holy interces- 
sion, we may come to the joys of the true light. Amen."^ 

Cn. XIII. Apostacy of Judas Iscariot — Eulogy of the eleven 
apostles u'ho remained faithful — Their histo7y given in the 
preceding chapters. 
Judas, Simon Iscariot, was of the tribe of Issachar, and 
counted in the number of the twelve apostles. But in- 
flamed with a fatal covetousness, having sold his master and 
Lord to the Jews for thirty pieces of silver, he lost the rank 
of an apostle, and, after a late repentance, miserably hanged 
himself. Even now there are many successors of Judas in 
the church, men who assume a sacred title without acting 

^ St. Jude is often confounded with Thaddeus, one of the seventy-two 
disciples who were supposed to have been sent to Edessa by St. Thomas. 
He is one of the apostles mentioned by St. Paul as having women in his 
company, which was very natural, as he was a married man. 

'•* Some particulars respecting St. Matthias are to be found in the col- 
lection of the BoUandists, under the 24th of February, unknown to our 
author, because they were only introduced into the church in the twelfth 
century, by a monk of Treves. This apostle seems to have confined himself 
to Palestine. 



APOSTACr CF JUDAS ISCAEIOT. 285 

worthily of it. Unworthy aa he was, Judas had worthy and 
mystical names by \yhich false Christians are typified in the 
church. For instance, Judas means confessing ; by which 
name those are signified, who, as the apostle says, " profess 
that they know God, but deny him by their works." More- 
oyer, Simon means ohedient, by which word are signified 
hypocrites and deceivers, and those who obey falsely, not 
doing the will of Grod from loye of him and desire of heaven, 
but speciously following the traditions of their elders, for 
vainglory and the applause of men. Many among them are 
blinded by their covetousness, like Judas Iscariot, and quit- 
ting the pursuits and the companionship of good men, fall 
readily into detestable crimes and become indissolubly 
entangled in the snares of sin, enjoying a transitory reward 
in the present life, and receiving some recompense for a 
certain propriety and exterior decency of conduct, they are 
elated with vanity ; but in the future life they will wail, 
inextricably chained, in the loathsome dungeons of hell, and 
tormented for the sins they have committed with indescriba- 
ble forms of punishment, without any hope of forgiveness. 

The traitor Judas having withdrawn from the company 
of the apostles, what did those merit who remained faithful 
to the Lord Jesus ? Unspeakable honour and eternal 
blessedness. Holy mother church holds, and every true 
Catholic faithfully believes, that the twelve apostles are 
truly blessed and exalted and partakers of everlasting 
felicity. The salt of the earth and the light of the world, 
the twelve hours of the eternal day, the fruitful branches of 
the true vine, the fellow labourers with Christ, and fellow 
heirs of his heavenly kingdom, their memories are evfery 
where cherished iu the hearts of the faithful, and who are 
honoured by all nations who profess the true faith, and de- 
voutly reckoned the teachers of the people and rulers of the 
churches, as being appointed by Christ judges of the world, 
strict censors of the reprobate, but kind helpers of the 
devout, and their constant intercessors. Uor, holding all 
worldly things in contempt, they indissolubly attached 
themselves to Christ who is the true vine and life eternal. 
And now they reign in heaven with the King of kings, 
joining with the angels in praising him for ever, and sitting 
on twelve thrones, judge, with the Lord, the twelve tribes 



286 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.XIV. 

of Israel. I have searched out their acts as they are read 
in the church, and employed myself in abbreviating their 
histories, as I find them recorded in ancient books. 

Ch. XIV. Companions and sioccessors of the apostles — ' 

St. J^arnahas. 

I PUEPOSE now to treat of the companions and successors 
of the apostles, and by God's help will give a faithful ac- 
count of some of them in my present work. I enter upon 
this undertaking from no vain fancy that they need my 
commendation, of whom Grod himself is the praise, who 
reigns Triune through all eternity, and blesses his saints 
with everlasting rewards in his own presence ; but my 
work is intended to exhibit my devotion to these blessed 
saints, and to obtain their favour, in order that I may piously 
obtain my own salvation through their intercession. 

Joseph, surnamed Barnabas, that is to say, the son of 
consolation^ and a native of the city of Cyprus, founded by 
Cyrus king of Persia, was joined with Paul in his mission 
to the gentiles the third year after our Lord's passion.^ He 
was one of the seventy-two disciples of our Lord, and taking 
part with the apostles both in their joys and tribulations, 
ministered, as his name implies, the utmost consolation to 
the faithful. 

In the first place, he sold the land he possessed and laid 
the price of it at the apostles' feet. He gave the hand of 
fellowship to Paul after his conversion, introducing him to 
the apostles by whom he was as yet unknown and suspected, 
and relating the account of his call to those who were igno- 
rarft of it. He was sent by the apostles to Antioch, where 
he rejoiced at seeing the grace of God manifested in the 
disciples, and by his preaching a great multitude was con- 
verted to the Lord. Thence he went to Tarsus to find Saul, 
and having found him brought him to Antioch, where both 
sojourned a whole year and taught much people : there the 
disciples were first called Christians.^ 

Barnabus and Saul, being compassionate and benevolent, 
brought the alms of the gentile believers to the brethren in 
Judea. On their return from Jerusalem, after accomplish- 
ing tliis mission, they joined John whose surname was 
^ Acts iv. 36. 2 ^cts xi. 29, 30; xiL 25; xiii. 1—48. 



niSTOUT OF ST. BAENABAS. 287 

Mark, and continued at Antioch among the prophets and 
doctors. And as these were ministering to the Lord and 
fasting, the Holy Ghost said unto them : " Separate me 
iSaul and Barnabas for the work whereunto I have called 
them." And being sent forth by the Holy Ghost they 
came to Seleucia, and then sailed to Cyprus. Afterwards 
they struck Barjesus, the magician, who was also called Ely- 
mas, with blindness for a time, converted Sergius Paulus 
the proconsul to the true faith, and brought great multi- 
tudes to the light of truth, ^ 

While, therefore, the elect Avalked in the way of faith and 
righteousness, the reprobates, inflamed with rage, made a 
tumult and drove the apostles out of their neighbourhood. 
But they, rejoicing and filled with the Holy Ghost, preached 
the word of God, and converted to the Lord great multi- 
tudes of Jews and Greeks.' 

Coming to Lystra they healed one who was lame from his 
mother's womb ; on seeing which miracle the people took 
them for gods, saying : " The gods are come down unto us 
in the likeness of men." And they called Barnabas Jupiter, 
and Paul Mercury. And the priest of Jupiter who was 
near the city brought oxen and garlands to the gates and 
would have sacrificed with the people. But the apostles, 
in horror of such an abomination, drove them away, and 
rending their clothes ran among the people exclaiming 
against it with much reasonable discourse, which wdth difii- 
culty persuaded the crowd from sacrificing to them.^ 

After this they came to Derbe, preaching the gospel there, 
teaching many, and giving them instruction in virtue. And 
passing through several provinces in w^hich they made known 
the word of God, at length they arrived at Jerusalem, and 
being received by the holy apostles told what wonderful 
things God had wrought by their means. At that time 
some evil disposed persons raised questions respecting the 
necessity of circumcision. Upon this the apostles took 
counsel and sent Paul and Barnabas to Antioch to allay the 
dissensions, who, coming there armed with an apostolic 
epistle, succeeded by their preaching in exterminating the 
impious heresy.'* 

^ Acts xi. 29, 30; xii. 25; xiii. 1—48. ^ ^^cts xiii. 49—52. 

^ Acts xiv. 6—17. Acts xiv. 6; xv. 1 — 21. 



288 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.XIY. 

Like true pastors, tliey published tlie word of Grod, taught 
the ignorant, healed the sick, and anxiously devoted them- 
selves to promote religion in every way. They therefore 
frequently visited the churches in which they set forth the 
true faith, using every precaution lest the neophytes should 
fall into heresy. For they knew how crafty were the wiles 
of Satan, and watched against the hearts of the regenerate be- 
coming foul with the deadly seed of the tares. Afterwards, 
as Luke the evangelist relates, it seemed expedient that 
Paul should return to Jerusalem, and Barnabas to Cyprus 
his native city, having John, surnamed Mark, as his co- 
adjutor in the ministry. He had been a gentile, and, with 
his companion Orduon, was in the service of Cyril, the 
high priest of the execrable Jupiter, but was baptized by 
Paul and Barnabas at a ])lace called Iconium, and afterwards 
faithfully accompanied them in their journeyings. 

At length, while the apostles just named were preaching 
in Pamphilia, and many, both Jews and gentiles, believed in 
the Lord, it was revealed to Paul by the vision of an angel 
in the night that he should quickly go to Jerusalem, and 
permit Barnabas to return to Cyprus. Having made known 
the vision, they prayed on bended knees, and kissing each 
other, bade farewell with many tears, and separated in the 
body, never again saw each other in this life.^ 

Barnabas and John now visited Laodicea and came to a 
city called Anemoria,^ where certain prudent and well- 
disposed gentiles, having heard Christ preached, believed, 
and being baptized, received the grace of the Holy Ghost. 
They then sailed to Cyprus, where they found Timon and 
Aristion, servants of the Lord. Timon was suffering from 
a burning fever, but Barnabas having laid his hands on him, 
with the holy gospel, invoking the name of our Lord Jesus, 
the fever immediately left him, and his strength was so re- 
stored that he followed with joy the Lord's saints. 

By the instructions of the apostles, St. Barnabas always 

1 Acts XV. 2, 38, 39. It was not to return to Jerusalem that St. Paul 
finally separated from St. Barnabas; and their parting does not appear to 
have been so friendly as our author describes it. The sacred writer says, 
" The contention was so sharp between them, that they jiarted asunder one 
from the other." 

^ Pliny calls this place Ancmurium. 



LEGEITD OF ST. BARNABAS. 289 

carried with him the gospel of St. Matthew the apostle, and, 
wherever he tbimd sick persons, laid it upon them, and they 
were immediately healed of whatever disease they laboured 
under. Barnabas also ordained Heraclius, who had been 
baptized by the apostle Paul, bishop, for the teaching of the 
faithful. Afterwards when Barnabas wished to gain admis- 
sion to Paphos, Barjesus, the Jewish sorcerer, whom Paul 
had etruck blind for a time, recognized the apostle, and 
opposing him to the utmost of his power, forbade his entering 
Paphos, The holy man, however, came to a certain place 
where he saw the heathens, both men and women, running 
naked in public games. His indignation being roused he 
cursed the temple ; and immediately part of it fell down, 
from the foundation upwards, and many of the heathens 
were crushed and perished in the ruins, but those who 
escaped took refuge in the temple of Apollo. The illustrious 
champion of Christ now entered the city of Salamis, and 
finding there a synagogue of Jews, he constantly preached 
the gospel to them and converted many of the Jews to the 
faith of Christ, Upon finding this, Barjesus displayed all 
the malice of w^hich he was capable, and raised a tumult 
against the holy apostles of God. The Jews were willing to 
arrest Barnabas and deliver him to the consul of Salamis, 
having first subjected him to much suffering and various 
kinds of tortures. At length, as they were dragging liim to 
judgment, bruised and shaken with their ill-usage, they 
found that Eusebius, an illustrious and powerful mau, and a 
relation of the emperor's, had landed in the island, and 
fearing that he would snatch their victim out of their hands, 
they fastened a rope round his neck and dragged him lace- 
rated from the synagogue to the Hippodrome, and from 
thence outside the gate. There they made a fire round 
him and cruelly burnt him. Thus the blessed apostle, after 
many suflerings and long conflicts, was burnt for the love of 
Christ, and departed to everlasting joys. The impious 
Jews, not content with his death, collected his remains, and 
enclosing them in a leaden cofler, intended to throw it into 
the sea ; but John Mark, with Timon and Eodon, carried 
off" the holy body by night and deposited it in the crypt 
which had been formerly the habitation of the Jebuseans on 
the third of the ides [11th] of June. In consequence of this 

VOL. I. U 



290 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.XT. 

secret interment the venerable remains lay concealed for a 
number of years, the Christians not being able to discover 
where thej were buried. At length they were found, by the 
revelation of the apostle himself, in the time of the emperor 
Zeno and pope Gelasius, when they were gloriously en- 
shrined with hymns and thanksgivings to the honour of 
G-od. Blessings are bestowed on those who piously implore 
them through the merits of St. Barnabas the apostle, of 
which may the abundant grace of God, which works with- 
out ceasing, make ns partakers, who is the protector through 
all ages of those whom he has predetermined to lile. 
Amen.^ 

Ch. XV. Acts of SL Marh — Legend of his mission to 
AquiJeia — Appointed first bishop of Alexaiidria — His 
apostleship there and in the Pentapolis — His martyrdom 
— His remains translated to Aquileia and Venice. 

Mark, the evangelist, was both the disciple and the scribe 
of St. Peter the apostle, whose son he was in baptism, and 
from whose dictation he wrote his gospel of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. It is reported of him that he caused his thumb to 
be cut off that he might be disqualified for the priesthood, 
but was so far from being rejected by the apostles on that 
account that they elected him bishop of Alexandria. When 
St. Peter was at Pome, he called upon him to preach the 
gospel to tlie Gentiles in Italy. " Why," he said, " do you 
remain inactive with us ? you are fully informed of all that 
Jesus of Nazareth did ; arise and go to Aquileia, and there 
propagate among the people the doctrines of the true 
religion." Mark, having his province for preaching thus 
allotted, and receiving the episcopal staff, took the road 
assigned to him and arrived at Aquileia, which is the first 
of the cities of Italy. He found there a young man afflicted 
with leprosy, whose name was Ataulfus, son of XJlfinus, 
the first and most illustrious of the citizens ; and having 
spoken with him, took him by the hand and arm, and im- 
mediately the hand and arm were cleansed of the leprosy. 
Perceiving this, the vouth ran to his father, and told him 

^ This history of St. Barnabas is compiled, with some slight variations, 
from his Acts, alleged to have been written by his disciple John Mark. 
They are to be found in the collection of the Bollandists, 11th of June. 



LEGEND OE ST. MARE. 291 

with joy what Mark had done to him. Upon this, Ulfinus 
hastening to the apostle, with a great crowd, found him 
sitting at the eastern gate, and implored him with eager- 
ness to heal his son. Upon its being promised, if he be- 
lieved, he declared liis belief in the Lord Jesus; whereupon 
Mark baptized the joung man, and he was entirely freed 
from the leprosy. After this cure Ulfinus also, with all his 
household, was baptized, and a midtitude of the people 
besides, on the same day. After some years, Mark, desiring 
to see Peter, proposed to withdraw privately and go to 
Eome ; but the people, discovering his design, assembled 
round him in great numbers at the dawn of day, and en- 
treated him with shouts to appoint them a pastor. Then 
Hermagoras, being elected by the people, was taken by St. 
Mark with him to Rome. There he was ordained by St. 
Peter the apostle, first bishop of the Italian province, and 
after many miracles which God wrought by him among the 
people, he was martyred, with Portunatus his arch-deacon, 
in the reign of the emperor ISTero, under Sebastus the 
prefect, on the third of the ides [13th] of July. ^ 

As for the blessed St. Mark, he undertook the govern- 
ment of the church of Alexandria by the command of St. 
Peter the apostle, being the first who preached the gospel 
of Christ in the land of Egypt. He also proclaimed the 
true religion in Marmorica and Ammonian Libya, or the 
Pentapolis ; the inhabitants of this country being imcir- 
cumcised idolaters, in the practice of all uncleanness. When 
therefore Mark arrived at Cyrene in the Pentapolis, and 
found the natives immersed in execrable wickedness, begin- 
ning with a discourse on divine things, he healed the sick 
in the name of the Lord, cleansing lepers, and expelling 
many evil spirits by his word alone. Numbers who wit- 
nessed these miracles believed, and destroying their idols, 
and cutting down their sacred groves, were baptized in 
the name of the Triune God. 

After this, it was commanded him by a revelation of the 
Holy Spii'it that he should go to Alexandria.^ Mark there- 



1 The legend, which Is evidently apocryphal, of this pretended patriarch 
of Aquileia is to be found in Mombritius. 

^ The text reads Alexandrice phanum ; perhaps employed as a synonym 

17 2 



292 OllDERICUS TITALIS. [b.II. CH.IT. 

fore took leave of the brethren, making known to them what 
had been revealed ; and th^y accompanied him to the ship, 
and having broken bread together they parted from him, 
saying: " Jesus Christ prosper you in your journey." He 
reached Alexandria on the seventh day, and disembarking 
from the ship hastened to the city, when, as he was en- 
tering it, his sandal burst. "Truly," he said, "my journey 
is now at an end." 

The holy man gave his sandal to a certain cobbler named 
Aniarius, to be mended ; who, while at work upon it, 
sharply pimctured his hand, exclaiming at the same time : 
" There is but one God." The blessed Mark hearing this 
said, inwardly rejoicing : " The Lord has prospered my 
journey;" and spitting on his right hand he anointed the 
man's hand, saying, " May this hand be healed in the name 
of Jesus Christ the Son of the living God," and it w^as 
instantly healed. The cobbler, struck by the presence of 
such a man and the efficacy of his words, as well as by the 
modesty of his appearance, requested him to honoui* his 
house by eating bread with him. Mark entering with joy, 
pronounced a blessing, Avith prayer, and made known the 
tidings of the gospel to all who heard him, declaring that 
the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. He 
subsequently added to his instructions signs and wonders 
in the name of the Lord, and Aniarius, being baptized with 
his whole household and many of his neighbours, became 
the assistant of his teacher in preaching the truth. 

Meanwhile the idolaters of Alexandria, perceiving that 
the Galilaean preacher was destroying their worship and 
ceremonies, sought to put him to death and laid many 
snares for him. But the blessed Mark, who knew their 
designs, ordained Aniarius bishop, and three priests, Me- 
lirius, Paberius, and Cerdon, with seven deacons, and eleven 
others with functions in the service of the church. After 
that he went into the Pentapolis, and dwelt there two years, 
comforting the brethren who were already believers, and 
ordaining bishops and clergy in those parts. Eeturning 
to Alexandria he found the brethren increased in faith and 
grace. Seeing also a church built by them at a place called 

for pharinn, a pharos, or beacon. Tlie French translator renders it 
temple d'Alexandriey supposing phanum to be a corruption oifanum. 



MAUTTllDOM OF ST. MARK. 293 

the Bucolia, that is, the cattle market, which is under the 
cliffs by the sea-shore, he was greatly delighted, and kneel- 
ing down glorified God, and kindly lent his aid to the good 
work by his exhortations and prayers. 

In the fulness of time, when the Christians were multi- 
plied, and the images of the idols overthrown, the heathen 
learned tlie return of the holy apostle, and were filled with 
rage at the miracles which they found him perform. For 
lie healed the sick, preached to the unbelievers, and made 
the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak. Eut though they 
determined to arrest him, they were not able to find him ; 
so that they gnashed their teeth in their idolatrous cere- 
monies, and exclaimed in their orgies : " Great is the power 
of this magician." At length on Easter Sunday, that is the 
eighth of the calends of May [24th April], at the time 
when the feast of Serapis was celebrated, their spies dis- 
covered the apostle consecrating the most holy offering to 
the Divine Majesty. These impious men immediately seized 
the servant of God, and putting a rope round his neck, 
dragged him cruelly over the stones, so that they were 
sprinkled with his blood, and the soil stained with his torn 
flesh. But while they were shouting with fury : " Let us 
drag this buffalo to the bull-ring," St. Mark offered praises 
to God, saying : " O Lord Jesus Christ, I give thee thanks 
that thou hast thought me worthy thus to suffer for thy 
name." 

Night approaching, the idolaters threw bim into prison, 
while they consulted by what death he should be de- 
spatched. But at midnight, when the doors were close shut 
and the keepers were slumbering before the gates, behold 
there was a great earthquake, and an angel of the Lord 
descended from heaven and touching him, said : " Mark, 
the servant of God, the first and chief publisher of his holy 
laws throughout Egypt, lo, thy name is written in the book 
of life, and thy memorial shall be preserved through all 
ages. Thou art admitted into the fellowship of the hosts 
above : in the heavens they shall receive thy spirit, and thy 
rest shall know no end." On hearing this the blessed 
Mark, stretching out his hands to heaven said : " I give 
thee thanks, Lord Jesus Christ, that thou hast not de- 
serted me, but hast remembered me among thy saints. 



294 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.XT. 

Eeceive, I beseech thee, O Lord Jesus Christ, my soul in 
peace, and suffer me not to be longer separated from thee." 
"When he had said this, the Lord Jesus came to him in the 
form, and clothed, as he had dwelt with his disciples before 
his passion, saying to him : " Peace be with thee, Mark, my 
evangelist." Mark replied: "Thanks be unto thee, O 
Lord." And in the morning the whole populace of the 
city assembled, and again putting the rope round his neck 
dragged him away, saying : " Take this buffalo to the bull- 
ring." And as he went along, he gave thanks to God, say- 
ing : " Into thy hands, Lord, I commend my spirit ;" and 
so saying, he gave up the ghost. An immense crowd of the 
heathen now lighted a fire in the place which is called, " Of 
the Angels;" resolving to burn the sacred remains. But, 
by God's providence, a violent tempest arose, with a strong 
wind, and the sun's face was hidden, and there was loud 
thunder. Heavy rain also fell from morning to night, so 
that many houses were washed away and numbers perished. 
The guards, in terror, abandoned the body of the saint and 
fled ; and some said, mocking, that Serapis raised the storm 
on his feast-day in hatred of his enemy. 

Devout men then came and took the body and buried it 
with honour in a tomb of hewn stone on the seventh of the 
calends of May [25th April]. Thus St. Mark the evangelist, 
the first bishop of Alexandria, suffered martyrdom for Christ, 
and his body was buried on the eastern side of the city. 
After a long course of years, when Alexandria w^as threatened 
with the incursions of the infidels, who overran all the east 
like locusts, and subdued the greatest part of the world both 
to the north and the south, the faitliful Christians translated 
the apostle's remains to Aquileia where St. Mark first propa- 
gated the faith of Christ.^ The bishop of Aquileia therefore 
has now succeeded to the patriarchate formerly held by the 
bishop of Alexandria, and holds the fourth primacy m. the 

^ It is generally believed that St. Mark was sent by St. Peter to govern 
the church of Alexandria about a.d. 52, and that he there suffered mar- 
tyrdom in the eighth year of Nero's reign, the 25th of April, 62. Our 
author is one of the oldest writers who has given credit to his pretended 
mission to Aquileia. As for the details, equally apocryphal, which are 
here given of his apostlethip at Alexandria and his martyrdom, they are 
almost identically the same as those supplied by the Bollandists under the 
ist of April. 



ST. LUKE. 295 

world from reverence for St. Mark, to wliom Peter, who 
bears the keys of heaven, committed Egypt, appointing him 
chief pastor in the southern regions for the salvation of 
many souls. The Venetians^ and people of the west now 
glory in possessing the remains of the blessed evangelist, 
and continually pay them reverence to the praise of Almighty 
God, beseeching him that they may be reckoned in the 
number of the blessed for ever and ever. Amen. 

Ch. XVI, St. Luke lorites his gospel, and the Acts of the 
Apostles — Dies in Bithynia ? — His remains translated to 
Constantinople. 

St, Luke the evangelist, a native of Syria, who practised the 
art of medicine at Antioch with great skill, became a disciple 
of the apostles of Christ, and following St, Paul even to his 
martyrdom, remained constant in unblemished celibacy, 
serving the Lord, By divine inspiration, he wrote his 
gospel in the parts of Achaia, setting forth to the believing 
Greeks our Lord's incarnation in a faithful narrative, and 
showing how he was descended from the stock of David, 
He afterwards published a special book for the purpose of 
clearly recording the acts of the Apostles, and the first 
beginning of the infant church. These two books Luke 
dedicated to Theophilus, that, is one who loves God, and 
published them for all who, under the inspiration of the 
holy Ghost, are inflamed by a double charity. In his first 
book he has described the true priesthood of Christ, in which 
the Lamb of God has expiated the sin of the world by shed- 
ding his own precious blood. In the second, he has unfolded 
the majesty of the ineftable Deity, to which the Son of God 
has ascended at the right hand of the Pather in human flesh, 
and related the descent of the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete, on 
the apostles in tongues of fire, through which the primitive 
church shone with so glorious a light. In these two books of 
Luke the spiritual physician, is found the true medicine by 
which the deadly diseases of sin are expelled, and the remedy 
of justification unto life is provided for all who religiously 

^ Every one knows that the republic of Venice claimed to be under the 
especial protection of St. Mark, in virtue of possessing the relics of the 
holy evangelist, and many will recollect the richly decorated basilica of 
Byzantine architecture, and the stately piazza which bear the saint's 
cherished name. The lion of St. Mark was emblazoned on the standard 
of the republic. 



296 OEDEETCUS TITALTS. [b.II. CH.XYn. 

seek it. The "blessed Luke proclaimed the Lord by his 
writings as well as his discourses, and exhibited the light of 
truth to those who were in darkness. Among other mira- 
cles, he is said to have restored life to a dead man, in the 
name of the Lord. At length, he died in Bithjnia at the 
age of eighty-three years, full of the Holy Grhost, on the 
fifteenth of the calends of November [18th October]. His 
bones, ^s-ith those of St. Andrew the apostle, and Timothy, St. 
Paul's disciple, were translated to Constantinople on the 
seventh of the ides [9th] of May, in the twentieth year of 
the reign of the emperor Constantino.^ 

Ch. XVII. Sf. Martial, apostle of the Gauls, first hisliop of 

Limoges — Legend of his life and martyrdom. 
I HATE now gladly enumerated all the apostles and 
evangelists who were contemporary with and companions of 
our Saviour, the same our Lord lending me his help ; and 
have briefly and faithfully collected their sacred histories, as 
well as I could, digesting them from various works into one 
continued narrative. 

It yet remains that I should give some account of the 
blessed Martial of Limoges, whose extraordinary virtues have 
raised him to the highest rank of saints after the apostles. 
Aurelian, whom he restored from death in the name of the 
Lord, has written the details of his life with order, truth, and 
diligence. From this narrative I propose to make some 
extracts, invoking the Holy Spirit to vouchsafe his aid to 
my undertaking. 

While our Lord Jesus Christ was preaching in Judea, 
and great crowds of the Jews flocked around him, furnishing 
him with things necessarv' for his human wants, and learning 
theway of salvation by attentively listening to his instructions, 
one of the noblest of the Jews of the tribe of Benjamin, 
whose name was Marcellus, came to him, bringing with him 
his wife Elizabeth, and his only son Martial, who was then 
fifteen years of age. Beholding his marvellous works, and 
the saving doctrines he preached, they believed in Christ 
with contrite hearts, and at his command were baptized by 
the blessed apostle St. Peter. AVhen all the others returned 

^ It is the commonly received opinion that St. Luke wrote his gospel 
while he was in Greece, about A.t>. 53. He did not die in Bithynia as here 
stated, but in Achaia, probably at Patras, at a very advanced age. IJie 
translation of his relics to Constantinople took place the 3rd March, 357. 



ST. MAETIAL, APOSTLE OF THE GAULS. 297 

to their own homes, Martial devoted himself entirely to the 
Lord Jesus, and became one of his constant disciples. In 
so doing, he closely attached himself to the apostle Peter, 
to whom he was nearly related. He was a spectator of the 
raising of Lazarus after being four days in the grave, as well 
as of many other miracles. He ministered with Cleophas 
at the last supper, and other mystical rites, and was present 
with other disciples, at sundry appearances of our Lord 
after his resurrection, and at his glorious ascension. He 
partook of the blessings connected with the descent of the 
Holy Spirit, and was abundantly endowed with his superna- 
tural gifts, so that he was w^ell prepared by grace and faith 
for prosecuting vigorously the work of evangelizing. 

AVhen the apostles were dispersed. Martial went to 
Antioch with his kinsman St. Peter the apostle, and thence, 
seven years afterwards, to Rome. There Peter and his 
companions were hospitably entertained by Marcellus, the 
consul, living for some time in his palace, and preaching 
publicly to the E-omans the saving precepts of eternal life. 
At that time the Lord Jesus appeared to St. Peter, and 
commanded him to send Martial to preach in the provinces 
of Gaul. The apostle then called Martial to him, and duly 
informed him of the divine command ; upon hearing which 
he wept bitterly, from fear of such distant countries and 
barbarous tribes. But the blessed Peter gently consoled 
him, and, reminding him of the divine monitions, sent him on 
his errand of preaching the gospel. AVithout delay, therefore, 
Martial, with two priests, Alpinian and Austriclinian, set for- 
ward on the journey enjoined him. Austriclinian, however, 
dying on the road. Martial returned sorrowful to Eome, and 
informed Peter of the death of his companion. But at the 
apostle's command, he returned to his deceased brother, and, 
touching his body with the apostle's staff, he was immediately 
restored to life, by the merits and intercessions of the saints. 

Martial then, prosecuting his journey wuth his disciples, 
arrived at the castle of Tulle,^ where he was hospitably 
entertained by a wealthy man named Arnulf, with whom he 

^ M. Le Prevost considers that this is not Tulle in the Limousin, the 
Latin name of which was Tutela, but a place called Toulx on Cassini's 
map, on an elevated spot in La Marche, a few leagues N.E. of Gu6ret, 



29B OEDERICUS TITALIS. [b.II. CH.XVII. 

remained two months, diligently employed in publishing the 
word of Grod. Crowds of people flocked to him daily, 
hearing thankfully from his lips the words of salvation, and 
"witnessing miracles before unknown. During this time the 
daughter of Arnulf, who was daily vexed by a devil, was 
delivered from the unclean spirit at the command of Martial, 
and became as one dead ; but the man of Grod took her by 
the hand, and, raising her up, restored her to her father, 
perfectly healed. He was holy, benevolent, humble, and 
constant in prayer. 

The governor of the castle of Tulle whose name was Nerva, 
and who was related to the emperor Nero, had a son who 
was strangled by the devil. Upon this, the father and 
mother of the deceased, with all the crowd who were present, 
threw themselves at the feet of Martial and placed the 
youth's corpse before him with loud cries and lamentations, 
exclaiming in their grief: " Man of Grod, help us." The 
holy pontifi" had compassion on the sorrow of these people ; 
indeed he himself and his disciples wept with them, and they 
joined in prayer to Almighty Grod for the restoration of life 
to the dead. The prayer being ended, and the holy prelate 
having commanded the dead man to arise whole in the name 
of the crucified Saviour, he forthwith arose, and, throwing 
himself at the feet of the holy man, began to cry out: 
" Baptize me, thou man of Grod, and sign me with the sign of 
the faith;" adding: "Two angels came to me with great 
swiftness, saying that I should be restored to life by the 
prayers of the blessed Martial. Hell has no bounds ; there 
IS nothing but weeping and bitterness, darkness, wailings 
and groanings, and deep sorrow; the heat and cold are 
intense and terrible, and never fail ; there are the gnawings 
of serpents, and insupportable smells, corruption and misery, 
and the worm that never dies ; there are infernal gaolers who 
torment the souls they seize with various sufferings." 
When he had made this and similar declarations, all the 
people began to confess the Lord, and three thousand six 
hundred souls of both sexes were baptized on the spot. 
Many gifts were offered to the blessed man, all which he 

where the foundations of a fortification and many Roman antiquities have 
been discovered. 



ST. MAETIAL COMES TO LIMOGES. 299 

commanded to be given to the poor. After this he went to 
the idol images, and broke and reduced to atoms all their 
sculptured statues. 

The blessed prelate with his disciples came next to the 
village of Ahun/ and preached the true faith to the 
idolaters, who Avere deceived by the snares of the devil. 
Upon this the heathen priests assembled, and severely beat 
the • holy preachers. But they, blessing the Lord and 
patiently bearing their ill-treatment for his sake, and faith- 
fully supplicating his aid in this innninent peril, their 
persecutors were suddenly struck blind, and, holding each 
other by the hand, groped their way to the statue of 
Mercury. On their consulting the oracle as usual, it made 
no repl}^, the demon being bound by the angels of God. 
Having recourse to another idol they learned that their god 
could give them no answer, because he was chained by the 
angels of God in fetters of flame. 

The priests who had been struck blind, came therefore to 
St. Martial, and throwing themselves at his feet implored his 
pardon ; and the holy bishop restored their sight, and, 
presenting himself with all the people before the image of 
Jupiter, he adjured the demon in the Lord's name to come 
out, aild break in pieces the statue in presence of the multi- 
tude; which command was immediately obeyed and the statue 
reduced to atoms. Two thousand six hundred souls were 
baptized there. 

A man who was paralytic, hearing of this miracle, caused 
himself to be carried to the man of God. He Avas of high 
family, and rich in gold and silver, and great possessions. 
When now the man of God heard his entreaties and 
perceived his faith, he took him by the hand, and, praying 
for him, healed him. Thus restored to health, the paralytic 
glorified God, and offered rewards to the man of God, which 
he refused to accept, and ordered all to be distributed among 
the people. 

While St. Martial dwelt there, the Lord appeared to him 
in a vision, saying : " Tear not to go down to Limoges, for I 
will glorify thee in that place, and will be ever with thee." 
Thereupon the blessed bishop, having encouraged those he 
had baptized, commended them to the Lord, and went to the 

^ Ahun, near Gueret. 



303 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.XTIT. 

city witli his disciples. They were hospitably received in the 
house of a noble widow named Susanna, and on the morrow 
began to preach the Lord in public. 

There was a man afflicted with frenzy and bound in 
fetters in the house where the man of God was entertained, 
whom no one dared to unloose. Susanna having supplicated 
the bishop to heal him as he had done others who were sick, 
he yielded to her entreaties, and, making the sign of the cross 
over the diseased man, his chains fell off, and he was made 
whole. The noble mother, and her daughter Valeria, upon 
witnessing this miracle, believed, and were baptized by the 
holy bishop, with six hundred of their household. 

The priests of the idols, being incensed that the holy men 
preached in the theatre, severely scourged them, and threw 
them into prison ; but St. Martial and his companions bore 
patiently the injuries they received, giving thanks to God. 
St. Martial was praying about the third hour of the day 
following, when suddenly a light like that of the bright sun 
shone in the dungeon, and the fetters of those who were 
confined fell to pieces, and the doors were opened ; so that 
all who witnessed it entreated to be baptized. The city was 
shaken with an earthquake, there were lightnings and 
thunder, the heathen seeldng in vain the protection oi' their 
idols, for the priests who had scourged the holy men of God 
were killed by a thunderbolt. The citizens, therefore, were 
struck with universal terror, and, rushing to the prison, thre«' 
themselves at the bishop's feet, entreating pardon and help. 
The bishop and his colleagues offering their prayers, 
Aurelian and Andrew^ were restored to life, and, throwing 
themselves on their knees, sought forgiveness, confessing 
the true God, with all the people who saw with amazement 
such unheard-of prodigies. The day following St. Martial 
assembled the whole population, from the least to the eldest, 
and, having addressed to them a suitable exhortation, 
baptized them all. Thus twenty-two thousand believed in 
the Lord, and submitted with joy to his saving worship. 

The holy bishop then hastened with all the people to the 
temple, in which stood the statues of Jupiter, Mercury, 
Diana, and Yenus, and, destroying the images, converted the 

1 Probably two of the idol-priests so named. 



MARTYKDOir OF A^\.LEKIA. 301 

temple into a clnireli dedicated to the honour of St. Stephen, 
the first martyr. 

The blessed Susanna died happily in the Lord, and was 
buried by St. Martial with great honour. She had conferred 
. innumerable gifts and possessions on the holy bishop, and 
had granted to him the service of a number of her slaves. 
Moreover, her daughter Valeria devoted her virginity to the 
Lord, and, full of the Holy Ghost, showed herself a model of 
all good works. Hearing that Duke Stephen, to whom she 
was betrothed, was on his road to Limoges, and feeling sure 
that he would be grievously offended by her vow of chastity, 
she distributed to the poor all her wealth in gold, and silver, 
and vestments of various kinds, and precious stones. She 
had already joined her mother in making over to the holy 
bishop all their domains, with their slaves and serfs, that 
after his death his holy remains might be there interred. 

Duke Stephen's principality extended from the river 
Rhone to the ocean, and he possessed all the country on this 
side the Loire, with Aquitaine, inhabited by the Gascons and 
Goths. ^ He was not called king, because no prince assumed 
that title except Nero, who possessed the Roman empire. 
On Stephen's reaching Limoges, he ordered Valeria, his 
affianced bride, to be conducted to him, and, finding from the 
conference that he was rejected by her, and that it was 
certain he would never prevail on her to become his wife, 
he became so enraged that he broke off the conversation, 
and ordered her to be immediately led out of the city and 
beheaded. Arrived at the place of execution she foretold the 
sudden death of the executioner, and, spreading out her hands 
in prayer, commended herself with confidence to the Lord 
her God. During her prayer a voice was heard from above, 
saying : " Eear not, Valeria, thou art expected in the celestial 
brightness which never ends." The virgin rejoiced at 

1 We might be surprised to find the Goths and Gascons settled in 
Aquitaine during the fiist century, if it were not known that the legend 
writers of the middle ages stuck at no anachronism. It was not till the 
beginning of the fifth century (a.d. 412) that the Goths took jDossession of 
the basin of the Garonne, and in the course of the sixth the province of 
Novempopulanie changed its mime for that of Gascony, derived from the 
Gascons of Spain. The only historical personage of this country of the 
name of Stephen v.as a count of Auvergne, killed by the Normans in 
864. 



302 OEDERICTJS YITALIS. [c.II. CH.XTir. 

hearing these words, and, lifting up her eyes to heaven, said : 
" Lord, into thj hands I commend my spirit." Having thus 
spoken, she voluntarily offered her neck to the executioner, 
who cut off her head with a single blow. Many persons saw 
her spirit depart from the body, bright as the sun, and rising 
to heaven in a globe of fire, with a choir of angels, singing : 
" Blessed art thou, Valeria, martyr of Christ, for thou hast 
kept the commandments of God. Henceforth thou shalt be 
for ever in his sight, in the brightness of the light that 
knows no end." 

The squire of Duke Stephen, who had beheaded Valeria, 
hearing these words hastened to his master, and told him all 
he had seen and heard. Mentioning last the virgin's pre- 
diction of his own impending death, he was struck by an 
angel, and fell at the duke's feet, and presently expired. 
Fear and trembling seized the duke and all the people, and 
the duke, covering himself with sackcloth, requested the 
blessed Martial to come to him. On his arrival, the duke 
prostrated himself at his feet, and said, with many tears : " I 
have sinned, most holy man, in that I have shed the blood of 
the righteous ; but I pray thee to restore this my squire to 
life, and cause me to believe in your Grod." Then the holy 
bishop convoked the whole Christian population, and 
exhorted them all to supplicate for the recovery of the dead 
man. Sdence being then made, he himself prayed with a 
loud voice, and, his prayer ended, he approached the body of 
the dead, and taking his hand commanded him to rise in the 
name of the Lord. And he immediately arose, and, throwing 
himself at the bishop's feet entreated to be baptized. Duke 
Stephen, also, on seeing this miracle, knelt before the holy 
bishop, imploring his forgiveness for the sin he had 
committed. The blessed prelate, therefore, enjoined him a 
penance for putting to death the virgin and martyr, and 
baptized him with all his counts, and officers, and the whole 
army, and all the people of both sexes, to the number of 
fifteen thousand. The duke of whom we are speaking, gave 
to Martial, his master in Christ, large sums of gold and 
silver, that he might build churches to the honour of the 
Lord. He also granted him large domains, with many 
beneficiary estates, and vineyards, and serfs, in the province 
of Limoges, to enable him to embellish the churches he built. 



CHRISTIAN GAULS AT ROME. 303 

and to supply tbe wants of the clergy, who were to serve 
God in them. He afterwards erected a hospital for the 
poor, to the charitable memory of Valeria, in which he 
directed three hundred poor persons to be fed daily. He 
also founded another, in which he made provision for refresh- 
ment being given daily to a crowd of the indigent, to the 
number of six hundred ; and he also built a church over the 
tomb of St. Yaleria, virgin and martyr. 

Meanwhile Stephen, prince of the Gauls, was summoned 
to Italy by order of the emperor Nero, and there served in 
the army for six months with four legions of soldiers. 
During his military service Stephen did not forget the divine 
laws, but so ordered his troops that every one was satisfied 
with his own, and if any committed robbery he suffered 
death. After the term of his service was expired Stephen 
obtained his leave of absence, but he was unwilling to return 
to his own states until he had seen the blessed Peter the 
apostle. He hastened therefore, with all his troops, to 
Eome, and entering the city they found the apostle teaching 
great crowds of people in a place called the Vatican, 
Approaching the apostle with bare feet and sackcloth on 
their loins, they knelt before him and humbly besought his 
blessing. St. Peter, seeing the flower of the youth of Gaul, 
and learning that they had all been instructed in the gospel 
of Christ and baptized by the blessed Martial, was filled 
with joy and gave blessings to the Lord. He made many 
anxious inquiries of the pious duke concerning the manners 
and grace and way of life of the holy bishop, and the duke 
took pleasure in recounting many particulars of his goodness 
and miracles, and the conversion of the people who hastened 
from all parts to the font of holy baptism. 

When the duke had received absolution from the apostle 
for having shed the blood of the innocent Valeria, he ofiered 
him the two hundred gold livres which he had just received 
as a donation from the emperor JS'ero, but the apostle 
directed him to take the gold to the holy bishop, that he 
might employ it in erecting churches or relieving the poor. 
Having therefore received the apostolic benediction, Stephen 
and his soldiers returned to Gaul, and at the duke's sugges- 
tion they visited their common father before they returned to 
their own homes. Arriving at a certain royal palace called 



301 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b. II. CH.XYII. 

St. Jimien, they pitched their tents and pavilions on tha 
bank of the river Vienne.^ The heat of the weather 
drove them to the river for refreshment both from the dust 
and from the sun's rays, when Hildebert, son of Areadiug 
count of Poitoii, was drowned bj the devil at a place called 
Grarri, and died on the spot, nor could his body be found 
although the whole army searched for it. Arcadius and all 
the soldiers were overwhelmed with grief, and hastening 
with lamentations to Limoges, he humbly implored the aid 
of Martial on his son's behalf. Great crowds of Groths and 
Saxons, and people of other provinces, had now flocked to 
Limoges, desiring to hear the word of salvation from the 
holy man. Arcadius therefore and all the people threw 
themselves at Martial's feet, beseeching him with much 
lamentation on behalf of the young man dro\siied in the 
river. The holy man wept with them, and came to the 
place clothed in sackcloth, and with naked feet. All present 
joining in prayer, the man of God adjured the demons, who 
lurked in a hollow of the channel, that they should render 
themselves visible to the people and bring the corpse of the 
young man to the river-bank. Immediately the body wad 
cast ashore at the distance of about six furlongs, the demons 
appearing in the shape of swine. At length, the people 
making deprecatory prayers and the bishop adjuring, they 
rushed violently from the river, and came and lay down at 
the feet of St. Martial. They were like the Ethiopians, 
black as soot, their feet enormous, their eyes terrible and 
bloody, their whole body was covered with bristly hair, and 
Irom their mouths and nostrils they breathed sulphureous 
flames. Their speech resembled the croakings of the raven ; 
and when the bishop demanded their names one of them 
answered ; " I am called thousand-craft, because I have a 
thousand arts of deceiving the human race." Another said ; 
" I am called Neptune, because I have dragged numbers of 
men into this hole and plunged them into the torments of 
hell." The holy bishop inquired, " A¥hy do you wear rings 
of lire on your snouts ?" The demons replied : " When we 
have seduced the souls of men, it is by chains attached 
to these we drag them to our master." The bishop asking 

^ There is a commune still called du Palais on the banks of the Vienne, 



about one league from Limoges. 



ST. Martial's miracles. 305 

their master's name, they replied : " Strife, for he never ceases 
to stir up quarrels, and his rage and passion are without end." 
The demons then entreating the bishop that he would talk 
no more with them in Latin, and would not send them into 
the abyss or the boundless ocean, he commanded them, in 
the Hebrew tongue, to depart into a desert place, and to 
hurt no living creature to the day of judgment. The 
demons then flying through the air appeared no more. 
And now the duke with the whole crowd of people, and all 
the army collected from diiferent provinces, and present at 
this extraordinary spectacle, threw themselves at the feet of 
the holy bishop pitifully imploring him to restore life to the 
young man who then lay dead. The bishop, moved at their 
distress, commanded all with one heart to make intercession 
to the Lord, and taking the hand of the deceased said, " In 
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Hildebert arise ; " and 
he immediately arose and lived piously twenty- six years after- 
wards. While all who witnessed so glorious a miracle were 
praising God, St. Martial called Hildebert and made inquiry 
of him, for the edification of the hearers, what he saw while 
he was dead. With some hesitation, he related as follows : — 
"Bathed in sweat from the intense heat of the sun, I 
was washing myself in the river, when suddenly the demons 
plunged me into a deep hole and drowned me. Eut when they 
attempted to bind me in chains of iire, an angel of the Lord 
stood by me and delivered me out of their hands. We had 
begun to take the road to the east, when two bands of 
demons opposed our progress, throwing at us fiery darts. 
One of these bands attacked us in front, while the other 
assaulted us in the rear. Tor my part I was terribly 
frightened, but the angel my companion encouraged me ; 
beginning to sing with a melodious voice and sweet expres- 
sion : ' Bless the Lord, my soul ; and all that is within me, 
praise his holy name. Who forgiveth all thy iniquities and 
redeemeth thy life from the pit.' At length we reached the 
purgatorial fire, where Christians are punished for such of 
their daily transgressions as are not aggravated to mortal sins. 
Purgatory is a river of fire, with a bridge across, over which 
the angel of the Lord conducting me stood still, and taking 
my hand said : ' Here you will remain until, being cleansed 
from all your sins, you are fit to be a partaker of the 

YOL. I. X 



806 OEDEEICrS TITALIS. [e.ii. Cn.XTII. 

heavenly kingdom.' This being passed we arrived at the 
gate of Paradise, near which we found a crowd of demons 
assembled, whose rage and whose slanders I horribly feared. 
But at that moment a voice was heard from heaven, saying : 
' Let the soul of the young man return to his body, and let 
him live twenty-six years.' The angel who conducted me 
was of incredible beauty, his whole aspect surpassing the 
human race. To my inquiries concerning our doctor, St. 
Martial, he replied : ' His merit in heaven is great because he 
has continued in celibacy, and is and means to be free from 
the love of women. From his youth he began to serve the 
Lord and attach himself to the blessed Peter, never 
returning to his father's house. As he is known to be free 
from the concupiscence of the flesh, so he will be delivered 
from the pains of death. Twelve angels are commissioned 
by the Lord to attend him constantly, who do not suffer him 
to be weary, nor to hunger or thirst, but preserve him from 
all evil and shield him from every touch of sorrow.' 'J 

"While Hildebert was relating these things and others 
similar to them, the hearts of the bishop and the duke and 
all the assembled people were gladdened, and they oflered 
thanksgivings to the Lord for all the benefits conferred 
upon them. Hildebert, observmg the angel's admonitions, 
shaved his head, and attaching himself to the blessed prelate 
devoted himself to the service of the Lord, neither drinking 
wine nor eating flesh. He went bare-foot, and was satis- 
fied with bread and water for food, and sackcloth for 
raiment. He gave himself up to constant prayers, and 
frequent fiistings, and. the continual performance of good 
works. All that he inherited from his parents he distributed 
to the poor ; and reserved nothing for himself on the mor- 
row. Multitudes followed his example, and renouncing 
their own wills hastened to Christ by the narrow way. 

Duke Stephen pubHshed an ordinance du-ecting^ that 
through all the nations which were subject to his doininion, 
the temples and idols should be broken down and burnt 
with fire, and that they should worship the one only God, 
whom they should strive to obey. He himself, as he had 
learnt from his master, observed a life of religion towards 
God. He was liberal in alms, just in his judgments, care- 
ful for the poor, docile, and devoted to the priests and all 



ST. MAUTIAL AT BOURDEATJX. 307 

tlie ministers of Grod ; he was the wise father of the Chris- 
tians, but a fierce persecutor of the pagans. Prom the day 
of his baptism he was never defiled by connection with 
any woman, but lived in chastity to the day of his death. 

There was in the city of Bordeaux a count named Sige- 
bert, who for six years was grievously afflicted with para- 
lysis. Hearing the miracles which were wrought by the 
blessed Martial, he directed his wife Benedicta to go with 
all haste to the man of God, and, taking with her twenty- 
six livres in gold and a sufficient sum in silver, implore 
the favour of Grod through the intercession of his friend. 
She used the utmost despatch in preparing what was com- 
manded, and hastened to the man of Grod with an escort ol 
two thousand eight hundred horsemen. On her arrival she 
earnestly petitioned the man of Grod for her husband's health, 
which he, rejoicing in her faith, promised to restore. He 
therefore delivered his staff" to the matron, commanding her 
to lay it on her husband and he would be healed. He 
refused to accept the gold and silver, but according to the 
Lord's commandment conferred the spiritual benefits 
gratuitously. He baptized the noble Benedicta and all the 
companions of her journey, and dismissed them to their 
homes confirmed in the faith. 

Meanwhile, when the populace of Bordeaux flocked to 
the idol temples and the priests burnt incense, the demon 
said that he would come out at the command of a certain 
Hebrew named Martial, and published with sorrow the 
great virtues of the holy bishop and his honour with Grod. 
As the matron was entering the city on her return, the 
elders of the people proceeded to meet her, and told her all 
that they had heard from Jupiter. Then the countess sent 
for the chief pontiff* of the idols, and commanded him that 
he should go to all the temples, except those of the unknown 
God, and utterly destroy them. She then with her Chris- 
tian companions implored God's mercy, and coming in his 
name to her husband's bed, placed on him the blessed 
apostle's staff". Immediately his limbs, which had been 
injured by the contraction of the nerves, and dried up by 
fever, became instantly as though they had never lost their 
power. After the just-named Count Sigebert was healed 
he went with a great retinue to the holy bishop and was 

2 X 



SOS OEDEEICTJS TITALIS. [e.II. Cn.XTII. 

regenerated hj him, with all his followers, in the water of 
holy baptism. He returned abundant offerings of prayers 
and thanks for the heavenly benefits conferred upon him, 
and lived many years afterwards happily in the service of 
the Lord. 

It happened on a certain occasion, that when the city of 
Bordeaux was, for the presumption of the inhabitants, in 
danger of being consumed by fire, the flames threatening its 
entire destruction, the pious Benedicta, in full faith, op- 
posed the staff of the man of God to the progress of the 
fire, invoking the aid of the Creator, whose omnipotence 
she confessed. And the conflagration was immediately 
extinguished, so that no traces of fire remained. 

At that time Martial, the bishop of Christ, moved by 
divine inspiration, went to the bank of the'river G-aronne, 
and preached the gospel to multitudes who flocked to him 
at a place called Mortagne ; remaining there three months in 
the saving work of his divine mission. Nine demoniacs 
brought by their parents in chains from the city of Bordeaux 
were healed by St. Martin, the demons being expelled. 
The demons also, who by virtue of Christian faith were 
expelled from the city of Bordeaux, incensed with those 
whom they had subjugated, took possession of some mise- 
rable idolaters, and entering their bodies grievously vexed 
them. Their parents therefore brought them to the man of 
God, at whose prayers and commands their malignant 
enemies issued forth from their mouths with torrents of 
blood, and were no more seen. 

On one occasion when the blessed St. Martial preached 
in Mortagne, and crowds of people flocked to hear the true 
doctrine. Count Sigebert resolved to join him with a con- 
siderable body of soldiers, and to show his friendship by 
supplying him with all that was necessary for meat and 
drink. Among other things he desired a quantity of fish, 
and despatched his servants to the sea for the purpose of 
fishing. "WTien at last the fishermen, bringing with them 
many kinds of fish, were looking forward with anxiety 
to reach the shore, a sudden storm arose and threatened 
them with shipwreck and destruction. The countess Bene- 
dicta, who ^ith a crowd of people was on the shore waiting, 
saw the danger in great alarm. And now men began to 



CnUECIIES BUILT AT LIMOGES. 309 

sink witli the boats, when the devout woman, extending her 
hands towards heaven, called upon Grod with a loud voice, 
and the storm immediately ceased. The fishermen, with 
their boats, and fish, and nets, came safe to the harbour, and 
all who saw it glorified God. 

On his return from Mortagne the amiable prelate again 
\ isited Limoges, and thence went to a village called Ansae. 
It boasted an idol of Jupiter held in great veneration by 
the heathen, which drew together numbers of sick folk 
labouring under various infirmities. On the bishop's arrival 
the demon was dumb, but at the request of the inhabitants 
the man of God commanded him to come out of the image, 
and breaking the statue show himself to the people in a 
visible form. There forthwith issued from the statue what 
had the appearance of a negro boj, black as soot, covered 
with dark and rough hair from head to foot, and fire 
flashing from his mouth, nostrils, and eyes, with a sulphu- 
reous smell. Thus the saint showed the people what sort of 
god they had worshipped, and repeated his order to the 
demon that he should destroy the image ; which he accord- 
ingly reduced to powder, and never again appeared. Then 
the venerable bishop assembled round him all the sick, and 
making the sign of the cross over them healed them in the 
name of the Lord, baptizing all those who appeared to 
dwell in that place. E^eturning afterwards to his own see, 
he caused oratories to be built, and decorated them care- 
fully with rich ornaments. One he dedicated to the honour 
of St. Stephen the first martyr, his own kinsman, and 
another to St. Peter the apostle, his ownnnaster.^ The altar 
was overlaid all round with plates of gold. When the 
churches were built, the blessed bishop fixed a day for the 
consecration, and Duke Stephen caused preparations to be 
made for entertaining all who came to the holy solemnity. 
When however the holy bishop was celebrating the mass, 
Herve, count of Tours, was carried ofi" by the devil, as well as 
his Christian wife. But the holy man did not sufter them 
to be long tormented, but calling them to him, he rebuked the 

^ The cathedral of Limoges is still under the invocation of St, Stephen. 
The church here called St. Peter's, has been known by the name of St. 
Martial since the time that the relics of that apostle of the Limousin were 
deposited in it. 



310 OBDERICUS TITALIS. [b.II. Cn.XVII. 

devils for taking possession of them. But tHey replied, that 
it was permitted them on account of the transgression of 
the coiint and his wife, who, contrary to the bishop's precept, 
had polluted themselves with carnal knowledge the whole 
night. Upon the count and the people entreating favour 
for the possessed, the holy bishop restored them to sound 
health and vigour, expelling the demon in the name of the 
Lord. The church of St. Peter was consecrated on the 
sixth of the nones [2nd] of May, in the reign of the emperor 
Nero, when so dazzling was the light shed in it on the day 
of dedication, that it was scarcely possible to distinguish 
one person from another. 

These ceremonies being duly performed, the blessed Mar- 
tial ordained Aureliau to succeed him in the see of Limoges 
after his own decease. He also caused Andrew the priest 
to preside over the church of St. Peter the apostle, settling 
in it Hildebert, son of Count Archadius, and thirty-six 
clerks besides, for whom Duke Stephen provided out of his 
own domains an abundant revenue, to supply food and 
clothing. 

Much has been written on the life of the blessed Martial, 
which cannot be fully recounted in detail. To sum up his 
character shortly, he was deeply imbued with divine wis- 
dom, illustrious for his piety, exemplary in his morals, and 
regarded vrith awe for the miracles he wrought. Holding 
the world cheap, and loving God and his neighbour, for him 
" to live was Christ, to die was gain." He restored, as we 
have often noticed, sight to the blind, and caused the deaf 
to hear, the lame to walk, the dumb to speak, and the dead 
to return to life. There are many other particulars worthy 
to be recorded, as Aurelian remarks, of works done by St. 
Martial by the grace of Christ, which would be considered 
as apocryphal by unbelievers, if they were committed to 
writing. 

In the year 40, after our Lord's resurrection, when the 
blessed Martial was praying, as he was wont, the Lord 
Jesus Christ appeared to him in glory with his disciples, 
and having graciously saluted him by name, predicted that 
the fifteenth day from thence would be the period of his 
departure out of this world. The holy man, full of joy, gave 
thanks to Grod, and during two weeks, prepared for his end 



DEATn OF ST. MARTIAL. 311 

with fasting, and watching, and prayer. After a short ces- 
sation, to rest his wearied limbs, he rose in the night for 
prayer at the hour appointed, and continued his prayers 
and divine lauds to the second hour of day. Then he 
offered the holy sacrifice to the Lord, for himself and the 
whole church, at the second hour, and afterwards preached 
diligently until the evening. Towards the close of day, as 
night approached, he took the nourishment to which he 
rigorously confined himself, viz. bread and water. 

The period of his vocation being near, the holy man con- 
voked his brethren and announced to them, that the day of 
his departure was at hand ; making known the same also 
by messengers he despatched through all the provinces and 
districts which he had gained for the Lord. Great numbers 
assembled in deep sorrow, viz., the people of Poitou, Berrv, 
Auvergne, Grascony, and Gothia. The day of his death 
drawing near, at the request of all he went out of the gate 
of the city called the Lime-gate, and there delivered a 
discourse on the true faith and the divine operations, and 
profitably recounted the blessed virtues which adorn the 
Christian life. At the end of his discourse he gave the 
benediction to the people, commending them to God in 
devout prayer, and then causing himself to be carried into 
the oratory of St. Stephen, and lying there in sackcloth and 
ashes waited his end, while, with bended knees and hands 
outstretched to heaven, he caused prayers to be offered to 
aid him in his last struggle. At the close he thus addressed 
the Lord : " Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit ;" 
and whilst those who stood around were weeping and pray- 
ing, he made a sign with his hand for silence, and said to 
them : " Be still, hear ye not the songs of praise proceeding 
from heaven? surely the Lord cometh, as he promised;" 
and immediately a great light shone around, and the voice 
of the Lord was heard calling him, and saying : " Blessed 
spirit, depart," and instantly he rose to heaven, surrounded 
by the glorious light, while a concert of angels was heard. 
On the morrow, at the third hour, a paralytic who touched 
liis bier immediately became sound. "When his body was 
carried forth for burial, at the moment of the departure 
towards the church of St. Stephen, the heavens were opened 
and continued open while the bearers of the holy remains 



312 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.XVIII. 

carried tliem to the place of interment. Moreover, as a 
multitude of infirm persons was collected at the funeral, 
the blessed Alpinian taking the sudarium of the holy bishop 
applied it to the bodies of the sick, and invoking the name 
of Christ all were healed. Among the rest a dropsical man 
was brought from Toulouse, with six blind persons and four 
demoniacs, who, on the day following the obit of the holy 
bishop, were presented before his tomb, and healed by the 
touch of the sacred napkin. 

Innumerable other miracles were wrought by the most 
holy prelate after his interment, the great number of which 
forbids their being reduced to ^vTiting in detail. Probably 
larger volumes, if they were written, would not content 
those who are dissatisfied with the present account.^ 

May the holy bishop Martial, the cotemporary of Christ 
and the companion of the apostles, who was the pious pastor 
of Limoges, and the first who preached to the people of the 
west, intercede for us who speak of him, that, protected by 
his prayers, we may be found worthy to be partakers of the 
eternal inheritance. Amen. 

Ch. XVIII. Epitome of the series of bishops of Mome^ 
from St. Peter to Pope Innocent II. a.d. 1143. 

Having determined to compose a history from the works 
of former writers, I commenced with ecclesiastical history, 
in the beginning of which I collected some short accounts 
of the holy apostles. Now, by God's help I shall endeavour 
to give a regular series of the Koman bishops, beginning 
with St. Peter the apostle, to whom Christ gave the keys of 
the kingdom of heaven ; an undertaking I consider neces- 
sary, and useful to studious persons and others who desire 
instruction. My careful researches extend through eleven 
centuries, from the time that the Almighty Emanuel came 
to us, veiled in the flesh which he borrowed from the im- 

1 These supposed acts of St. Martial appear to have been substituted 
for the original, which was then lost, a few years before 994, the date of 
the second translation of his relics. Till that time it was believed, accord- 
ing to Gregory of Tours, that the period of his mission could not be carried 
higher than the reign of Trnjan, A council at Limoges iii 1029, another 
at Bourges in 1031, and, finally, a bull of the holy see, sanctioned the 
assertions of the fictitious account. 



A.D. 6Q — 78.] SUCCESSION OF POPES. 313 

maculate virgin. The city of Rome, wliich from its very 
foundation carried its fasces in triumph over all its neigh- 
bours, and which, by God's providence, extended its fron- 
tiers to the Euphrates and the Ocean, saw also many^ 
illustrious champions, who, by God's aid, held the reins of 
ecclesiastical discipline. It is delightful to trace their tri- 
umphant course over the waves of this world, that those 
who walk in the steps of the Christian heroes may strive to 
imitate their noble acts which lead to salvation. 

The blessed Simon Petee, the prince of the apostles, son 
of John, and born at Bethsaida, in the province of Galilee, 
i first filled the see of Antioch during seven years. He then 
went to Home in the reign of Claudius, to oppose Simon 
Magus, and there preaching governed the church twenty- 
five years. He often disputed before Nero and the people 
against Simon, whom he defeated; and bis martyrdom by 
Nero at the same time as that of St. Paul, took place in the 
year 36 from the passion of our Lord, on the third of the 
calends of July [29th June].^ 

Linus, son of Herculanus, and born in Tuscany, occupied 
the see of E-ome eleven years, three months, and twelve 
days, suffering martyrdom on the sixth of the calends of 
December [25th November]. Following the precept of the 
apostle Peter, he decreed that no woman should enter a 
church without having her head covered.' 

Cletus, born at Eome, sat twelve years, one month, eleven, 
days, and suffered under Domitian on the sixth of thei 
calends of May [26th April]. The see remained void 
twenty days. Eufinus, priest of Aquileia, says in the pre- 
face of his history of Clemens, that Linus and Cletus- 
performed the functions of bishops during the life of Peter 
the apostle, and afterwards succeeded him. 1 am much 
surprised that so sensible a critic and historian, and one so 
well read, both in Greek and Latin authors, should not have 
recollected, that both these bishops finished their blessed 

1 See former notes on the date of St. Peter's ministry at Antioch and 
Rome, and his martyrdom, pp. 194 and 195, 

* Our author has followed the martyrology of Ado in placing the death 
of Linus on the 25th of December. It is generally placed on the 23rd of 
September. It is very doubtful whether this pope and his successor 
suffered martyrdom. 



314j oedeeicus yitalis. [e.ii. cn.xTiii. 

course by martyrdom, and tliat no one suifered persecution at 
E-ome for the cause of Christ until the thirteenth 3'ear of 
Nero, after the fall of Simon Magus. Linus suffered in the 
time of Vespasian, and Cletus in the persecution under 
Domitian.^ 

CLEMEifs, born at !Rome on the Celian Mount, whose 
father was Faustinus, jfilled the see ten years, two months, 
ten days, and was thrown into the sea under the emperor 
Trajan on the ninth of the calends of December [23rd ISTo- 
vember]. The see was vacant twenty-one days. Following 
the discipline of the blessed Peter the apostle, he was so 
eminent for the ornaments of a good conversation, that he 
was esteemed by the Jews and Gentiles, as well as by the 
Christians, whose poor he caused to be all registered, not 
suffering those who had been purified by holy baptism to 
become public mendicants. He gave the consecrated veil 
to riavia Domitia, a virgin who was niece of Domitian and 
espoused to Aurelius,^ and confirmed Theodora the wife of 
count Sisinnius in her resolution of chastity. Her husband, 
having been led by his passions to follow her as she secretly 
entered the church, was immediately by St. Clemens' 
prayers struck blind and deaf. His servants seeking to 
remove him could not find the door, although they searched 
for it all round for some time, until Theodora obtained by 
her prayers on her husband's behalf, that he and his attend- 
ants might depart. Conducted home, his blindness still 
continued, and when mass was ended Theodora stated all 
the circumstances to Pope Clemens, who exhorted the 
people to offer their prayers. He himself, with the woman, 
visited the diseased man, and by his supplications caused 
his sight and hearing to be immediately restored. But 
though he recovered his bodily senses, he lost his reason, 
and ordered Clemens, whom he accused of following his 
wife, to be siezed and brought to him. His servants also 

1 This pope is also called Anaclete. The history of these first two 
successors of St. Peter is very obscure. There appears to be no foundation 
for the opinion of Rufinus, but the fact which our author opposes to it, is, 
as already observed, doubtful. [■23rd September? 78 — 91. 

^ If we believe, with the church, the existence of this saint, she must 
have been the niece, not of Domitian, but of Flavius Clemens, his cousin- 
german, who was consul in 82. Unfortunately we have no other guarantee 
for this story but the very suspicious Acts of SS. Nereus and Achilles. 



AD. 91 — 100.] POPE CLEMENS. 315 

attached ropes to stone pillars, and dragged them within 
and without the house. Sisinnius and his servants being 
thus mad, Clemens departed, and Theodora spent the whole 
day in weeping and praying for her husband. At length in 
the evening Peter the apostle appeared to her and com- 
forted her, saying : " Sisinnius shall be saved by thee, in 
order that the word spoken by my brother Paul the apostle 
be fulfilled : ' the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the 
believing wife.' " ^ Sisinnius, recovering his reason, caused 
Theodora to invite Clemens to come to him, and confessing 
his former folly, declared his belief in Almighty Grod, and 
being confirmed in the faith was baptized the following 
Easter, with three hundred and twenty-three persons of 
both sexes.^ Many noble and illustrious persons believed 
through him, and professing the true faith received baptism. 
Publius Torqueanus, count of the sacred offices, becoming 
jealous of the increase of the Christians, gave money to his 
officers in various provinces, to stir up opposition to the 
name of Christ. A tumult of the people took place at Eome, 
while Mamertine was prefect, and by command of Publius 
Torqueanus, Clemens was privately brought before him ; but 
the bishop, by his sensible replies, endeavoured to bring him 
over to the true faith. The tumult still raging, a report 
concerning Clemens was forwarded to JN^erva, and also to 
Trajan. The rescript of Trajan ordered that if Clemens 
refused to sacrifice to the idols, he should be banished to the 
city of Chersona, beyond the Euxine Sea. But the Lord 
gave such grace to the blessed Clemens that even the heathen 
judges grieved for him. Julian, the president, sorrowfully 
commended him by prayer to God, and supplied him with 
a ship, freighted with all that his comfort required, and he 
was accompanied in his exile by many devout persons, both 
of the clergy and laity. The holy pope found at his place of 
banishment more than two thousand Christians, condemned 
to hew blocks of marble; and rejoiced that they were 
suffering for the name of Christ, instructing them fully in 
the doctrine of patience and keeping the faith. Hearing 
that they had to fetch water on their shoulders six miles, he 

1 1 Cor, vii. 14. 

^ The whole of this legend of St. Theodora is apocryphal, as it is easy to 
discover. 



316 OilDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.II. CH.XYIII. 

prayed the Lord to give them water. "When his prayer was 
ended, he saw a Iamb standing on a hill, and gently struck 
with a short rod the spot which the lamb had pointed out, by 
lifting its foot ; whereupon a fountain burst forth supplied 
by copious springs, and speedily forming a river. This being 
known, the whole province flocked together, and great 
numbers listened to the teaching of St. Clemens, so that in 
one day five hundred souls, or more, were baptized ; and in 
less than a year seventy-five churches were erected, the idols 
being demolished by the believers. 

After three years, a malicious accusation was forwarded to 
Trajan at the instance of the pagans ; and he sent the tribune, 
Aulidius, who put to death many Christians by various kinds 
of suffering. After this general massacre he ordered Clemens 
to be embarked alone on the sea, and thrown into the waves 
with an anchor attached to his neck. While this was doing, 
Phaebus and Cornelius, with a crowd of Christians, stood on 
the shore praying, with floods of tears, when the sea receded 
for almost three miles from the shore, and people walking on 
the dry land saw a strange spectacle. For they found a 
small building, having the appearance of a marble chapel, 
built by angelic hands, and the body of St. Clemens deposited 
therein in a stone coffin by the ministry of angels, with the 
anchor by which the body had been sunk laid near. It was 
revealed to the disciples that they should not remove the 
body, as, on the recurrence of the anniversary of St. 
Clemens' martyrdom, the sea would again recede, and for 
seven days permit approach to the tomb. Many miracles 
were wrought there, and all the heathen in the neighbourhood 
believed in Christ, and became servants of Him who liveth 
and reigneth for ever and ever. Amen.^ 

By a constitution of Clemens' s, the altar-cloth, the chair, 
and the candelabrum, were to be burnt when they became 
worn out. 

Anacletus,' a Greek, of Athens, filled the see nine years 
two months, ten days ; and on his death the third of the 
ides [13th] July, it was vacant sixteen days. By a decree of 

^ The details respecting St. Clemens contained in this and the preceding 
paragraph, are altogether apocryphal. • 

* See the note in p. 314, which describes Pope Anaclete as the same as 
Cletus. 



A.D. 100 — 127.] EYATIISTUS— STXTTjg. 817 

his no accusation was to be received against a priest, except 
it were preferred bj men of character and probity, above 
suspicion. 

Eyaeistus, a Jew, of Bethlehem, whose father's name was 
Juda, filled the see nine years, ten months, two days, in the 
reigns of Domitian, Nerva, and Trajan.^ After his 
martyrdom the see was vacant eighteen days. Evaristus 
appointed seven deacons to attend the bishop during his 
preaching, to be witnesses of his doctrine,^ and to supply the 
place of eyes in his superintendence of all parts of his diocese. 
He also decreed that a man should not divorce his wife, or 
the wife leave her husband ; and that no church should have 
a new bishop while the former was alive. 

Alexander was born at Eome, in the quarter of the Bull's 
Head, his father's name being also Alexander. He filled the 
see ten years, seven months, eleven days. He introduced 
the custom of blessing houses, by sprinkling holy water in 
which salt was mixed ; as well as the reference to our Lord's 
passion, in the prayer used by the priest in celebrating mass. 
The Lord wrought many miracles, and brought salvation to 
many souls by his instrumentality. At length he was 
beheaded on the Nomentan way, on the fifth of the nones 
[3rd] May, and the see was vacant thirty-five days. 

SixTUS, born at Eome in the Latin Street [via Latino] 
whose father's name was Pastor, sat ten years, two months, 
one day. He decreed that none but persons in orders should 
presume to touch holy things. He also introduced into the 
[canon of the] mass, the hymn of angels and men, to be sung 
by the priests in the presence of the people : " Holy, holy, 
holy, Lord God of sabaoth. Heaven and earth are full of 
thy glory: hosanna in the highest. Blessed is he that 
Cometh in the name of the Lord : hosanna in the highest." 
Sixtus ordained that the character, truthfulness, life, and 

^ Our author commits a great anachronism in placing a part of the' 
pontificate of St. Evaristus (who died a.d. 109) under the reigns of 
Domitian and Nerva, the last of whom died in the month of January, 98. 

^ This passage is very obscure. The text runs, qui cusiodirent episco- 
pum prcEdicanfem per stilum veritatis, " by the pen of truth." The 
ecclesiastical historians paraphrase it, somewhat as is here done, with 
the gloss, " lest the bishop's detractors should attribute to him errors in his 
preaching, which he had not committed ;" a curious instance of the use of 
what we cali shorthand-writers in very early times. 



818 OEDEEICUS yiTALIS. [b.II. CH. XVIII. 

conversation of any one who brought forward charges against 
the clergy, should be narrowly scrutinized, and that no 
attention should be paid to such as were ignorant of the true 
faith, whose lives were irregular, or who came from the 
houses of Christ's enemies. At length he suffered martyrdom 
on the nones [5th] of April, and at his death the bishopric 
was vacant fourteen days. 

Telesphoetts, a Greek, held the see eleven years, three 
months, twenty-one days, in the time of Antonine and 
Marcus Aurelius. This pope ordained that the fast before 
Easter should last seven weeks, and the midnight mass at the 
feast of the Nativity, and introduced the hymn of the angels, 
that is the " Gloria in excelsis," as the commencement of the 
holy office. He was at length martyred on the nones [5th] 
of January. The see was then vacant for seven days.^ 

Hyginus, an Athenian, who had been a philosopher, held 
the bishopric four years, three months, four days, in the 
time of Verus and Marcus. He forbade metropolitans to hear 
causes in the absence of all the bishops of their provinces ; 
and bishops without the assistance of their clergy ; otherwise 
the decisions of both should be void. This pope was 
interred on the third of the ides [11th] of January, and the 
see was void three days.^ 

Piiis, an Italian, born at Aquileia, filled the see nineteen 
years, four months, three days, in the time of Antoninus 
Pius. Prom the teacliing of an angel in guise of a shepherd,^ 

1 A.D. 127 — 139. Our author here commits two mistakes. He makes 
the popedom of St. Telesphorus continue to the reign of Marcus Aurelius, 
though it did not exceed the first year of Antoninus Pius; and he attributes 
to him the addition of a seventh week to the Lent fast, while there were 
only six as late as the time of Gregory the Great. The other innovations 
attributed to him may not be better founded. 

^ A.D. 139 — 142. Our author again makes a grave mistake in placing 
this popedom under the reign of Marcus Aurelius, and still more of Verus, 
who was not associated in the empire till 161, though Marcus Aurelius 
was created Caesar in 139. The apostolical constitutions attributed to 
Hyginus are generally supposed to have been a compilation of much later 
date. 

' A.D. 142 — 157. This obscure paragraph is an imperfect extract from 
Bede. It has been already remarked, p. 90, that the book called The 
Factor, directly mentioned by Bede in this place, was written by Hernias, 
the disciple of the apostles, and not by the pretended St. Hermes, said to 
have been brother of Pope Pius I. It, however, contains nothing relative 
to the time of keeping Easter. 



A.D. 142 — 218.] PIL'S — CALIXTUS. 319 

he decreed that the feast of Easter should be observed on a 
Sunday. He died en the fifth of the ides [11th] of July, and 
the bishopric was vacant fourteen days. 

AjS'icetus, a Syrian, sat eleven years, four months, three 
days, in the time of Severus and Marcus. He decreed that 
the clergy should cut their hair; that no less than three 
bishops should be present at the ordination of a bishop ; 
and that a metropolitan should be consecrated by his 
suffragans. He suffered martyrdom on the twelfth of the 
calends of May [20th April]. The bishopric was vacant 
seventeen days.^ 

SoTEE, who was born at Fondi, a town in Campania, and 
whose father's name was Concordius, filled the see of E-ome 
nine years, seven months, twenty-one days, in the time of 
Severus. He died on the fifteenth of the calends of May 
[17th April], and the bishopric was vacant twenty-one days.' 

Eleittiieeius, a G-reek, whose father's name was Abun- 
dius, filled the see fifteen years, three months, in the times 
of Antouine and Caracalla. This pope decreed that no one 
should be condemned in his absence, or the accusation of an 
informer be heard against him : also, that no food should be 
rejected by Christians, which was fit in reason for human use. 
He died on the seventh of the calends of June [26th May], 
and the episcopal see was in abej^ance five days.^ 

YiCTOE, an African, filled the see ten years, eleven 
months, ten days : he received the crown of martyrdom on 
the calends of August ; and the bishopric was void twelve 
days. He decreed that no one should be placed on his de- 
fence upon loose charges. * 

Zephyeiists, born at Eome, sat eight years, seven 
months, and ten days, in the time of Antoninus and Severus. 
He was interred on the Appian Way on the seventh of the 
calends of September [26th August], and the see was vacant 
seven days. A constitution of his ordained that a clerk 
unjustly expelled should be provisionally restored to his 
benefice, and then should make answer to those who ac- 

^ A.D. 157—168. 

- A.D. 168 — 177. This pope could not have been contemporary with 
Septimus Severus, whose reign did not begin till 193. 
= A.D. 177—193. 
* A.D. 193-202. 



320 OEDEEICUS YITALTS. [e.II. CH. XVIII. 

cused him, according to law, being allowed sufficient time, 
if he required it.^ 

Calixtus, a Horn an, from the province of Eavenna, 
filled the see seven years, two months, and ten days, under 
Macrinua and Heliogabalus. According to a decision of 
his, the bishops were not to judge or excommunicate those 
who belonged to another diocese ; no one being subject to 
trial or sentence by any other bishop than his own. He 
determined that a man who had lapsed into sin should be 
restored to his former office, after undergoing fitting pen- 
ance, and if he held no office before was capable of receiving 
an appointment. He ordered the Saturday's fast to be 
observed three times a year, of corn, wine, and oil, according 
to the prophecy the fourth, the seventh, and the tenth. 
At last he was martyred on the third of the ides [14th] of 
October, under the emperor Alexander, and the see was 
void six days. At that time Calepodius the priest, with 
Astirius and Palmatius, consular men, and two hundred of 
their familes, suffered martyrdom.^ 

TJeban, a Eoman, sat four years, ten months, and twelve 
days. He decreed that all the faithful should receive the 
Holy Grhost by the imposition of the bishop's hands, after 
baptism, for their confirmation in the Christian faith. In 
his time Tiburcius, Valerian, Maxim us, and Cecilia, suffered 
martyrdom, and he himself on the eighth of the ides of 
June [6th May].' 

PoNTiAis", a Eoman, filled the see nine years, five months, 
and two days, in the reign of the emperor Alexander, by 
whom he was banished to Sardinia with the priest Hyppo- 
litus. He died on the third of the calends of November 
[30th October], and the bishopric was vacant ten days.^ 

^ A.D. 202—218. 

^ A.D. 219 — 222. No such person as Palmatius is known to have 
existed. If we believe the martyrologies, there was no reign in which so 
much Christian blood was shed as that of Alexander Severus, while, on the 
contrary, it is certain that the church then enjoyed perfect tranquillity. 

^ A.D. 223 — 230. It would appear that this pope has been placed on 
the list of martyrs by mistake for another St. Urban, a bishop. As for the 
other saints named in this paragraph, St. Cecilia is the only one whose 
worship is too old and too authentic to leave any doubt as to her existence; 
but her acts are apocryphal, and there is good reason to believe that she 
suffered martyrdom in Sicily in the time of Marcus Aurelius 

* A.D. 230 — 235. It was not by Alexander Severus, but by the cruel 



AD. 235 — 253.] ANTHEEOS — LUCIUS. 321 

Antheeos, a Greek, sat twelve years, one mouth, twelve 
days. He suffered martyrdom on the third of the nones 
[3rd] of January, and the see was void thirteen days.^ 

Fabian, a lioman, sat fourteen years, eleven months. 
Among other judgments of his, the following is recorded : 
" No account is to be taken of an accusation made by a man 
in a passion. Let him who brings forward a charge prove 
it, and if he fails let him suffer the punishment he would 
have had inflicted on another." This pope suffered martyr- 
dom on the fourteenth of the calends of February [19th 
January], and the bishopric was in abeyance seven days.^ 

CoENELius, a Eoman, sat two years, two months, and 
three days.^ This pope disinterred the apostles' remains 
by night, at the request of St. Lucina. He deposited 
the body of St. Paul on the road to Ostia, and that of 
St. Peter in the temple of Apollo on the golden mount at 
the A'atican.* Cornelius was exiled to Centum Cellae in the 
reign of Decius, but was afterwards brought back to Eome, 
where he made many conversions, and was beheaded on the 
eighteenth of the calends of October [14 September], 
when the bishopric became vacant for thirty-five days. 
This pope determined that priests should take oaths only 
by pledging their faith .^ 

Lucius, a Roman, filled the see three years, three months, 
three days, in the time of Grallus and Yolusianus. By 
God's will he returned from banishment and was beheaded 

Maximin, his successor, and consequently after the month of March, 235, 
that St. Pontian was banished to Sardinia. 

' Novembtr 2.3, 235— January 3, 236. 

2 A.D. 236—250. 

=* June 4, 251— September 14, 252. 

* Some remarks have been ah-eady made (p. 96) on the translation of 
the relics of SS. Peter and Paul, attributed to St. Cornelius. It is certain 
that tliey were deposited, the one at the Vatican, the other ad aquas 
Salvias, long before his time. To complete the details already given 
respecting: these relics, it should be added tliat the report is that they were 
collected and weighed by Pope St. Silvester in 319, and then distributed 
in equal portions between the two churches where they now rest, so that 
each should possess one lialf (jf the body of each apostle. See Roma Sub- 
terranea, 1. iii. c. 3, p. 246. 

^ It was not under the reign of Decius, but in the reign of Gallus, that 
St. Cornelius was banished to Centum Cr^l/cB, now called Civita-Vecchia. 
lie is supposed to have ditd there, but his claim to be ranked as a 
martyr is doubtful. 

VOL. I. T 



322 OEDEEICIIS TITALIS. [b.II. CH.XYIII. 

by Valerian the tliird of the nones [5tli] of March ; the see 
was void thirty-five days. He ordained that two priests and 
three deacons shonld on all occasions be present with the 
bishop for ecclesiastical testimony.^ 

Stephek, a Koman, sat seven years, five months, and 
two days, in the time of Valerian and Grallienus [and Maxi- 
mus]. He restored sight to Lucilla who was blind from 
her infancy, and baptized her father JSTemesiua the tribune, 
with seventy-two others of both sexes. After the martyr- 
dom of Sempronius, Olympius, Exnperia, and Theodotus, 
with twelve priests, among whom were Bonus, Eaustus, 
Maurus, Primitius, Calumniosus, John, Exuperantius, Quiril- 
lus and Honoratus, who suffered martyrdom before him on the 
calends [1st] of August, he himself, having said mass,was be- 
headed on the fourth of the nones [2nd] of August, and the 
bishopric was void twenty-seven days. He ordained that in- 
famous persons should not be allowed to accuse priests, and 
that priests and the rest of the clergy should not have their 
sacred vestments in daily use, but in the church only." 

SixTUS, a Greek, formerly a philosopher, sat one year, 
ten months, twenty-three days, in the time of Gallienus and 
Decius. He made a law that whoever should despise his 
own judge and resort to another should be excommunicated. 
At length he was beheaded on the eighth of the ides [6th] 
of August with six deacons — Eelicissimus, Agapitus, Janu- 
arius, Magnus, Vincent, and Stephen. The see was void 
thirty-five days. At that time Laurence, the archdeacon, 
and Hippolitus with his family, and Abelon and Sennes, 
petty kings of Persia, and many others, sufiered martyrdom 
in various ways.^ 

DiONTSius, who had been a monk, filled the see six years, 
two months, and four days. This pope granted churches to 

1 September 25, 252 — March 4, 253. It is unjust to attribute the 
death of St. Lucius to Valerian, Avho did not ascend the throne till the 
following year, and only began to persecute the Christians in 256. 

2 A.D. 253 — 257. It is probable that the Maximus here named was 
Galerius Maximus, pro-consul of Africa, who caused Cyprian to be beheaded 
in 258. All the persons and facts mentioned in this paragraph appear to 
be apocryphal, not excepting the martyrdom of St. Stephen himself. 

^ August 24, 257 — August 6, 258, Our author has confused this pope 
with a Pythagorean philosopher of the same name. He was contempora- 
neous with Valfrian and Gallienus, not Gallienus and Decius. 



A.D. 2G9 — 301.] TELIX — MAECELUXUS. 323 

the priests, and founded cemeteries, parishes, and dioceses. 
He suffered martyrdom on the sixth of the calends of Janu- 
ary [27th December], and the bishopric was in abeyance five 
days. He decreed that " A forced confession is not to be ac- 
cepted, for it ought not to be extorted, but made voluntarily."^ 

Felix, a Eoman, sat four years, three months, twenty- 
f:' five days, in the time of Claudius and Aurelian. He was 
crowned with martyrdom on the third of the calends of June 
[30th May], and the see was void five days. He decreed 
that a bishop could not be deprived of his bishopric before 
liis cause was heard.' 

EuTYCHiAK, a Tuscan of the town of Luna, filled the see 
one year, one month, one day, in the time of Aurelian. He 
died on the sixth of the calends of August [27th July], and 
the bishopric was vacant eight days.^ 

Caius, a Dalmatian, sat eleven years, four months, twelve 
days, in the time of Carinus, Diocletian, and Constantius. 
This pope divided the clerks in orders into seven ranks ; 
viz., porters, readers, exorcists, subdeacons, deacons, and 
priests. He suffered martyrdom on the tenth of the calends 
of May [22nd April], and the see was vacant eleven days.* 

Maecellinus, a Eoman, held the see nine years, four 
months, sixteen days, in the time of Diocletian and Maxi- 
mian. By a decree of his, superiors were not subject to the 
judgments of inferiors, and no laic was suffered to accuse a 
clergyman. None of the clergy of whatever rank were 
allowed to sue any one in the secular courts, without the 
bishop's leave. This pope suffered martyrdom on the 
seventh of the calends of May [25th April]. Eighteen 
thousand persons were slain with him for the faith of Christ 
in thirty days ; so grievous was the persecution of the 

^ A.D. July 22, 259 — December 26, 269. All that our author relates of 
this pope is without foundation, including his martyrdom. 

^ A.D. 269 — 274. The martyrdom of this pope, without being quite 
certain, is more probable than that of his predecessor. 

^ A.D. 275 — 283. Our author has greatly mistaken the duration of the 
popedom of St. Eutychian, who was not only contemporary with Aurelian, 
but with Tacitus, Probus, and. Carus. 

* A.D. 283 — 296. It is doubtful whether this pope suffered martyrdom, 
and there is no foundation for the assertion that he instituted the seven 
orders of the clergy. 

t2 



324 OllDEIUCTTS YITALTS. [b.II. CH.XVIII. 

Christians, that the bishopric remained void for seven years, 
seven months, and twenty-five days.^ 

Maucellus, a Eoman of the Via Lata, sat ten years, 
seven months, and twenty-one days, in the time of Maxen- 
tius and Maximin. He was condemned by the tyrant to 
groom horses in a stable, and died at length on the seven- 
teenth of the calends of February [16th January]. The *» 
see was vacant twenty days.^ 

Etjsebius, a Greek, who was formerly a physician, sat 
six years, one month, and three days, in the time of Con- 
stantine. He died on the sixth of the nones [2nd] of 
October, and the see was void seven days. In his time the 
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ was found on the fifth of the 
nones [3rd] of May, and Judas Cyriacus was baptized.^ 

Melchiades, an African, filled the see four years. He 
forbade the faithful to fast on Sundays and Thursdays, 
according to pagan rites. He was interred in the ceme- 
tery of Calixtus, on the Appian Way, on the fourth of the 
ides [10th] of December, and the see was void sixteen 
days.* 

Silvestee, a Eoman, whose father's name was E-ufinus, 
and his mother's Justa, was bishop of Eome twenty- three 
years, ten months, eleven days.^ He was educated at Home 
by Cyrinus the priest, and imitating his life and conversa- 
tion, reached the highest point of Christian perfection. 
Erom his youth he was given to hospitality and other good 
works. At that time he entertained Timotheus on his 
coming from Antioch to Eome, and seconded his efforts 
in publicly preaching Christ. Fifteen months afterwards, 
when Timotheus was put to death for the truth by Tar- 

quin, prefect of the city, Silvester conveyed the body of 
>, 
?<> 

^ A.D. 296 — 304. The preceding observations may be applied to the 

martyrdom and decrees of Marcellinus. The number of the martyrs who 
perished in 304 is not generally reckoned as more than sixteen or seven- 
teen thousand. The holy see was vacant, not seren, but three years and a 
half. 

2 May 19, 308 — January 16, 310. The degradation of Marcellus is 
very doubtful. 

^ A.D. 310. The discovery of the true cross by the empress Helena was 
not made till 327. Judas Quiriacus, or Cyriacus, is an imaginary person. 

* July 2, 311— January 10 or 11, 314. 

5 January 31, 314— December 31, 335. 



A.D. 314 — 335.] POPE SILVESTER. 325 

the martyr by night to his own house, where he assembled 
Melchiades the bishop, with the holy priests and deacons, to 
perform the obsequies of the martyr for Christ. Timotheus 
was thus honourabl}^ interred in the garden of Theona, a 
Christian matron, near the tomb of St. Paul. But Silvester 
was arrested by order of Perpenna Tarquin, and thrown into 
prison to be tortured on the morrow as a confessor of 
Christ. Meanwhile, however, the prefect, while at dinner, 
was choked by a fish-bone in his throat, and Silvester was 
joyously released from prison, while his persecutor was car- 
ried with mourning to the grave. Silvester was thirty 
years old when he was ordained deacon, and soon afterwards, 
at the entreaty of all the people, he was ordained priest by 
Melchiades the holy bishop. On his death, Silvester was 
unanimously elected pope. He was illustrious for his virtues, 
and the merit of his sanctity procured for him the esteem 
of all men. 

An enormous dragon appeared on the Tarpeian mount, on 
which the Capitol stands, and the magicians with the sacri- 
legious virgins resorted to it once a month, with sacrifices 
and offerings, descending three hundred and forty-five steps, 
as if they were going to the infernal regions. The dragon 
rose suddenly, and though he did not go forth, his breath so 
poisoned the air of the neighbourhood, that it caused a 
great mortality, and especially there was much lamentation 
for the death of children. At length, the heathen, having 
entreated Silvester's help, he enjoined a three-days' fast on 
the Christians, after which, as he had been instructed in a 
vision by St. Peter the apostle, he descended with three 
priests and two deacons, and in the might of God chained 
up the dragon, so that the whole city, from that day and 
ever afterwards, delivered from its pestiferous breath, gave 
thanks to God. Many of the E;omans who witnessed this, 
having thus escaped the plague of the dragon, and believing 
in Christ, were baptized. 

The emperor Constantine, compelling the Christians to 
sacrifice to idols, and making great slaughter among those 
who refused to worship images, Silvester retired from the 
city, with his clergy, and concealed himself for some time on 
Mount Soracte, devoted to fasting and prayer. The avenging 
hand of God, however,, struck Constantine with elephantine 



326 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.II. Cn.XYIII. 

leprosy, and fhus checked the effusion of the blood of his 
servants. The emperor, in despair at such a calamity, 
inquired anxiously for some cure for his disorder, and by 
the abominable counsel of the priests of the Capitol, ordered 
a crowd of infants, to the number of three thousand, to be 
massacred, that a bath might be prepared of their blood, in 
which, plunging while it was yet reeking, he was told his 
leprosy would be cured. But when Constantine went forth 
from his palace to the baths, and perceived crowds of women 
bitterly bewailing the [threatened] slaughter of their child- 
ren ; he inquired the cause of such great lamentation, and 
learning the fact, was dreadfully shocked. He condemned 
such savage cruelty, and extolling the humanity of the Eo- 
man government in a long and eloquent speech, ordered the 
children to be restored to their mothers unharmed, adding 
liberal gifts, with provisions and carriages, and thus sent 
them away to their homes rejoicing. 

The night following, the blessed apostles Peter and Paul 
appeared to him in a vision, and admonished by them, he 
recalled Silvester and his clergy, and heard from his mouth 
instruction in the true way of salvation, and truly submitted 
to him in all things. Then the pope imposed on himself 
and the whole Christian population a week's fast, at the end 
of which, on Saturday evening, he ordered the laver of sal- 
vation to be prepared in the Lateran palace, and consecrated 
it according to the ritual. Constantine was then baptized, 
and while a bright light shone round for nearly half an 
hour, he was cleansed of his leprosy, and confessed that he 
had seen Christ. 

By command of the emperor Constantine, a council of 
forty-four bishops was assembled at Rome. In it Pope 
Silvester disputed with twelve of the most learned Jews, 
overwhelming them by Grod's help, with a mass of powerful 
authorities. He contended against the rabbins Abiathar and 
Joases, that the Pather, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are 
one Grod. Against the scribes Godoliah and Anna, he 
showed clearly, from the books of the prophets, that Christ 
Avas born of a virgin, tempted by the devil, betrayed by a 
disciple, arrested by his enemies, mocked and scourged ; 
that he drank vinegar, and was sold ; that his garments were 
divided by lot ; that he was nailed to the cross, dead, and 



A.D. 314 — 335.] LEGEND OE POPE SILVESTER. 327 

buried. Against Doliet and Chusi, masters, and Bonoin 
and Arohel, interpreters of the law, he showed the vast 
benefits arising from the incarnation, the temptation, and 
the passion of Christ. Against the pharisees Jobal and 
Thara, it was authoritatively maintained that Jesus Christ 
is perfect God and perfect man, who, in his human nature, 
was tempted, suffered, and died, that he might procure the 
salvation of all men ; but the divine nature was exempt 
from suffering, as the light which shines upon a tree, when 
an incision is made by the stroke of an axe, receives no 
impression. A copious argument was sustained by Seleon 
the priest, that the Son of God is rightly called the Lamb 
without spot, because he was slain for the offences of the 
whole people. He was born of the virgin, that we may be 
horn of our virgin mother the church. He was thrice 
tempted, that he might deliver us from the like temptation ; 
taken, that we may be set free ; bound, that we may be 
liberated from the bonds of the curse ; mocked, that he 
might deliver us from the illusions of the demons ; sold, 
that he might redeem us ; humbled, that we might be 
exalted ; a captive, that he might deliver us out of captivity 
to the demons ; stripped, that the nakedness of the first 
man, by which death entered into the world, might be 
covered ; crowned with thorns, that he might eradicate from 
us the thorns and thistles of the original curse ; having gall 
for meat, and vinegar for drink, that he might bring us into 
a land flowing with milk and honey ; and finally, sacrificed 
on the altar of the cross, that he might take away the sins 
of the whole world. Here the cause of the devil failed, 
who, having set calf against calf, and goat against goat, 
could not find a lamb to set against the Lamb without spot. 
Our King died, that he might subdue the power of death ; 
he was buried, that he might consecrate the tombs of the 
saints ; he rose again, that he might give life to the dead ; he 
ascended into heaven, that he might not only restore to man 
the paradise he has lost, but might also open to him the 
gates of heaven. He now eits at the right hand of the 
leather, that he may grant the prayers of believers ; and he 
will come to judge the liviiig and the dead, that he may 
render unto every one according to his works. This is the 
true faith of Christians. 



328 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [e. IT. Cn.XVlH. 

AYhen Silvester had argued these and many other matters 
Avith great force, and Seleon, in the silence of the other 
Jews, had commended the statements of the pope, Zambri 
the twelfth, who was a very skilful magician, put himself 
forward in opposition. This man chose to contend, not with 
tlie authentic words of scripture, but with magic arts, de- 
manding that a mad bull should be brought to him in the 
presence of them all. The pope and the emperor assenting, 
presently the bull of Terence, who was so fierce that a hun- 
dred stout soldiers could hardly hold him, was brought in ; 
And upon Zambri' s whispering something secretly into its 
ear, the wretched animal groaned, and its eyes leaping from 
their sockets, instantly expired. Upon this, the crowd of 
Jews began to insult Silvester, and for nearly two hours 
there was a violent tumult. The emperor, having at length 
enforced silence, Silvester, advancing to the magician, 
demanded whether he could restore to life, in the name of 
the Lord, the bull whicli he had just put to death. This 
Zambri was unable to do, but he declared loudly and swore, 
by the life of the emperor, that if Silvester would recover 
the bull from death, all the Jews would renounce the law of 
Moses, and embrace the religion of Christ. Hearing this, 
the holy pontifi" spread out his hands, and prayed for some 
time in tears, and on bended knees. His prayers being 
ended, he drew near to the bull, and cried with a loud voice : 
" In the name of Jesus Christ, who was crucified by the Jews 
under Pontius Pilate, rise up, and stand quickly." The 
animal immediately arose, and the holy bishop, having set 
free its horns from the bonds, " Go peaceably," he said, "to 
the herd to which you belong." And the bull immediately 
returned to the herd with all gentleness. Then all the Jews 
threw themselves at the feet of Silvester, and entreated that 
they might be regenerated by the water of baptism. 

Helena, herself, the emperor's mother, appeared in public 
without reserve, kissing the feet of the pope in the sight of 
all, and begging him to assign her a place of penance. At 
the same moment, many demons came out of the bodies 
they had taken possession of, confessing that they were 
compelled to depart by the commands of St. Silvester. 

In the disputation between the Jews and Christians, 
which has been already mentioned, the empe/or and senate 



A.D. 335.] silyester's deckees and death. 329 

appointed Zenophilus and Crato censors and umpires, the 
one being a Greek and the other a Latin. Both were skil- 
lul orators, men of wit, and lovers of truth, and had been for 
a long time held in the highest esteem in the Eoman court, 
as men of probity and contemners of avarice. Both were 
heathens, so that they might favour neither party on account 
of religions, but study only to promote justice, neither 
Christians nor Jews suspecting them of inclining to their 
side. 

On the triumph of the Christian cause through Silvester, 
many gentiles as well as Jews believed, and as the 
•controversy was held in the beginning of the first month, 
they changed their names, and were baptized at Easter. 
Prom that time the Lord's name began to be magnified by 
the Eoman people, and the company of the faithful 
throughout the world to be strengthened, and greatly exalted 
everywhere by the power of God. 

At the command of Constantine, Silvester assembled a 
council of 318 bishops at Nice, in Bithynia, and of 227 at 
Kome. It was decreed that no layman should prosecute a 
charge against a clerk, and that the oppressed should choose 
their own judges. Deacons were to wear dalmatics, and to 
cover their right arm with a linen napkin. No clerk was to 
proceed in the civil courts for any cause whatever, nor to 
plead before any judge except in the ecclesiastical court. 
The sacrifice of the mass was not to be celebrated with a silk 
or coloured altar-cloth, but with one of linen only, as it is 
read our Lord's body was so wrapped by Joseph at his burial. 
AVhoever wishes to become a soldier of the church, and to 
rise in the ranks, he must be a reader for twenty years, an 
exorcist for thirty days, an acolyte five years, a sub-deacon 
five years, a deacon seven years, a priest three years ; and 
afterwards, if he be worthy, he may be made a bishop. 
Silvester died at last, after a long course of excellence, on 
the sixth of the calends of January [31st December].^ The 
see was vacant 165 days. 

'■ St. Silvester's feast occurs in the Roman breviary on this day. It 
need hardly be remarked, that almost all our author has said of him is of 
a legendary character. It does not appear even that the council of Nice 
was convoked by the pope ; and his great age not allowing him to be 
present, he was represented by his legates. 



330 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [e.II. Cn.XYIIT. 

Maek, a Koman, the son of Priscus, filled the see two 
years, seven months, and twenty days. He founded two 
churches, one in the cemetery of Balbina, on the road to 
Ardea, w^here he was buried, and the other in the city of 
Bome, near the Palatine mount. He ordained twenty-seven 
bishops to diflferent sees, and died on the nones [7th] of 
October, and the bishopnc was void twenty days.^ 

Julius, a E-oman, whose father's name was Eusticus, sat 
fifteen years, two months, seven days. He suffered much 
tribulation in the time of Constantius the heretic, and was 
ten months in exile for the Catholic faith ; but after the 
tyrant's death he was restored w^ith honour to his bishopric. 
He founded two churches, and three cemeteries, and 
consecrated nine bishops. He died the day before the ides 
[12th] of April, and the see was void twenty-five years.^ 

LiBERius, a !Roman, son of Augustus, held the see six years, 
three months, four days, in the time of Constantius. He 
was three years in exile for the faith ; but afterwards, joining 
the party of the Arians, he was recalled by Ursatius and 
Valens, the heretical priests, and violently persecuted the 
Catholics. At length he was interred on the seventh of the 
calends of May [25th April] in the cemetery of Priscilla, on 
the Salarian Hoad ; and the see w^as void six days.^ 

Pelix, a Eoman, whose father's name was Anastasius, sat 
one year, three months, three days, during the exile of Liberius. 
In a council of forty-eight bishops he excommunicated the 
emperor Constance, who had been re-baptized by Eusebius, 
bishop of Nicomedia, as well as the heretics, Ursatius and 

^ January 18 — October 7, 336. One of the churches built by Mark 
still retains the name of St, Balbina ; the other bears his own name. The 
cemetery of St. Balbina, more anciently called the cemetery of St. Pretex- 
tatus, was situated between the Appian and Ardeatine roads, near that 
of St. Calistus, with which it had a communication. 

^ A.D. 337 — 352. This pope was neither subject to the banishment nor 
the tribulations attributed to him. The western church enjoyed profound 
peace during his popedom. One of the churches he built stood in the 
Forum, and another on the side of the Flaminian Way ; his three ceme- 
teries along the Flaminian, Aurelian, and Ostian roads. 

^ May 22, 352— September 24, 366. Liberius was banished from 355 
to 358. He had the weakness to subscribe the decrees of the first council 
of Sirmich, but he never persecuted the Catholics, and returned to the 
orthodox faith in 359. Our author is mistaken as to the length of his pope- 
dom and the day of his death, but not as to the place of his interment. 



A.D. 366 — 384.] POPE DAMASUS. 331 

Yalens. In consequence, be was deposed and put to death 
in the city of Corona/ on the third of the ides [11th] of 
November, and the see was void thirty-seven days. He 
consecrated nineteen bishops ; and his days count in the 
episcopate of Liberius ; for the statutes which Liberius 
made before his banishment have force, but those enacted 
after his return are void, because he had joined the heretics.^ 
Damasus, a native of Spain, whose father's name was 
Anthony, filled the see eighteen years, three months, eleven 
days. Ursinus was consecrated in opposition^ at the same 
time, but being expelled from B-ome he was made bishop of 
]^^aples. Damasus merits great praise for his virtues. He 
made researches for, and discovered, many remains of saints 
to whose memory he composed verses. Being maliciously 
accused of adultery by two deacons, Concordius and Calixtus, 
he was acquitted of the charge, and his accusers condemned 
by a synod of forty-four bishops. He ordered the psalms 
to be sung regularly day and night in the churches, and 
transmitted a decree to that effect to the priests and bishops 
and monasteries. Damasus had a great regard for St. Jerome 
the interpreter of the divine law, supporting him with his 
pontifical authority, and encouraging him to establish the 
true sense of the scriptures. He ordained sixty-two bishops 
in difierent cities. He was buried near his mother, in the 
church which he built on the road to Ardea, on the third of 
the ides [11th] of December, and the see was void thirty- 
one days.* 

^ There was a city of this name in the Peloponnesus. The French 
translator, however, renders it Cortona, which was in Tuscany, on the 
borders of Umbria, a more probable reading. 

- Felix having been substituted for Liberius immediately after the 
banishment of the latter, he can only be considered an anti-pope. All that 
we here read of him is controverted, except the council lie convoked in 
358. After the restoration of Liberius Felix retired into the country, and 
died in 365. 

^ Sub intentione, a phrase oflen used by our author to express a double 
election, or one in opposition. 

* A.D. 366 — 384. Baronius has collected the greatest part of the poems 
composed by Damasus in honour of the saints. The council of forty-four 
bishops at which it is said Pope Damasus cleared himself of the charge of 
adultery, being then eighty years of age, rests on the authority of the 
J'ontijicals, and could not have been earlier than the year 381. The part 
of the catacombs where he Avas interred was near the cemeterv of St. 



332 . OBDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.II. CH. XVIII. 

Smicius, a Homaii, son of Tiburtius, sat fifteen years. 
He made many useful decrees, which he promulgated 
throughout the world, being deeply concerned for the flock 
of Christ. He consecrated thirty-two bishops in different 
parts. He was interred in the cemetery of Priscilla on the 
iSalarian Eoad on the eighth of the calends of March [22nd 
Eebruary], and the bishopric was vacant twenty days.^ 

Anastasius, a Eoman, son of Maximvis, sat three years, 
and ten days.^ He ordered that when the holy gospel was 
read the priests should not sit, but stand with their heads 
inclined. He forbade that any foreign clerk should be 
ordained without the signature of his own bishop. He 
built the Crescentian church in the second region of the 
city of Eome, and consecrated eleven bishops. He was 
interred in his own cemetery at Ursipilatum^ the fifth of the 
calends of May [27th April], and the see was void twenty- 
one days. 

Innocent, of Albano, whose father's name was also 
Innocent, held the see fifteen years, two months, twenty-one 
days. He made a great number of decrees ; he discovered 
and banished manv Montanists,* and condemned the heretics 
Pelagius and C^elestes. Innocent consecrated the church in 
honour of the holy martyrs Gervase and Protase,'^ built ac- 
cording to the will of an illustrious woman named Yestina ; 

Calistus, on the Via Ardea, as here stated. His remains were afterwards 
translated to the church he built near the theatre of Pompey, and which 
bears the strange name of St. Laurent in Damaso. 

^ AD. 384 — 398, We owe the first decretal which is considered 
anthentic to this pope. The epitaph inscribed on his tomb in the cemetery 
of Priscilla has been published by Gruter and Baronius. 

2 December 5, 498— April 27,' 502. 

' This word is written in the MS. of St. YAvrovM Arsipileatum ; the 
French editor says it should be read, ad Ursum pileatum ; query rather 
pi/atiim 9 answering to our " bear and ragged staff," the cognizance of the 
Beauchamps, earls of Warwick. There were two cemeteries of this name 
near Rome ; the one here mentioned is situated on the road to the 
episcopal city of Ostia. It having been destroyed, Pascal I. translated 
the remains of his predecessor to the church of St. Praxidius. 

■• Kataphrygaa. The Pontifical of Anastasius is the doubtful authority 
on which rests our author's statement of the banishment of the Montanists 
by Innocent. 

'' The situation of this church is unknown, but it formed a title of the 
Roman church which was no longer in existence in the time of Gregory 
the Great. 



A.D. 417—422.] ZOSIMAS — BONIFACE. 333 

and he honoured it with many gifts. He ordained fifty- 
four bishops. He ordered a fast to be observed on Saturday, 
because on that day our Lord lay in the sepulchre, and his 
disciples fasted. He was interred in the cemetery at 
Ursipilatum the fifth of the calends of August [28th July], 
and the see was void twenty-two days.^ 

ZosiMAS, a Greek, whose father's name was Abramius, 
sat one year, three mouths, eleven days.^ He made many 
ecclesiastical constitutions ; amongst others, he ordered 
deacons to have the left arm covered with linen napkins, 
and that candles should be blessed in the parishes.^ Ho 
consecrated eight bishops. 

Boniface, a Eoman, whose father was Jocundus, a priest, 
sat three years, eight months, seven days."* He was conse- 
crated on the same day with Eulalius, in opposition, and the 
schism among the clergy lasted seven months and fifteen 
days. Eulalius was consecrated in the church of Constan- 
tino, and Boniface in that of Julius ; but both were expelled 
by the authority of the emperor Honorius, and of Valen- 
tinian, son of Placidia Augusta.^ At the approach of 
Easter, Eulalius entered Eome, baptized in the church of 
Constantino, and celebrated the festival. But the emperors, 
incensed at his presumption, banished him to Campania, and 
recalling Boniface to Eome, established him in the bishop- 
ric. He made a decree that no nun or woman should touch 
or wash the holy altar-cloth ; and that no one but one of 
the clergy should carry incense into the church. ]^o slave, 
and no one liable to any office in the courts, or in other 
uITairs, could receive hob'^ orders.® Pope Boniface founded 

^ A.D. 402—417. 

■■* " Zozimas." March 18, 417— December 26, 418. 

^ These two regulations are correctly attributed to Pope Zosimas. 

* A.D. 418—422. 

* Bonaface I. was consecrated in the church of St. Marcellus, not in that 
of Constantino, now called St. John Lateran. Honorius at first favoured 
the cause of Eulalius, but after a synod held at Milan both the pretenders 
were forbidden to enter Rome until the decision of a council convoked at 
Spoleto tor the 13th of June was known. Eulalius disregaided this pro- 
hibition, but as he was driven out of the Lateran church and expelled the 
city on Holy Thursday, he could not have celebrated Easter there, as our 
author states. 

^ The two constitutions here attributed to Pope Boniface, according to 
the Ponlijicalsy are of very questionable authority. 



33^! 0E,DE11ICUS TITALIS. [b.II. Cn.XTIII. 

an oratory in tlie cemetery of St. Eelicitas the martyr, near 
her tomb ; and ordained bishops in thirty-six different places. 
At last, he was interred near the body of St. Felicitas, on 
the Salarian road, the eighth of the calends of November 
[October 25]. The bishopric was vacant nine days. Then 
the clergy or the people demanded the return of Eulalius, 
but he would not consent to return to Bome.' 

Celestik, a Eoman, son of Priscus, sat eight years, ten 
months, seventeen days. He made many good decrees. He 
ordered that some of the one hundred and fifty psalms of 
David should be chanted by a double choir before the sacri- 
fice of the mass ; for before, only an epistle of St. Paul was 
read, and the holy gospel, and then mass was said. He con- 
secrated forty-six bishops. He was buried in the cemetery 
of PrisciUa, on the fourth of the ides [10th] of April, and 
the see was void twenty-one days.'^ 

SiXTUS, a Eoman, whose father's name was Xistus, sat 
eight years and nineteen days. Being accused by a man 
named Bassus, the emperor Yalentinian assembled a council 
of fifty-six bishops, by whom the pope was acquitted, and 
Bassus condemned. The latter died within three months, 
and his body was interred at St. Peter's by the pope. Pope 
Sixtus added many ornaments to the churches of the saints, 
and ordained fifty-two bishops. He was interred on the 
road to Tibur, in a crypt near the body of St. Lawrence ; ^ 
and the see was void twenty-two days.^ 

Leo was bom in Tuscany, and his father's name was 
Quintian. He sat twenty-one years, one month, thirteen 
days.'^ He assembled at Chalcedon, with the concurrence 

^ It is incorrect that Eulalius was proposed for successor to Boniface ; 
nothing is kno\vn respecting him after this expulsion. 

2 September 10, 4-22— July 26, 432. 

^ Among the works of this pope are reckoned the restoration of the 
basilica of Liberius, now called the church of Sta. Maria Maggiore, and 
the baptistery of St. John Lateran. He was interred, as here stated, by 
the side of the road to Tivoli, in a cr t of the church of St. Lawrence in 
agro Verano. 

* July 31, 432— August 18, 440. Our author has gathered this story 
of the charge made against Sixtus III. from the Pontifical of Anastasius, 
in which the accuser is called Bassus, who is described as of consular rank. 
In the text of Ordericus the phrase is a quodam vasso, " by a certan 
vassal." 

* A.P. 440—451. 



A.D. 440—492. ST. LEO — rELix II. 335 

of Marciau, a Catliolic prince, a council of two hundred and 
fifty-six bishops, and having obtained the assent by their 
signatures of four hundred and six bishops,^ he set forth the 
Catholic faith, and condemned the heretics Eutjches and 
jN'estorius. Pope Leo wrote a number of epistles in defence 
of the faith, confirming frequently the decision of the coun- 
cil of Chalcedon. He addressed twelve epistles to the 
emperor Marcian ; to Pulcheria the empress, nine ; to the 
eastern bishops, eighteen. Full of zeal in sacred things, he 
did much good. He consecrated one hundred and eighty- 
five bishops. He was interred at St. Peter's, the third of 
the ides [11th] of iVpril, and the bishopric was vacant 
seven days.^ 

HiLAET, a native of Sardinia, whose father's name was 
Crispin, held the see of Home six years, three months, ten 
days.'' He addressed many epistles to the oriental churches, 
confirming the three councils of Nice, Ephesus, and Chalce- 
don, and condemning all heresies by an anathema. He 
placed many rich ornaments in the churches of the saints, 
and ordained twenty-two bishops. After many good works, 
he was buried at the church of St. Lawrence, in the crypt, 
near the tomb of Pope Sixtus, and the bishopric was vacant 
fifteen days. 

SiMPLicius, born at Tibur, son of Castinus, sat fifteen 
years, one month, seven days. He ordained thirty-six 
bishops, and was interred in the church of St. Peter the 
Apostle, on the sixth of the nones [2nd] of May. The see 
was void six days.^ 

Pelix [IL], a Eoman, son of the priest Pelix, by the 
title of Easciola, filled the see eight years, eleven months, 
seventeen days,^ in the times of the emperor Zeno, and 

^ The number of the bishops assembled at the council of Chalcedon was 
520, and the subscriptions (as our author himself states, book i. ch. xxiii. 
p. ]23) were 630. 

2 TJie tomb of St. Leo was placed in the porch of the church of St. 
Peter. It was opened in 1G07. See Aringhi, Roma SubterraneUy i. p. 
160, and the Bollandists. 

' A.D. 461—468. 

* A.D. 468 — 483. He was burled, like Pope Leo, in the porch of St. 
Peter's church. 

* A.D. 483 — 492. The title of Fasciola was the same with that of St. 
Nereus and St. Achilleus. 



336 oiiDERicrs yitalis. [b.ii. cn.xviir. 

Odoacer, king of the G-oths, to the reign of Theodoric. This 
pope excommunicated Peter, bishop of Alexandria, and 
Acacius, bishop of Constantinople, who had departed from 
the right faith, sending two bishops, Misenus and Vitalis, 
from the apostolic see to depose them. But when thev 
reached the city of Heraclea, they were induced by bribes 
not to execute the pope's commission. Felix, having heard 
this, examined the affair and excommunicated both. He 
consecrated thirty-one bishops, and was buried in the church 
of St. Paul, the Apostle, in the time of the king Theodoric, 
and Zeno, the emperor. The bishopric was vacant five 
days.^ 

Gelasius, an African, son of Valerius, sat eigbt years, 
eighteen days.^ He was a kind friend to the poor, increased 
the power of the clergy, and delivered Eome from famine 
and danger. This pope published constitutions for the entire 
church. He composed tracts and hymns like St. Ambrose, 
and published works against Eutyches and Nestorius, which 
are preserved to the present day in the. archives of the 
libraries. He ordered the Manicheans, whom he discovered 
at Eome, to be carried into banishment, and caused their 
books to be burnt before the doors of the Church of Santa 
Maria. He condemned for ever, if they did not repent, 
Peter and Acacius, for the many crimes and murders they 
had caused. He ordained sixty-seven bishops, and was 
buried in the church of St. Peter the Apostle, on the 
eleventh of the calends of December [21st November]. 
The see was void seven days. 

Anastasius [II.], a lioman, wbose father's name was 
Peter, of the fifth region called the Bull's Head, filled the 
see one year, eleven months, and twenty-four days.^ Many 

* These legates arrived at Constantinople in 484. It was not at 
ileraclea, but at the Dardanelles, that they were arrested by order of the 
emperor Zeno. The council at which they were excommunicated, together 
with Acacius and Peter Mongus, was held after their return in the month 
of July, the same year. The death of Felix improperly styled III. (for 
the pope designated Felix II. was an antipope), is incorrectly assigned to 
the reign of the emperor Zeno, which ended on the 9th of April, 491, as 
well as to that of Theodoric, who did not succeed Odoacer till March, 493. 

- March 1, 492— November 14, 496. 

' November 24, 496 — November 17, 498. It is easy to refute wnai our 
author has taken from the Book of Pontijicals on the schism connected 
with the recall of Acacius, since he died in 489. 



A.D. 498 — 514.] porE stmmachus. 337 

of the clergy withdrew from his communion, on his wishing 
to recall Acacius privately, which he could not accomplish 
because he was struck by God. He consecrated twenty 
bishops. He was buried in the church of St. Peter the 
Apostle, on tlie thirteenth of the calends of December [19th 
November], and the bishopric was vacant four days. 

Symmachus, born in Sardinia, whose father's name was 
Fortunatus, filled the see fifteen years, seven months, 
twenty-seven days, in the time of Theodoric the king and 
Anastasius the emperor.^ He was consecrated in opposition 
to Lawrence, bishop of Nocera; and by the decision of 
Theodoric, as he was the first consecrated and had the 
majority, he was confirmed in the apostolic see. But, three 
years afterwards, he was falsely accused through the ill-will 
of the Eomans, and Peter, bishop of Altinum, usurped the 
apostolic see contrary to the canons.^ A great schism was 
therefore made in tlie church, and the clergy again divided. 
But Pope Symmachus justified himself in a synod, in which 
one hundred and fifteen bishops Avere assembled, and Peter 
of Altinum, the usurper of the apostolical see, and Lawrence 
of Nocera, were condemned. Then Symmachus was replaced 
on the apostolical throne at St. Peter's by all the bishops, 
the clergy, and people, in great triumph. However, Festus, 
chief of the senate, and Probinus, ex-consuls, and other 
senators, commenced disturbances in the city, and attacked 
all who were in communion with Symmachus with such 
violence that they even dragged nuns from their convents 
and retreats, and, regardless of their sex, scourged them 
until their naked bodies were wounded Avith the stripes. 
They fought daily against a church in the middle of the city, 
where many priests and others of the faithful were slain. 
Among others, Dignissimus and Gordian, priests, were taken 
and slain with staves and swords, as well as many other 
Christians. None of the clergy were safe in the city, by 

^ November 22, 498 — July 19, 514. The consecration of Symmachus 
and his competitor Lawrence, who was afterwards bishop of Nocera, took 
place the s.ime day. 

" The second schism appears to have commenced as early as 499. The 
last sitting of the council which confirmed the election of Symmachus was 
held on the 23rd of October, 501, and its decrees were subscribed, not by 
115, but by 76 bishops. The scandals and outrages described by out 
author occurred in the early part of the preceding September, 

VOL. I. Z 



338 ORDEEICTJS VITALIS. [b.II. CH.XVIII. 

hlglit or by day ; and Faustus, the ex-consul, was the only 
one who fought for the church. JSTotwithstandino', Sym- 
machus maintained himself from the consulship of Paulinus 
to that of Senator. He drove into banishment the 
Manicheans, whom he discovered at Home, and burnt their 
images and books before the gates of the basilica of 
Constantino. He enriched the churches of the saints with 
a variety of ornaments, and ordained one hundred and 
seventeen bishops. He ordered the angelic hymn^ to be 
sung every Sunday. Every year he supplied money and 
clothes to the bishops who were banished to Africa and 
Sardinia. He ransomed captives in Liguria and other 
provinces, and distributed largely to the poor. After many 
good works he was interred in the church of St. Peter, on 
th© nineteenth day of the month of July ; and the bishopric 
was vacant seven days. 

HoRMiSDAS, born in Campania, son of Justus, of the city 
of Frusinone, filled the see eight years, and seventeen days. 
By the advice of King Theodoric he sent to Constantinople 
Eunodius, bishop of Pavia; and Eortunatus, bishop of 
Catania ; to absolve the Greeks who had been excom- 
municated on account of the heresies of Peter, bishop of 
Alexandria; and Acacius of Constantinople. But the 
emperor Anastasius, favouring the Eutychian heresy, sent 
back the envoys in great haste, and in his rescript to the 
pope, among other things, said haughtily : " It is ours to 
command, not to be commanded." jSTot long afterwards, by 
God's permission, he was struck with thunder. He was 
succeeded by Justin, a Catholic, who willingly submitted to 
the directions of the pope in all things, and received with 
honour Germauus, bishop of Capua, and the other envoys 
from the apostolic see, who were conducted by the consul 
Yitalian, and a great company of monks and men of rank, 
from the Eound Tower to the city of Constantinople. Some 
of the clergy who were accomplices with Acacius, envious of 
such a triumph, shut themselves up in the great church of 
St. Sophia, and taking counsel together, sent a message to 
the emperor, that unless Acacius, their bishop, was 
unconditionally restored, they would refuse submission to 
the apostolic see. At this time, Clovis, king of the Pranks, 
* The Gloria in Excelaisj mentioned before, p. 318. 



A.D. 523—526.] POPE JOHN. 339 

becoming a Christian, sent an oiFering to the tomb of St. 
Peter tlie Apostle, with precious jewels. The aforenamed 
pope flourished from the consulship of Senator to the time of 
Symmachus and Boetius, and ordained fifty-five bishops in 
different places. He was interred in the church of St. Peter. 
the Apostle, on the eighth of the ides [6th] of August.' 
The bishopric was vacant seven days.^ 

John, a native of Tuscany, son of Constantius, sat two 
years, nine months, and sixteen days, from the consulship of 
Maximus to that of Olibrius. At that time Justin, the 
orthodox emperor, wished to extinguish all heresies, and 
have the churches in which they were taught consecrated 
to the true faith. At this Theodoric AV^alamir, being a- 
heretic, was much incensed, and determined on ravaging 
the whole of Italy with the sword. Pope John was re- 
quested by the king at Ravenna to undertake a mission to 
Constantinople, which, though he was sick, he accomplished, 
and while there gave sight to a blind man. He was received 
with great honour by the emperor Justin whom he crowned, 
and obtained from him indulgence for the heretics to save 
Italy from devastation. Meanwhile, the heretic king put 
to death the illustrious senators and ex-consuls Symmachus 
and Boethius. Pope John also, and the senators who had 
been honourably entertained by the emperor, were treache- 
rously arrested by Theodoric on their return ; and the pope 
was imprisoned at Eavenna and suffered martyrdom on the 
fifteenth of the calends of June [18th May]. Theodoric 
himself, by the will of God, died suddenly ninety-eight days 
afterwards. Pope John consecrated fifteen bishops. His 

' A.D. 614 — 523. The mission of the bishops of Pavia and Catania to 
Constantinople took place in 515. It was on a second mission, in 517, 
that the emperor Anastasius made a reply in much the same terms as are 
here reported. Doubts are entertained whether he was really struck by 
lightning on the 8th of July of the year following, as also before stated, p. 
113. It is certain, however, that he expired in the midst of the fright 
occasioned by the thunder storm. Justin succeeded him the next day. 
The pope's legates arrived at Constantinople the ■25th of March, 519. It 
has been already observed, that Acacius Avas dead ten years before. The 
dispute respecting him was limited to the question whether his name 
should be retained in the diptichs. The resistance made by part of the 
clergy entrenched in Sta. Sophia is a mere fable. It Avas not with this 
pope, hut with his predecessor Anastasius, that Clovis corresponded after his 
conversion. 

z 2 



340 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.II. CH.XVITI. 

body was translated from Raveuna to the church of St. 
Peter at Eome ; and the bishopric was vacant fifty-eight 
days.^ 

Felix, a Samnite, son of Castorius, filled the see four 
years, two montlis, and thirteen days, in the time of The- 
odoric, and Alaric his nephew, and of the emperor Justinian, 
from the consulship of Tiburtius to that of Lampadius and 
Orestes. He was inau^ured without tumult, and ordained 
twenty-nine bishops. He was interred in the church of St. 
Paul the Apostle on the fourth of the ides [12th] of Oc- 
tober. The bishopric was vacant three days." 

Boniface, born at Rome, whose father's name was Sigi- 
buld, sat two years, twenty-five days, in the time of Alaric, 
the heretic, and the emperor Justinian. At his election there 
was great dissension, both among the clergy and in the 
senate, for twenty-eight days. Dioscorus was consecrated 
at the same time in the basilica of Coustantine; but, by 
God's will, he died shortly afterwards on the second of the 
ides [14th] of October. He had numerous partisans. As for 
Boniface, he gave dishes of meat to the priests and deacons, 
and notaries, supplied from his own patrimony, and made 
abundant provision of food for the clergy when famine 
threatened. He assembled a synod in the church of St. 
Peter, and chose the deacon Vigilius for his successor, but 
afterwards, repenting his having subscribed the act, erased 
his signature in the presence of the clergy and senate. He 
was interred at St. Peter's on the seventeenth day of the 
month of October, and the see was void two months fifteen 
days.^ 

Joiiif Meecurt, a Eoman, son of Projcctus, of the Coelian 
Mount, filled the see two years, four months, six days, in 
the time of Alaric and Justinian. That pious emperor, 

^ A.D. 523 — 526. In speaking of heresies in this paragraph, the Arians 
are to be understood. In giving to Theodorie the surname of Waiamir, 
our author seems to adopt the opinion of those who regard him as Wala- 
mir's son, but he appears to have been only his nephew. The journey of 
the pope to Constantinople took place at the beginning of the year 525. 
Boetius was arrested at Pavia, and put to death as early as 524. 

■■^ A.D. 526 — 530. There was no consul of the name of Tiburtius. 

^ A.D. 530 — 532. The name of the father of this pope appears to have 
been Sigiswult, from which we may conclude that he was of Gothic origin, 
though bom at Rome. 



A.D. 535 — 538.] AGAPETE — SILVEEIUS. 341 

actuated by ^Yarm devotion to the Christian religion drew 
up a statement of his belief, which he sent to the apostolical 
see, with his own signature and many valuable gifts, by 
the hands of Eparchius and Demetrius. John consecrated 
twenty-one bisliops. He was interred at St. Peter's on the 
sixth of the calends of June [27th May], and the see was 
void six days.^ 

Agapitus, a E,oman, son of Grordian, a priest, filled the 
see eleven months, eighteen days. Theodotus, king of the 
Goths, who had put to death Amalasonta, daughter of king 
Theodoric, sent him to Justinian the emperor, by whom he 
was honourably received at Constantinople. While there 
he procured the banishment of Anthemius, bishop of that 
city, because he denied tlie two natures of Christ. Having 
consecrated Mennas, a Catholic, bishop of Constantinople, 
he died there on the tenth of the calends of May [22nd 
April.] His body was conveyed to Eome in a leaden coffin, 
and interred at ISt. Peter's on the twelfth of October, and 
the bishopric was vacant one month twenty-eight days.' 

SiLVEiiius, a native of Campania, son of Hormisdas, 
bishop of Eome, sat one year, live months, six days. He 
owed his elevation to the tyrant Theodotus, who was in- 
duced by bribery to eflfect it by violence and terror. Two 
months afterwards, by God's will, Theodotus died, and 
Witigis having carried off and married the daughter of 
Amalasonta, ascended the throne. The emperor Justinian 
commissioned Belisarius the patrician to deliver Italy from 
the Goths. The patrician consequently laid siege to Naples, 
which he took by storm, putting all the Goths and citizens 
to the sword, so that not even the priests and nuns in the 
monasteries escaped. Soon after this Witigis, collecting an 
army of Goths, besieged Eome for a whole year, vast num- 
bers perishing by the sword as well as by the famine which 
now prevailed throughout the world. JSo one was allowed 
to enter or depart from the city. All property, private and 
public, not excepting the churches, was destroyed by fire, 
and the inhabitants were either butchered, or fell victims to 
famine and pestilence. At length, God in his mercy sent 

1 A.D. 533 — 535. The embassy of Hypacius (not Eparchius) and 
Demetrius to the pope took place in 533. 
^ X.V. 5o5 — 53(i. 



342 OHDEEICTJS TITALIS. [b.II. CH. XVIII. 

Belisarius to defeat the Groths and save Eome. The em- 
press requested Silverius to recall the heretic Anthemius, 
but the pope putting his trust in Grod refused compliance, 
and defended the sentence of his predecessors by his own 
authority. Upon this, the empress commanded Belisarius 
the patrician to send Silverius into exile, and to substitute 
Anthemius as his vicar-general in the church of Eome. 
Belisarius very reluctantly complied with the orders of the 
empress, and the pope being charged by false witnesses 
with plotting to deliver up Eome to the Gothic king, by 
introducing him at the Asinarian gate near the Lateran, he 
was arrested in the Pincian palace. Antonine, the patrician, 
then sharply rebuked the pope, and John the sub-deacon, 
removing the pallium from his shoulders, divested him of 
his pontifical robes in his chambers and dressed him as a 
monk. Silverius was banished to the island of Pontia, 
w^here, after great suffering, and being reduced to bread and 
water for sustenance, he was buried on the twelfth of the 
calends of July [20th June]. He consecrated eighteen 
bishops, and after his death performed many miracles in 
healing the sick. The see was void fourteen days.^ 

ViGiLius, a Eoman, son of the consul John, filled the 
see fifteen years, six months, twenty-six days. At this time 
Belisarius defeated Witigis, and John, the bloody master- 
general of the army, pursued him all night and made him 
prisoner. The captive king being conducted to Constan- 
tinople, Justinian received him into favour, and creating 
him patrician and count, sent him to reside on the I'ersian 
frontier, where he remained until his death. The emperor 
also conferred on Belisarius the highest military dignity, and 
employed him in Africa. Deceiving Guittarith, king of the 
Vandals, with friendly professions, Belisarius put him to 
death, and restored Africa to the dominion of Eome, from 
which it had been detached ninety-nine years. He then 
visited Eome, and made many offerings to God and St. 

* A.D. 536 — 538. Theodotus was killed towards the month of August, 
536. Belisarius came from Sicily to Italy in the spring of tliat year; took 
Naples after a siege of twenty-two days, and entered Rome the 10th of 
Becember. The siege of Rome by Witigis was in 537 — 538. Silverius 
was first banished to Patara in Lycia, afterwards to the island of Palmaria 
on the coast of Italy, where he was starved to death. 



A.D. 538—555.1 ■ POPE YiaiLius. , 343 

Peter, distributing also alms to the poor, from the spoils of 
the Vaudals. 

The Empress Theodora urged Pope Vigilius, also, to 
recall the heresiarch Autheniius, but he positively refused, 
adhering strictly to the opinions of his predecessors. At 
the suggestion therefore of some ill-disposed Romans, who 
imputed the death of Silverius to the pope, Anthemius 
Bent an imperial commissioner, arrested Pope Vigilius in 
the church of St. Cecilia, and carried him to Constantinople 
hj way of Sicily. Por two years the Grreeks used the whole 
influence of the imperial authority to induce him to recall 
the heretic, as he had promised when he filled the office of 
deacon. But the pope persisted in his refusal, preferring 
an honourable death to a dishonourable life. At length, 
when upon his strongly declaring his resolution in the pre- 
sence of Justinian and Theodora, some one struck him in 
the face, the pope fled to the church of St. Euphemia, and 
clung to the pillar of the altar. But he was forced out of 
the church and dragged round the city by a rope about his 
neck till the evening. He was then committed to close 
custody, and the Eomau clergy who had attended him were 
sent to diflerent mines. 

Meanwhile, the Goths elected Totila king, and soon after- 
wards laid siege to Pome. During the continuance of the 
siege the famine in the city was so severe that mothers 
were readv to feed on their own children. Totila at lenfrth 
gained entrance into the city, of which he held possession 
for some time, the people sheltering themselves in the 
churches. But afterwards the emperor sent Narses his 
eunuch and chamberlain into Italy, who defeated the army 
of Totila who fell in the battle. The emperor Justinian 
was full of joy at this intelligence, and on the petition of 
IN^arses and the Pomans set at liberty Pope Yigilius and his 
clergy ; but he died of stone at Syracuse. His body was 
brought to Pome and interred in the church of St. Mar- 
cellus, on the Salarian road, when the see was void three 
months and five days. This pope consecrated eighty-one 
bishops, and appointed Ampliatus the priest his vicar to 
goverji the church during his exile, and sent from Sicily 
Valentine the bishop to the Lateran.^ 

^ A.D. 53u — 555. Viyilius was elected and consecrated pope in the 



314 OEDERICTJS YITALIS. [b.II. CH. XVIII. 

Pelagius, a Eoman, son of John the vicar-general, filled 
the see eleven years, ten montlis, and twenty-seven days. 
He was consecrated by two bishops, John of Perugium 
and Bonus of Perentino, vrith Andrew priest of Ostia. 
Numbers of the religious, and well-informed, and noble 
persons separated from his communion in the persuasion 
that Pelagius was a party to the death of Pope Yigilius, in 
consequence of the sufterings he had undergone. Pope 
Pelagius, therefore, and Narses consulted, and a procession 
having been formed from the church of St. Pancras, when 
litanies were sung, and hymns and anthems chanted, on 
their arrival at St. Peter's, the pope ascended a pulpit, 
holding the gospels in his hand with the crucifix raised on 
high, and satisfied the people that he had done no injury to 
YigiHus. He consecrated forty-nine bishops. Pelagius was 
buried at St. Peter's on the 6th of the nones [2nd] of March. 
The bishopric was vacant three months, and twenty-five days.^ 

John, a Boman, son of the illustrious Anastasius, filled the 
see twelve years, eleven months, and twenty-six days. At 
that time the Heruli having elected Sindbal their hing, 
were bent on subjugating the whole of Italy, but Narses 
slew their king and entirely defeated them. He also, by 
Grod's aid, put to death Amingus [Lothaire], and Buceline, 
chiefs of the Pranks, who invaded Italy, to which he restored 
peace and prosperity. The E-omans, however, from envy, 
accused him to Justinian, and raised disturbances against 
his government. Narses therefore, upon finding himself 
deprived of his dignities by the emperor, called in the 

lifetime of his predecessor, but we date his popedom from the death 
of Silverius. Witigis was taken prisoner, and sent to Constantinople in 
540. Belisarius's expedition to Africa was undertaken in 532, and the 
war ended by the captivity of Gelimer, king of the Vandals, in 534. 
Nothing is known of the person our author calls Guittarith, and his 
murder by Belisarius. The latter returned from Africa to Rome in the 
beginning of 547, soon after the pillage of the city by Totila. Vigilius 
arrived at Constantinople the 2jth of January. We have no other account 
of the ill treatment he received in 551, proceeding to the length of his 
being buffeted in the presence of the emperor and empress; indeed Theo- 
dora was not then living, having died in 548. Rome was taken by Totila 
the second time in 549. Pope Vigilius died at Syracuse the 10th of 
January, 555, as he was on his return to Ri-me. 

* A.D. 555 — 560. The epitaph on Pope Pelagius may be seen in 
Aringhi, Roma Subterranea, i. p. 161. 



A.D. 574 — 578.] POPE BENEDICT. 3-15 

Guinillan Lombards, who inhabited Pannonia, to invade 
Italy. Narses died not long afterwards, and his body being 
enclosed in a leaden coffin was conveyed, Avith all his 
wealth, to Constantinople. Pope John consecrated sixty- 
one bishops, and was buried in the church of St. Peter 
the apostle on the 3rd of the ides [13th] of July. The 
bishopric was vacant ten months and eleven days.^ 

Benedict, a Eoman, son of Boniface, sat four years, one 
month, and twent^^-eight days.' King Alboin led the 
Lombards into Italy in the year of our Lord 568. A great 
famine then afflicted Italy and compelled it to submit to 
Alboin. Upon learning this, the emperor Justinian sent to 
Egypt, and causing ships loaded with corn to be despatched 
to Eome, thus saved the city from the famine which 
threatened it. This emperor, for his numerous victories over 
foreign enemies, received the surnames of Alamannicus, 
Gothicus, Yandalicus, and Africanus. He founded a church, 
within the walls of Constantinople to the honour of Christ, 
which is called in Greek "Hagia," meaning Santa Sophia. 
This building so surpasses all others that it stands unrivalled 
among all the edifices in the world. Justinian was a prince 
devoted to the Catholic faith, pure in his conduct and just 
in his judgments, so that he succeeded in all his enterprises. 
In his time Cassidorus, a senator who afterwards became a 
monk, distinguished himself at Kome both in sacred and 
profane learning. Among his other excellent works, one of 
the principal is a commentary on the Psalms. 

At that time also Dionysius, who was made an abbot at 
Eome, composed an admirable work on calculating Easter. 

Priscian, also, a native of Csesarea, but established at 
Constantinople, penetrated, if I may so speak, all the depths 
of grammatical science. 

Arator, likewise, sub-deacon of the church of Eome, an 

^ A. p. 560 — 573. Sindbal, chief of the Heruli, was hung by order of 
Narses, before he had time to make great devastations. Our author has 
Bubstituted Amingus for Lothaire, one of the French chiefs put to death by 
Narses. For observations on the calumnies of the Romans against Narseis, 
Bee before, book i. p. 115, and the same ncte respecting the Guinili. 

^ A.n. 574 — 578. Alboin, king of the Lombards, issued from Pannonia 
the 2nd of April, 5G8, to invade the Venetian provinces; he took Milan 
the 4th of September in the year following, and afterwards made himself 
master of the greatest part of Italy, including the duchy of Beneventum. . 



3iG OHDERICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.XVIII. 

admirable poet, gave the Acts of the Apostles in hexameter 
verse. 

Then also the most reverend father Benedict, who first 
settled at a place called Subiaco, forty miles from Home, 
and afterwards at Monte Cassino, shed around him the light 
of his great virtues and apostolical life. His life, as is well 
known, has been the subject of an eloquent discourse in 
Pope Grregory's Dialogues. 

Pope Benedict died, worn out with labours and troubles, 
and was buried in the church of St. Peter, the 2nd of the 
calends of August [31st July]. He consecrated twenty- 
one bishops ; the see was void three months and ten days.^ 

Pelagius, a Eoman, son of AV^inigild," filled the see ten 
years, eleven months, and ten days. He was consecrated 
without the emperor's confirmation, because E-ome was 
•besieged by the Lombards who were fearfully devastating 
Italy. In his time there was much bloodshed and excessive 
rain. The pope was suddenly carried ofi" by a contagious 
pestilence, and died on the 7th of the ides [7th] of February; 
and was buried at St. Peter's. He consecrated forty-eight 
bishops for difi*erent places, and the see was vacant six 
months and twenty-five days.^ 

1 Our author makes a great mistake in representing Pope Benedict as 
contemporary with Justinian, who died on the 14th of November, 565. 
The church of Santa Sophia was consecrated 27th of December, 537. 
Cassiodorus had died at an advanced age in the time of Po}>e John III., 
about the year 565. Reference has been already made in the notes, book 
i. p. 11 5, to Dionysius the Little, who died in 540. Priscian, the cele- 
brated grammarian, flourished at Constantinople about a.d, 525. Arator, 
as it has been already remarked, was contemporary with Pope Vigilius. 
St. Benedict, who was born in 480, after having founded his first monastery 
at Subiaco as far back as 497, retired to Monte Cassino, where he died the 
21st of March, 543. 

* It is curious to observe how speedily the posterity of barbarian and 
heathen invaders not only adopted the faith and civilization of the people 
subjected, but raised themselves to its first ranks. Pelagius is the second 
pope of Home, in the sixth century, who was of Gothic extraction, Boni- 
face (see p. 340) being the first. Thus we shall find in the sequel of this 
-work that in England the primacies of Canterbury and York were both 
filled by Danes or Norwegians within fifty years after the island was first 
devastated by a people represented by the writers of the times to be in a 
state of unmitigated barbarism. 

' November 30, 578 — February 8, 590. Pelagius fell a victim to the 
plague which ravaged Rome in the beginning of the year 590. 



A.D. 590 — G04.] ST. GREGOrvT THE GREAT. 847 

Gregory, a Roman and philosopher, son of Gorcliau the 
praetor, a man of the highest rank, and of the most excellent 
Sylvia, presided over the Eoman see thirteen years, six 
months, ten days, in the reigns of the emperors Tiberius, 
Constantino, Maurice, and Phocas.^ Gregory composed 
forty homilies on the gospels ; he ^Yrote commentaries on 
the Psalms and Ezekiel, and published a pastoral and a dia- 
logue, with many other works which w^e cannot stay to 
enumerate. This incomparable doctor Avas highly distin- 
guished for deep wisdom and great learning, both in the 
writings and discourses of his useful labours, by which he 
rendered the greatest service to the sons of the church of 
God. He added to the canon of the mass the words, "And 
grant th}^ peace in our days," &c.^ The Eoman patrician 
and exarch came to Eome while Gregory was pope, and 
occasioned great troubles.^ On his return to Eavenna, he 
seized the cities of Sutri, Bomarzo, Amelia, Perouse, and 
some others held by the Lombards. Upon this, the king 
Agilulf, being greatly incensed, attacked Perouse with a 
powerful army, besieging in it Maurision, general of the 
Lombards, who had submitted to the Eomans, whom he 
made prisoner in a few days, and immediately put to death. 
Not long afterwards, Agilulf, having returned to Pavia, 
made a lasting peace with the Eomans, through the media- 
tion of the blessed pope Gregory. 

At the same time, St. Gregory commissioned the servants 

1 September 3, 590— March 12, 604. It was not St. Gregory's father 
who was praetor of Rome, but the bishop himself before his conversion. 
His popedom did not correspond with the reign of Tiberius Constantine, 
but only with those of the two other emperors here named. 

^ The words added are, dies nostras in tua pane dispones, alque ah 
esierna damitatione nos eripi et in e/eclorum Ivortim jubeas greye numerari. 
Per Chrisiinn Dominnm nostrnm ; '* Dispose our days in thy peace, 
preserve us from eternal damnation, and number us among thine elect ; 
through Christ,'' &c. The clause immediately precedes the consecration 
prayer in tlie office of the mass. It appears to have been first introduced 
during the perils to which Rome was exposed when besieged bv Agilulf in 
595. 

' The Roman patrician, who was also exarch of Rivenna from 590 to 
.597, constantly oj)posed the pacific policy of Gregory. The siege of Rome 
resulted from the exarch having taken possession of the places here 
named, which the Lombards had held. Peace with them was not restored 
until 598. 



34^8 ohdericus yitalis. [b.ii. ch.xviii. 

of Grod, Mellitus, Augustine, and John, with several others 
who feared the Lord, to preach to the Enghsh nation, and 
convert them to the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. After 
many great and memorable works, Pope Gregory was buried 
in the church of St. Peter the Apostle, before the sacristy, 
on the fourth of the ides [4th] of March. He consecrated 
seventy-two bishops in different places, and the bishopric 
was vacant five months and eighteen days.^ 

Sabinian, a native of Blesa," in Tuscany, whose father's 
name was Bonus, sat one year, five months, and nine days. 
At this time Eomewas afflicted with a grievous famine; and 
the pope, having concluded a peace with the Lombards, 
caused the granaries of the church to be opened, and corn 
to be sold at the rate of tbirtv bushels of wheat for a 
shilling. This pope was buried in the church of St. Peter, 
on the sixth of the calends of March [February 24]. He 
consecrated twenty-six bishops, and the see was void eleven 
months and twenty -three days. 

Boniface [III], a Roman, son of John of Cappadocia, 
filled the see eight months and twenty-two days.^ He 
obtained from the emperor Phocas his confirmation of the 
claim of the apostolical see to be the head of all churches, the 
church of Constantinople having made pretensions to prece- 
dence over that of Eome, and assumed the primacy. He 
was buried at St. Peter's on the second of the ides [12th] 
of November. He consecrated twenty-one bishops, and the 
see was void ten months and six days. 

Boniface [IV.], a native of Valeria,* a city of the Marci, 
son of John the physician, filled the sea six years, eight 
months, and thirteen days. In his time there were grievous 
famines, and pestilences, and inundations. He petitioned 
the emoeror Phocas for the temple called the Pantheon, 



1 See before, book i. p. 117, respecting the mission of St. Augustine and 
his companions to England ; and, in regard to the tomb of St. Gregory at 
St. Peter's, Aringhi, Roma Sudlerranea, ]. p. 161. The sea-etarium of 
the pontifical churches was a sacristy reserved for the use of the popes, in 
wliich they were robed before they took part in the service. 

^ September 13, 604 — February 22, 606. Blesa is now called Breda, a 
town ten miles from Viterbo. 

^ February 2.'; — November, 606. 

* A.D. 007 — 615. Valeria is a town of the Abruzzi. 



A.D. 615 — 625.] DEUSDEDIT — BONIFACE Y. 349 

and liavino; obtained it, dedicated it in honour of All Saints.^ 
He was buried at St. Peter's on the eighth of the calends 
of June []May 25]. He consecrated thirty-six bishops. The 
see was void six months and thirty-five days. 

Deusdedit, a Eoinaii, son of Stephen, a sub-deacon, sat 
three years, twenty-three days.' He greatly loved and 
honoured the clergy. At that time Eleutherius, the patrician 
and chamberlain, reduced Naples, and slew John Campius, 
in whose rebellion many had fallen. Peace, therefore, pre- 
vailed through all Italy, but there was a great earthquake, 
followed by so foul a pestilence, that no one could recognize 
the dead bodies of their friends.^ Pope Deusdedit was 
buried at St. Peter's on the sixth of the ides [8th] of No- 
vember. He bequeathed to each of the clergy a vestment^ 
for his ob^3equies. He consecrated twenty-nine bishops, and 
the see was void one month and sixteen days. 

BoNiEACE [Y.], of the city of Naples, in Campania, whose 
father's name was John, filled the see five years. He was 
the mildest of men, and did great good in the church. At 
that time Eleutherius the patrician invaded the kingdom, 
but he was slain by the troops from Eavenna, on his road 
from Luceoli to Rome. This pope was interred at St. 
Peter's, on the eighth of the calends of November [Oct. 25]. 

^ See note to book i. p. 118, for the day of the dedication of the Pan- 
theon alter it was converted into a church by Boniface IV. Tjie 
anniversary of this feast attracted so many strangers as sometimes to 
threaten the city with famine; in consequence Gregory IV. changed the 
day to the first of November, a season of the year when Rome Avas better 
supph'ed witli j^rovisions. 

'^ November 13, 615 — December 3, 618. Eleutherius was exarch from 
616 to 619. When marching from Ravenna to Rome, to compel it to 
receive him as emperor, he was killed by his troops. 

' This pestilential disease appears to have been the elephantiasis, a sort 
of leprosy which produced a trightful scurf, which might have the effect 
here described. 

* Rogam unam dimisit. M. Le Prevost considers the meaning to be 
that the pope left a legacy of a certain amount, " un legs sptcial en 
argsnty" to each of liis clergy. The word roga, however, from rogus, a 
funeral pile, rogalis, of or belonging to a funeral, seems to point to some- 
thing immediately connected with that ceremony. M. Du-Bois, the 
French translator of Ordericus, renders the passage " il accorda pour se 
obseques vn v6tement a ckacun dcs membres du dergt" a sense which is 
here adopted. 



350 OHDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.XYIII 

He consecrated twenty-nine bishops. The bishopric was 
vacant thirteen days.^ 

HoKORius, a native of Campania, son of the consul 
Petronius, filled the see twelve years, eleven months, and 
twenty-two days, in the time of the emperor Heraclius.' His 
good deeds were numerous and his teaching zealous. He 
appointed that every Saturday there should be a procession, 
departing from the church of St. ApoUinarius, and going to 
St. Peter's, the people accompanying it with hymns and 
spiritual songs. He consecrated eighty-one bishops, and 
was buried on the fourth of the ides [12th] of October, in 
the church of the blessed martyr St. Agnes, which he had 
himself built from the foundation.^ The bishopric was vacant 
one year, seven months, and seventeen days. 

Seyerin, a Roman, son of Albienus, filled the see two 
months and two days, under the emperor Heraclius, He 
-was mild and liberal, and very kind to the clergy and the 
poor. In his time the Lateran palace was violently pillaged 
by the Eoman army under the command of Maurice, keeper 
of the records, and Isaac, patrician and exarch. This pope, 
having consecrated four bishops, was buried at St. Peter's, 
on the nones [2nd] of August. The see was vacant three 
months and twenty-four days.* 

JoH]^, a Dalmatian, son of Yenantius the Scholastic, sat 

1 A.D. 618 — 625. Castrum Luceoli appears to be the place now called 
Ponte Riccioli. 

2 October 27, 625— October 12, 638. The father of this pope is called 
a consul, or consular man, at a time when the consulship had long ceased to 
exist either as an office or dignity, in the primitive sense of the term. It is 
probable that Petronius held some local magistracy to which the name had 
been transferred. It was revived in still later times as a title of honour, if 
not of office. Not only do the early English historians sometimes use the 
title indiscriminately with that of earl, but Robert, the distinguished son of 
Henry I. of England, was expressly created " consul of Gloucester." 

^ The church of St. Agnes, first erected by Constantine at the request of 
his daughter Constantine, and embellished by Tiberius II., h<id been 
restored by Symmachus, and was now rebuilt from the foundation by 
Honorius. The mosaics which ornamented the apsis are still preserved, 
and represent the pope at the left hand of the saint, who stands in the 
centre. See Ciampini, vols. ii. and iii. 

* May 29 — October 11, 640. The papal treasury was pillaged during 
the unusual interval which elapsed between the death of the late pope and 
the election of Severin. 



A.D. 6^2 — G55.] TnEODORE — MAETIK. 351 

one year, nine months, eighteen days. He transmitted 
large sums of money by the holy abbot Martin into Istria 
and Dalmatia for the redemption of captives ; and caused 
the relics of saints to be reverently transferred from thence. 
He was buried at St. Peter's, on the fourth of the idea 
[12th] of October ; and the see was vacant one month, thir- 
teen days.^ 

Theodore, a Greek, son of Bishop Theodore, and born 
at Jerusalem, filled the see six years, five months, eighteen 
days." At that time the abandoned Maurice, keeper of the 
records, revolted against Isaac the patrician, and secured 
the adhesion of the army and magistrates by oaths. But 
Isaac despatched Donus, his master of the troops and sacris- 
tan, to oppose Maurice, with directions to take him prisoner, 
and having beheaded him, to expose his head on a pole in 
the circus at Eavenna, and throw the others implicated into 
close imprisonment to await their punishment.^ Isaac him- 
self, however, by God's will, soon after died suddenly, and 
Theodore Calleopa was sent by the emperor to succeed him 
in the government of Italy. Pope Theodore was very pious 
and good. He deposed Pyrrhus and Paul, heretical bishops 
of Constantinople,* and consecrated forty-six bishops. He 
was interred at St. Peter's, on the ides [15th] of May ; and 
the bishopric was vacant one month, sixteen days. 

Maiitin, of Lodi, filled the Roman see six years, one month, 
and twenty-six days.^ In his time, Paul, bishop of Constan- 
tinople, revolted from the Catholic doctrine, and rudely 
overturned and stripped the altar belonging to the see of 
E-ome, which was dedicated in the house of Placidia. He 
prohibited the pope's vicars from worshipping there, or 

^ December 24, 640 — October 11, 642. The relics here mentioned were 
those of St. Anastasius, St, Venantius, St. Maur, and their companions. 

2 November 24, 642— May 13, 649. 

' Maurice, after the pilla<^e of the papal treasury, took refuge in the 
church of Sta. Maria ^la^giore, from which he was dragged forth, and his 
head, having been cut off by the soldiers who had orders to take him to 
Ravenna, was presented to Isaac. The latter died by accident in G4o, and 
was interred in the church of St. Vitalis, where his epitaph remained for 
several centuries. 

* The deposition of the patriarch Paul and the excommunication of 
Pyrrhus were pronounced at a council in which the pope presided in 648^ 
the decree of which he is said to have signed with consecrated wine. 

* July 5, 649— September 16, 655. 



352 ORDERICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CH. XVIII. 

offering the consecrated host, and celebrating the holy com- 
munion. On his being admonished by the apostolical vicars 
and other orthodox bishops, he only grew more furious, 
insomuch that he had some of them placed in confinement, 
some he sent into banishment, and others were subjected to 
scourging. Hearing this. Pope Martin assembled one hun- 
dred and five bishops at Eome, and condemning the heretics, 
confirmed the faith of the church of God. Afterwards, 
however, at the instigation of Paul, the emperor Constantine 
sent Theodore into Italy as exarch, and he caused Pope 
Martin to be banished to the Chersonesus, where the holy 
bishop died, on the fifteenth of the calends of October [Sep- 
tember 17].^ 

EuGENius, born at liome in the first or Aventine quarter, 
and son of liufinian, was bred to the church I'rom his 
inftmcy. He filled the see two years, nine months, and 
twenty-four days.^ He was a most excellent bishop, and 
excommunicated Peter, bishop of Constantinople, for his 
heresy.^ He consecrated twenty-one bishops ; and was 
buried at St. Peter's on the 4th of the nones [-Ith] of July. 
The see was void one month, twenty-one days. 

ViTALiAis", born at Segni in Campania, and son of Ana- 
stasius, filled the see fourteen years and six months. He 
was a strict observer of order, and consecrated ninety-seven 
bishops. At that time the emperor Constans besieged 
Eomoald, the son of King Grimoald, in Beneventum, but 

' The council assembled by Pope Martin was held in the month of 
October, 649. Though he was carried off from Rome in June, 653, lie 
did not reach Constantinople till the 17th of September of the year follow- 
inrr, havins: been detained in the island of Naxos. After a thousand hard- 
ships and outrages, his imprisonment was transferred to the Chersonesus, 
where he died at the time already stated. 

' A.D. 654 — 657. This pope^was nominated by the emperor in the life- 
time of his predecessor. The Aventine was the first of the seven eccle- 
siastical districts called regions, into which Rome was divided in the middle 
ases. It extended on the left bank of the Tiber as far as the church of 
St. Paul, which Avas included in it, thus enclosing the region of the circuit 
of Augustus, called the Aventine, and perhaps the thirteenth (the Fish- 
market), and the first (at the Capuan gate). 

^ It was in 656 that Peter, patriarch of Constantinople, having sent his 
confession of ftiith to Rome, it was rejected with indignation by the clergy 
and people, who would not permit the pope to celebrate mass until he had 
promised not to accept it. 



A.D. 657 — 678.] YITALIAK — DONUS. 353 

being defeated and forced to flee, lie came to Rome, where 
lie was honourably received and entertained by the pope 
and clergy for twelve days, but he raised money by stripping 
the city of the monuments which embellished it. He also 
wrought much evil on the Italians and other nations who 
owed him allegiance, but was soon afterwards assassinated 
in Sicily by his own attendants while he was bathing. On 
his death, the tyrant Mezentius usurped the throne. It 
was now that the Saracens massacred vast numbers of the 
Christians in Sicily. However, Pope Yitalian was then 
dead, and was buried at St. Peter's on the 6th of the 
calends of February [27th of January], and the bishopric 
was vacant two months and thirteen days.'^ 

Adeodatus, a Roman who had been a monk, and son 
of Jovian, filled the see four years, two months, and five days. 
Mezentius was now put to death by the Italian army at 
Syracuse, and his head, with those of several of the judges, 
was carried to Constantinople. The Saracens then took 
Syracuse, putting a multitude of the citizens to the sword, 
and returned to Alexandria, carrying with them the rich 
booty which the emperor Constans had lately brought from 
Rome. This pope consecrated forty-six bishops, and was 
interred at St. Peter's on the Gth of the calends of July 
[21st of June]. The bishopric was void three months and 
sixteen days. At that time there were such violent rains 
and thunder storms that the harvest could not be got in ; 
but the next year the grain sprung up self-sown.^ 

DojS'US, a Roman, son of Maurice, filled the see one year, 
five months, and ten days. At that time a comet appeared 
in the east during three montlis, in the month of August 

^ A.D. 657 — 672. We have corrected the text in this paragraph by 
inserting the name of Constans for that of Constantino. The spoliations 
committed by Constans when he visited Kome in 663, after his fruitless 
siege of Romoald at Beneventum, have been already mentioned. The 
name of the usurper was not Mezentius, but Mizizi ; but he was in- 
vested in the purple for some weeks against his own wishes, . The 
Saracens, who had already made themselves masters of part of Sicily in 
663, reduced and pillaged Syracuse about the year 673, carrying off to 
Alexandria all the bronze which Constance had stripped from the edifices 
at Rome. 

* A.D. 672 — 676. It was Constantino Pagonat who put to death Mizizi, 
as well as his father's murderers. Why they ai'e called judges we are at a 
loss to understand. 

YOL. I. A A 



354 OEDERicua yitalis. [b.ii. en. XVIII. 

from cock-crowing till day-break, to the great terror of the 
inhabitants of many countries in which it was visible. 
A great mortality followed in the east. Pope Bonus 
granted various honours to . . . ^ ; and consecrated six 
bishops. He was interred at St. Peter's on the third of the 
ides [2nd] of i\.pril. The see was void two months and 
fifteen days. 

Agatho, a Sicilian, sat two years, six months, and four 
days, in the time of the emperors Constantine, lleraclius, 
and Tiberius.' At that time the moon was eclipsed for 
eighteen days in the month of June.""^ A great mortality 
ensued ; parents with three or four of their children being 
carried to the grave together. The pope's legates were 
honourably received by the emperors in the royal city, and 
a general council of one hundred and fifty bishops of the east 
was assembled to discuss the Catholic faith. George of 
Constantinople, being convicted of heresy, submitted quietly 
to its decision; but Macharius, bishop of Antioch, persisting 
in liis obstinacy, was condemned Avith his followers, and 
being deposed by a unanimous decree was banished to 
Kome.^ Theophanius was made abbot in the island of 
Sicily. Pope Agatho consecrated eighteen bishops. He 
was buried at St. Peter's on the fourth of the ides [10th] of 
January; and the see was vacant one month and seven days. 

Leo the younger, a Sicilian by birth, son of Paul, sat ten 
months and seventeen days. He was very eloquent, well 
read in the sacred scriptures, learned in the Greek and 
Latin languages, and he took the lead in chanting and 
psalmody, and was zealous in all good works. He convoked 
the sixth general council in the palace of the emperor Con- 
stantine, called Trullus, and translated its acts from Greek 
into Latin with great care. On the IGth day of April, 

^ The ]\ISS. are imperfect in this place. M. Le Prevost suggests that 
the blank should be supplied with clerurn, " clergy." 

* J.une 26, 679 — January 10, 682. Heraclius and Tiberius were the 
brothers of Constantine Pogonat, who associated them with him in tlie 
empire at the commencement of his reign, and put them to death before 
his own death. 

^ Every one knows that an eclipse cannot last many days. The one 
here mentioned took place the 17th of June, 630. 

* Macarius died at Rome in the monastery assigned for his prison by 
Leo IL 



A.D. 682— G86.] LEO II.— JOHN. 355 

the first indiction, after the Lord's supper, the moon was 
eclipsed, her fiice having tlie colour of blood almost all 
night, but after cock-crowing it began gradually to brighten. 
Pope Leo consecrated twenty-three bishops. He was 
buried at St. Peter's on tlie fifth of the nones [3rd] of July, 
and the bishopric was vacant eleven months and twenty- 
two days.^ 

Benedict the younger, a Uoman, whose father name was 
John, filled the see ten months and twelve days. He was 
in the service of the church from infancy, and devoted to 
good works. He flourished in the time of Justinian and 
Heraclius. At that time the moon was completely over- 
shadowed by a cloud, while the rest of the sky was clear, 
during the Epiphany. In the month of February a star 
disappeared from the east and appeared setting in the 
west. Afterwards in March, Mount Bra\dus in Compania 
vomited lava for ten days, and the whole neighbourhood 
was destroyed by the ashes of the eruptions. This pope 
consecrated twelve bishops ; and was himself buried at 8t. 
Peter's on the eighth of the ides [8th] of May. The see 
was void two months and fifteen days.^ 

John, born at Antioch in Syria, son of Cyriacus, filled 
the see one year and nine days, in the time of the emperor 
Justinian. While yet a deacon, he had been sent by pope 
Agatho with certain priests to the imperial city. He was 
interred at St. Peter's on the fourth of the nones [2nd] of 
August, and the bishopric was void two months ^and 
eighteen days. He was continually unwell, and ordained 
thirteen bishops.^ 

CoNON, a Sicilian, whose father's name was Traceseus, 

^ August 17, 682— July 3, 633. Pope Leo was not consecrated till the 
8th of October. The sixth general council ought not to be confounded, as 
it is by our author, with the council in Tridlo of a.d. 691. Leo II 
implicitly received the decrees of that council, but it is not known that he 
translated them into Latin. The eclipse mentioned in this paragraph took 
place on the 16th of April, 683, at eleven p.m., being Holy Thursday. 

2 June 26, 684 — May 7, 685. This pope was not contemporary with 
the emperor Justinian II. or Heraclius, but with Constantine Pogonat 
(668 — September, 685). According to other historians, it was not the 
moon, but a star which exhibited the appearance here mentioned; and the 
mountain which was in a state of eruption was Vesuvius. 

' June 23, 685 — August 1, 686. This pope had been Pope Leo's 
legate at the council of Constantinople. 

A A 2 



35G ORDERICrS VITALIS. [e.II. Cfl.XVlII. 

filled the see eleven months. There was a severe con- 
test at his election, the clergy supporting Peter the arch- 
priest and the army Theodore the priest who was next on 
the list. But suddenly, by God's providence, they all 
abandoned Peter and Theodore, and unanimously chose 
the lord Conon, an old man of a noble presence and great 
piety. He suffered continually from sickness, but he con- 
secrated sixteen bishops. He was buried at St. Peter's 
on the tenth of the calends of October [21st September], 
and the bishopric was void two months and twenty-three 
davs.^ 

Sergitjs, whose family belonged to Antioch in Syria, but 
who was the son of Tiberius, settled at Palermo in Sicily, 
filled the see thirteen years, eight months, and twenty-three 
days, in the time of the emperor Justinian son of Constan- 
tine.'^ On the death of Pope Conon, part of the people 
elected Theodore the arch-priest, and another part Paschal, 
the arch-deacon ; but while there was great contention, the 
clergy chose Sergius. Paschal had privately given a bribe 
to John Plantiuus, the exarch, hopiug through him to 
obtain forcible possession of the papacy, but he was disap- 
pointed.^ Some time afterwards he was dismissed from the 
arch-deaconry for practising magical charms, and five years 
afterwards died impenitent. The emperor Justinian ordered 
a synod to be held in the imperial city, the acts of which 
confirmed by his own signature, he sent to Pope Sergius at 
Eome by the hands of Sergius, master of the ofiices."* But 
the pope, finding that some things were inserted contrary 
to the doctine of the church, refused his subscription. This' i 

1 October 21, 686 — September 21, 687. M. Le Prdvost proposes to 
render the words de patre Traccseo, by " of a family ftom Thrace." 

2 December 15, 687 — September 5, 701. 

^ For Plantinus read Platyn. The amount agreed on between the 
exarch and Paschal, one hundred livres d'or, was not paid, but promised; 
however Sergius was compelled to fulfil his engagement. 

* The magistrianus, translated " master of the offices," was a high 
officer of the Greek emperor's household. The word occurs before, p. 214. 
The council in Trvllo was held in 691, its decrees being subscribed by two 
hundred and eleven bishops. In 692, the emperor sent them to the pope, 
who did not even, condescend to read them ; and in 693 Zacharias, the 
protospathaire, was sent to Rome to arrest Sergius. This enterprise cer- 
tainly did not succeed, but whatever our author may say, the pope had to 
suffer banishment for five years. Aringhi, i. p. 165. 



A.D. 687 — 701.] POPE SERGIUS. 357 

produced a great disturbance, and Zachary, the protospa- 
thaire, was despatched to Eome by the emperor with orders 
to arrest the pope, and bring him to Constantinople. But 
the Ahnight_7 stirred up the troops at Ravenna and the 
Pentapolis, who marched to Home and blockaded the city 
gates, that they might have an opportunity of killing 
Zachary, while he, much alarmed, fled to the pope's own cham- 
ber, and pusillanimously concealed himself under the bed in 
terror of his life. The soldiery from Ravenna, entering Rome 
by St. Peter's gate, beset the Lateran palace with their 
armed bands, and when the gates were shut against them, 
threatened to demolish them, unless they were immediately 
opened. Upon this, the holy pope went out and gave an 
honourable reception to the soldiers and the people who 
liad hastily assembled for his protection, addressing them 
in courteous terms, so that their fury was assuaged. But, 
full of zeal for Grod and love for the prelate, they would not 
relinquish the guard of the palace until they had driven 
the before named spathaire from the city with disgrace. 
His employer, also, the providence of Grod speedily so 
ordering it, was driven from his throne, while the church of 
God and its first bishop were by Christ's help preserved 
in safety. Pope Sergius discovered by a divine revelation a 
large piece of the true cross in a silver case in the sanctuary 
of 8t. Peter's, and directed that it should be adored by the 
people every year on the feast of the exaltation of the 
cross. ^ He also ordered that at the moment of breaking 
the Lord's body, the Agnus Dei should be sung thrice by 
the people." This pope consecrated Damian. archbishop of 
Ravenna, Bertwald archbishop of Canterbury, and Clement 
AV^illebrod bishop of the Frisians, with other bishops in 
various provinces, to the number of ninety-seven. He was 
buried in the church of St. Peter, on the 6th of the ides 
[8th] of September, under the reign of the emperor Tiberias. 
The bishopric was vacant one month, and twenty days. 

I On the discovery of a portion of the true cross, see before, book i. p. 
133. 

'"* This was another of the additions to the ancient canon of the mass 
made by successive popes. It is retained in the English liturgy ; '"■ Lamb 
of God," &c. Concerning St. Willil)rod, see book i. He arrived in 
Frisia in GOO. Brihtwald, elected archbishop of Canterbury, July 1, 692, 
was consecrated June 29^ G93, by Godwin, arclibisliop of Lyons. 



358 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b. II. CH. XVIII. 

John, a G-reek, sat three years, two months, and twelve 
days.^ By his intercession Theophylact, exarch of Italy, 
was saved from being put to death in a tumult of the E-omau 
people. He also caused Gisulf, chief of the Lombards, who 
burnt and ravaged Campania, to retire into his own states, 
after receiving large sums for the ransom of his prisoners. 
This pope consecrated fifteen bishops, and was buried at 
St. Peter's, the see remaining void one month and eighteen 
days. 

John, a Greek, son of Plato, filled the see two years, six 
months, and seventeen days. He flourished in the reigns of 
Tiberius and Justinian,' and was a most learned and elo- 
quent prelate. He also carefully repaired many of the 
cemeteries of the saints and the churches which had fallen 
to decay and become ruinous.^ It was then that Aribert, 
king of the Lombards, son of Eaginbert, duke of Turin, 
restored to St. Peter the Cottian Alps, and recorded the 
donation in a charter with golden letters.* The emperor 
Justinian also, by the aid of Turbel, king of the Bulgarians, 
recovered the throne which he had lost, and caused the 
usurpers Leo and Tiberius to be put to death in the circus 
before all the people.'^ Pope John ordained nineteen bishops. 
He was buried at St. Ptiter's, before the altar of St. Mary, 
mother of God, which he had himself erected, on the fifteenth 
of the calends of JN'ovember [18th October]. The see was 
void two months. 

SisiNNius, a Syrian, son of John, sat twenty days.^ His 
mind was firm, and he was anxious for the prosperity of 

1 October 28, 701— January 9, 705. 

2 March 1, 705— October f7, 707. 

' The cemeteries repaired by this pope were those of Damasus, St. 
Mark, and St. Marceliinus, on the road to Ardea. He also rebuilt the 
church of St. Eugenius, which had become ruinous. The chapel he built 
and dedicated to St. Mary has been already mentioned. 

* The facts here related have been already mentioned, book i. p. l'2(y. 
It must not be understood that the whole Cottian Alps, or Mont Genevre, 
were included in the donation, but only the domains situated among them. 
It is singular that the Roman church, generally so careful to preserve the 
records of its title to estates, should have lost the charter of Aribert II. as 
well as that of Liutprand. 

* Ordericus has inverted the chronological order of these events; the 
first took place in 702, the second in 701. 

" January 18 — February 7, 703, 



A.D. 70S — 731.] SISINNITJS — GEEGORT II. 359 

3-^otne, but hs was a martyr to the gout, and expired sud- 
denly on the twentieth day after his consecration. He was 
uuriod at St. Peter's, and the bishopric remained vacant 
one month and eighteen days. 

CoNSTANTiNE, a Syrian, whose father s name was John, 
filled the see eight years and fifteen days.^ In his time 
there was a severe tamine at Eome which lasted three years, 
and was followed by a season of extraordinary plenty. The 
emperor Justinian sent the patrician Theodore into Italy, 
who took liavenna, and sent the contumacious archbishop 
i'elix'- into exile in Pontus, deprived of sight. The pope, at 
the emperor's request, undertook a journey to Constanti- 
nople with a numerous retinue, and was very honourably 
received by Justinian and Tiberius his son and the people. 
JYot long afterwards Philip put Justinian to death and 
usurped the throne, but in a very short time he was de- 
posed, and Anastasius, who succeeded, conformed to the 
orthodox belief.^ This pope consecrated sixty-four bishops, 
and was buried at St. Peter's of the ides [8th] of January ; 
the bishopric remaining void forty da3^s. 

GrREGORT [IL], a Eoman, son of Marcellus, filled the see 
sixteen years, nine months, and eleven days, in the reigns of 
the emperors Anastasius, Theodosius, Leo, and Constan- 
tine."* He founded many churches and abbies, and did 
many other good works which it is im])ossible to enumerate. 

He employed Boniface, the bishop, in converting the 
Germans to the Christian faith. During his pontificate the 

1 March 25, 708— April 9, 715. 

^ The epithet here applied to the archbishop of Ravenna has reference 
to his insubordination to the holy see. 

^ The expedition of the patrician Theodore to Ravenna was undertaken 
in 709. The pope's journey to Constantinople occupied the time from 
October 5, 710, the day of his departure, to the 24th of October of the 
year following. Justinian 11. was beheaded October 11, 711, and his suc- 
cessor, Philip, liad his eyes put out June 3, 713. 

* May 19, 715 — February 10, 731. The pontificate of Gregory IT. Avas 
far from lasting to the reign of Constantino Copronymus, which did not 
commence until 741. The woiks undertaken by this pope consisted more 
in restorations than new buildings. He sent Boniface into Germany in 
718. There appears some exaggeration in our author's account of the 
effects of the inundation of the Tiber in 717 ; according to other historians 
the flood in the quarter of the Via Lata did not exceed the height of a 
man. 



360 OKDEKICrS YITALIS. [b.II. CH.XTIII. 

moon had once the appearance of blood until midnight. 
The river Tiber oYerflo^Yed its banks and inundated Eome 
for seven days, so that it rose above the passage of the 
riaminian Grate, and in the Broadway was the depth of a 
man's stature and a half. Pope Gregory and his clergy, 
with the people, chanting frequent litanies, by the mercy of 
God, after the eighth day the flood abated. Anastasius, 
driven from the throne, engaged in battle with Theodosius,' 
but he was defeated and forced to become a monk. The 
infidel nation of the Saracens, having afilicted Spain for ten 
years, attempted to pass the Rhone into France, when they 
were met by Eudes duke of Aquitain, and defeated with a 
slaughter of 300,000 of the enemy, while 1,500 Franks only 
are said to have fallen. At that time a fiery rain was seen 
to fall from the sky in some place in Campania, which burnt 
lip the wheat and barley and pulse. When Leo was 
emperor, Constantinople was twice besieged by the Saracens, 
but God protecting it, the city was not taken, but 300,000 
of the inhabitants perished by fiimine and pestilence. 

Liutprand, king of the Lombards, at that time oppressed 
the Romans, but at the intercession of the people, and 
respecting his prayers and sanctity, he was induced to spare 
them. Duke Basil and Paul the exarch," with other mal- 
contents, received instructions from the emperor Leo to put 

^ The text, which has it Tiberius, is corrected. Theodosius's victory 
over Anastasius was obtained in the month of February, 716. One might 
suppose at first sight that our author is describing the irruption of Anbessa 
across the Rhone, but it is plain by the amount of the number of the slain, 
that he is speaking of the battle of Toulouse. Three consecrated sponges 
which Eudes pretended to have received from the pope, and which he 
distributed to his soldiers, greatly contributed to inflame the zeal of the 
Christians. 

^ The conquest by Liutprand of the greatest part of the towns in the 
duchy of Kom.e was effected in 7"29. It was the exarch Eutychius who 
attempted to obtain possession of the city, and he did enter it, but in a 
peaceable manner, through the good offices of the pope with his powerful 
ally. The emperor took measures against the pope as early as 7'2G at least 
when Jordan, the keeper of the rolls, and Lurion (in the MSS. called 
Barion), were killed by the Romans, and the duke Basil driven out of the 
city. The exarch Paul, who was not better treated by the Romans in 
72'7, fell during an insurrection at Ravenna in 728. The imprisonment 
and murder of Exhilhnrat, duke of Naples (written Exclarat in the MSS.), 
and his son, appear to be connected with the same period. 



A.D. 715 — 741.] GEEGOET II. — GEEGOEY III. 361 

to death Pope Gregory ; but the Eomans and Lombards, by 
God's providence, resisted their attempts, and protected the 
holy bishop. They slew Jordan, the keeper of the records, 
and John Lnrion, and Exhilharat the duke, with his son 
Adrian, and entirely frustrated the emperor's nefarious 
designs. He had decreed that no image of our Saviour or 
of his holy mother, or of any saint, martyr, or angel, should 
be allowed in the churches, pretending that they were all 
forbidden. He therefore commanded all images in the im- 
perial city to be removed and committed to the flames, 
threatening all who opposed with loss of their heads or their 
limbs. Leo deposed Germanus, bishop of Constantinople, 
who resisted this decree, and elevated the priest Anastasius 
in his place. In the month of January, the star which is 
called Antefer, shone with bright rays in the west. 
After this Tiberius Petasus made an attempt on the crown, 
but he was defeated and slain by Eutychius the exarch 
and the Eomans who had flown to arms.^ Pope Gregory 
consecrated one hundred and fifty bishops, and, after many 
good works, was buried at St. Peter's on the ides [Ist] of 
February. The bishopric was vacant one month and five 
days. 

Geegoet, a Syrian, whose father's name was John, filled 
the see ten years, eight months, and twenty-five days, in the 
reigns of the emperors Leo and Constantino.^ He was much 
distinguished for his sanctity, piety, wisdom, and eloquence 
in the Greek and Latin tongues. He founded many sacred 
buildings, and added ornaments to several churches. A 
synod consisting of niuetj^-three bishops was convoked by 
him at Pome, in opposition to the heresies of the emperors 
Leo and Constantino, who had cast out the images of Christ 
and his saints from the churches, and irreverently burnt 
them. He added the following words to be recited by the 
priest in the canon of the mass : " Whose holy festival is 
this day celebrated throughout all the world in the sight of 
thy majesty, Lord our God;" causing them to be in- 

^ Germanus, patriarch of Constantinople, was deposed the 17th of Jan. 
7?'0, and Anastasius was appointed in his place five days afterwards. The 
revolt of Tiberius Petasus was prior to the edict against images, which was 
not issued until 730, though the emperor had begun to oppose them in 7'27. 

2 March 18, 731— Isovember 27 or 20, 7-11. 



3G2 OEDERICUS TITALIS. [b.II. Cn.XTIII. 

scribed on stone in an oratory.^ In his time Liutprand, 
king of the Lombards, laid siege to Eome, on which occasion 
the pope sought aid from Charles, king of the IVauks.' It 
was then that Thrasimond, duke of Spoleto, having sought 
refuge at Eome, four cities were taken from the Komans. 
This holy pope consecrated eighty bishops, and was buried 
at St. Peter's on the fourth of the calends of December 
[28th November]. The see was void eight days. 

Zacuart, a Greek, son of Polychronius, filled the see ten 
years, three months, and fourteen days.^ Adorned with 
every virtue he conferred great benefits on the church. In 
his time Italy was in a very disturbed state : the pope, 
however, had an interview with King Liutprand, and suc- 
ceeded in negotiating a treaty of peace for twenty years, 
and, recovering the prisoner Liutprand, died in the thirty- 
second year of his reign, and was succeeded by Eatchis, son 
of Peminon duke of Forli. Then while the emperor Constan- 
tine marched against the Arabs, one Artabasdus contrived 
to usurp the government, but Constantino assembling the 
army of the east took the imperial city by storm, and de- 
prived the rebel and his accomplices of sight. At that time 
Carloman, son of Charles Martel, king of the Pranks, became 
a monk at Monte Cassino. King Katchis also, at the 
exhortations of the pope, came to Rome, and by God's grace 
laying aside his crown, became a monk.^ Pope Zachary 

^ The council mentioned in this paragraph wa.s held in 732. Ciampini 
iii. c. 4, preserves three prayers which Gregory III. caused to be inscribed 
in the crypt of St. Peter, but the fragment quoted by our author is not 
among them, and if the passage was introduced into the canon of the mass, 
its use has long since been discontinued. There are, however, correspond- 
ing words in the collect f(jr the masses for martyrs, confessor?, and bishops, 
and on the anniversaries of the dedication of churches. 

^ It will be observed that Ordericus Vitalis, like the Roman writers, 
always gives Charles Martel the title of king of the Franks. It was in 640 
that Thrasimond, duke of Spoleto, who had revolted against Liutprand, 
having sought refuge and obtained succour at Rome, the Lombard king 
revenged himself by seizing the towns of Ameria, Orti, Bomarzo, and 
Bieda, (?) and by besieging Rome. 

' November oO, 741 — March 14, 752. 

* Liutprand, in his treaty with the pope at the close of 7-^1, restored the 
four towns he had taken the preceding year. Thrasimond was pardoned 
on condition of his becoming a priest, a treatment to which he had 
subjected his father. Liutprand died towards the month of January, 744, 
after a reign of thirty-one years and seven months. Hildebrand, his 



A.D. 752 — 757.] POPE STEPnEN II. 363 

translated tlie four books of Dialogues of Pope St. Grregory 
from Latin to Greek, and consecrated eiglity-five bishops. 
He was buried at !St. Peter's on the ides [15th] of March, 
and the bishopric was vacant twelve days. 

Stephen, a lioman, son of Constantino, sat five years 
and twenty-eight days.^ The people had elected another 
[Stephen, a priest; but, three days afterwards, rising from 
sleep in good health, and sitting down for the despatch of 
business, he was suddenly deprived of sense and the power 
of speech, and died the next day. Upon this, Stephen, the 
deacon, a man adorned by every virtue, was elected pope. 
At that time Astulph, king of the Lombards, cruelly 
persecuted the church, and used every efibrt to reduce Home 
itself to subjection. In consequence, the pope, finding that 
neither money nor prayers were of any avail, was under the 
necessity of undertaking a journey to France, to implore 
protection for the church. He was received with high 
honour by King Pepin and the Frank nobles, and was 
entertained the whole winter at the Abbey of St. Deny's, 
near Paris." Soon afterwards Pepin laid siege to Pavia with 
an army of Pranks, and compelled Astulph to swear to a 
treaty of peace with the Eomans, but, as soon as Pepin 
retired to his own states, Astulph broke his oath, besieging 
Pome for four months, and violating the cemeteries, in which 
he disinterred the bodies of manv of the saints. At the 
pope's entreaty Pepin again besieged Pavia, and, forcing the 
perjured king to siu'render Eavenna, Narni, Pimini, and 
many other towns, added them to the patrimony of St. 
Peter. Not long afterwards Astulph perished while he was 
hunting, by a stroke divinely directed, and Duke Desiderius 
took possession of the throne.^ Pope Stephen consecrated 

nephew, was deposed the August following, and Ratchis, duke of Friuli, 
succeeded him. Artabasdus, brother-in-law of Constantine Copronymus, 
having revolted against him during his absence, had his eyes put out the 
•2nd of November, 743. Carloman became a monk at Monte Cassino in 
747, and Ratchis in 749. 

1 March 26, 752— April 25, 757. 

^ Concerning this journey of Pope Stephen II. to France, see previous 
note, book i. p. 131. 

' The first siege of Pavia was in 754, that of Rome by Astulph began 
January 1, 755, and the second siege of Pavia was undertaken in the 
course of the same year. The number of places which Astulph was com- 



364j ordeetcus vitalis. [b.ii. ch.xyiii. 

fifteen bishops, and crowned Pepin king of the Franks, with 
his Q,ueen Bertrade, and their sons Charles and Carloman. 
He was buried at St. Peter's on the calends [1st] of May, and 
the see was void five days. 

Paul, a Roman, brother of Stephen, filled the see ten 
years and one month, in the time of Constantino and Leo.^ 
His good deeds were many ; he ordained sixty bishops, and 
after his death the see remained void one year and one 
month, while the intruder Constantino took possession of 
tlie apostolical seat. 

Stephen, a Sicilian, son of Olybus, filled the see three 
years, five months, and twenty-eight days.^ He was a firm, 
wise, and excellent prelate, and rendered great services to the 
church. Before his election an unprecedented outrage was 
committed at Eome ; for Toto, duke of IS'epi, compelled 
George, bishop of Prreneste, very reluctantly, to consecrate 
the duke's brother Constantino pope, he being a layman.^ 
Soon after the ordination G-eorge fell sick, and became so 
infirm that he never afterwards sang mass. For his right 
liand dried up and became so palsied that he could not raise 
it to his mouth. A year after Eome was delivered up to 
Christopher the dean, and Sergius the sacristan, and Duke 
Toto was treacherously assassinated by Demetrius and 
Gratiosus. Upon this, Stephen was lawfully elected pope 
with the general consent ; and not long afterwards the 
intruder Constantino, with his brother Passibius, and 
Theodore, bishop and apostolic-vicar, were seized by some 
rufiians, who deprived them of sight ; and Christopher, with 
his son Sergius and several others, perished by the craft and 
emissaries of King Desiderius.' Meanwhile Stephen, soon 
after his consecration, sent Sergius the secondary to the 

pelled to cede to the pope amounted to twenty-two, among which were 
Fano, Cesina, Sinegaglia, Forli, Comacchio, and Narni. Astulph died 
and was succeeded by Didier, in the beginning of the year 755. 

^ May "29, 757 — June 28, 767. This pope was not contemporary with 
the emperor Leo, but with Constantino only. 

* August 7j 758 — February 1, 772. 

' Nepi is a small town in the neighbourhood of Rome, on the river 
Briglia. Constantine retained possession of the apostolic sse thirteen 
months. 

* It was five years afterwards that Christopher and his son Sergius had 
their eyes put out by Paul Afriartes, acting in concert with King Desiderius. 



A.D. 758 — 795.] STEPHEN III. — ADEIAiN" I. 365 

court of Charlemagne, king of the Franks, entreating his aid 
and advice. Upon this the king deputed to Rome twelve of 
the French bishops of the highest character, and best 
instructed in the holy scriptures, and in the rules of the 
sacred canons.^ 

In the month of April a sjmod of bishops assembled in 
the church of St. Saviour, near the Lateran palace, and Con- 
stantine, who from a layman had been so precipitately made 
a clergyman and pope, was unanimously condemned. The 
synod further decreed, under penalty of excommunication, 
that no layman, or person of any order, should be raised to 
the popedom, except by passing through the regular degrees 
of orders ; and that all which this Constantino had sanc- 
tioned in ecclesiastical affairs and divine worship should be 
performed anew, except baptism and holy unction. Pope 
Stephen consecrated thirty bishops, and was buried at St. 
Peter's, the bishopric remaining void eight days. 

Adeian, a Eoman, son of Theodore who lived in the 
district of the Broadway, filled the see twenty-three years, 
ten months, and seventeen days.^ Of noble rank and grace- 
ful person, he was moreover firm, devout, and holy. In his 
time Desiderius, king of the Lombards, inflicted great evils 
on Eome, on Eavenna, and on the places subject to them. 
In consequence Charlemagne, at the pope's request, under- 
took an expedition into Italy, and after besieging Pavia for 
live months, by God's help forced it to surrender ; and 
marching from thence to Pome, he and his army entered the 
city, amidst the highest honours, on the Saturday before 
Easter. He sent Desiderius captive to France, with his 
queen, and restored the patrimony of St. Peter which he 
had seized.^ Pope Adrian founded and ornamented churches 

1 Sergiua had been sent as legate to King Pepin immediately after 
Stephen became pope, but on his arrival (September 24, 768) he found 
Pepin dead, and his sons Charlemagne and Carloman in possession of his 
dominions. 

2 February 9, 772- December 25, 795. 

' The Lombard king made himself master of Ravenna in 772, and pro- 
ceeded on his march towards Rome the year following. The siege of Pavia 
lasted six months, as our author correctly states, during the winter and 
spring of 774, and Charlemagne entered Rome on Holy Saturday. De- 
siderius was confined in the abbey of Corby, where he ended his days. 
Charlemagne's donation to the Roman church included more territory than 
the Lombard kings had wrested from it. 



36G ORDEETCTTS YITALTS. [b.IT. CH. XTITT. 

and did many memorable things. He prevailed on the 
emperor Constantine to assemble a council of three hundred 
and fifty bishops at Nice, the acts of which he caused to be 
translated from Greek into Latin.^ In the twentieth year of 
this papacy the Tiber overflowed its banks as far as the door 
of St. Peter's church, doing great injury to the citizens ; but 
the pope ordered processions, and the Lord in his mercy 
abated the flood." He consecrated one hundred and eighty- 
five bishops, and was buried at St. Peter's on the seventh of 
the calends of January [26th December], Leo being made 
pope in his stead the same day. 

Leo [in.], a Eoman, son of Aizuppius, sat twenty years, 
five months, and sixteen days,^ following in all things the 
examples of his predecessors. While he was engaged in the 
due performance of his office, and on a certain day was going 
in procession with the people to the church of St. Peter, 
Paschal the primicier, and Campol the sacristan,"^ rushed 
from an ambush with their armed followers, and dispersing 
the terrified and unarmed populace, made an attempt to 
deprive the pope of his tongue and his eyes before the very 
altar of St. Peter. But some days afterwards Albinus the 
chamberlain released him from prison, and the Lord 
Almighty restored him to perfect health. Winigis, also, 
duke of Spoleto, came to his aid, and seeing the pope, who 
had been wounded with clubs and dashed before the altar, 
half dead and weltering in his blood, now wonderfully 
restored to health, the duke and the rest of the faithful 

• This council assembled at Constantinople the 1st of August, 786, and 
resumed its labours at Nice on the 24th of September of the year follow- 
ing, continuing them to the 23rd of October. The translation of its 
decrees made by Pope Stephen was so literal as to be almost unintelligible. 

- The inundation of which our iiuthor speaks occurred in the month of 
December, 791. The flood burst into the city at the Flaminian gate, now 
the Porta del Popolo, which it laid in ruins, as well as the Sublician 
bridge. 

' February 9, 772 — December 25, 7^5. 

* Primicerius, Sacellarius, The ])rimicier was the first officer of the 
Roman church, who in grand ceremonies attended the emperor and the 
pope on one side, while the secondary stood on the other, taking prece- 
dence of all other dignitaries. The sacristan was the fourth officer of the 
church, whose duty it Avas to distribute the pay of the troops, and the 
donations to the choir and clergy. The insurrection headed by these two 
leaders broke out on the 23rd of April, 749. 



2 



A.D. 772 — 824.] LEO III. — PASCHAL. 3G7 

glorified Grod. The pope afterwards paid a visit to 
Charlemagne, and complained to him of the treatment he had 
received. He was received with the honours due to his hi^rh 
rank, and on his return was attended by two archbishops, 
Hildebald and Arno, with six bishops and three counts.^ 
The king himself soon afterwards went to Eome and was 
crowned by the same pope on Christmas day at St. Peter's, 
being proclaimed by all, both Eomans and Franks, emperor 
of Eome. 

After this, on the second of the calends of May [30th 
April], the ninth indiction, a violent earthquake entirely 
destroyed the church of St. Paul, which Pope Leo rebuilt 
with great magnificence. Tliis pope also instituted the 
rogations for three days before our Lord's ascension 
None of his predecessors bestowed so much care on the 
churches of the saints, their ornaments and all things 
necessar}^ He ordained one hundred and twenty-six 
bishops, and was buried at St. Peter's on the second of the 
ides [12th] of June. The see was void one month. 

Stephen, a Eoman, son of Marinus, sat seven months.^ 
To establish the peace of holy church, he went into Prance 
to the emperor Lewis, and obtained of him all that he 
requested, and mercifully recalled the exiles who were 
banished for their outrage on Pope Leo.* He consecrated 
five bishops, and was interred at St. Peter's. The bishop- 
ric was vacant twenty-six days. 

Paschal, a Eoman, son of Bonosus, filled the see seven 
years, four months, and eighteen days.^ He followed the 
examples of his predecessors in great sanctity, doing much 

* Pope Leo met Charlemagne at Paderborn, and returned to Rome the 
29th of November of the same year. Hildebald (spelt Idilvald in the 
text) was archbishop of Cologne, and Arno of Saltzburgh, 

2 The earthquake which shattered and threw down the roof of the 
church of St. Paul happened in 801. It was not this pope, but Mamertus, 
who instituted the rogations, about the year 470. it should seem that 
Pope Leo IIL introduced them at Rome, or at least regulated the cere- 
monial to be observed in them. 

■*» June 11 or 12, 816— January 24, 817. 

^ The emperor received the pope at Rheims in the month of August. 
There is no other account of his having brought back from France the 
assassins of his predecessor, and it is not a very probable circumstance. 

^ January 25, 817 — May 11,824. This pope rebuilt three churches, 
St. Praxede, St. Cecilia in Transtevere, and Santa Maria in Dominica. 



8G8 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b. II. CH. XVIII. 

that was both useful aud ornamental to the church. He 
consecrated eleven bishops, and was interred at St. Peter's, 
the see being void four days. 

EuaENius, a Eoman, a good and holy prelate, filled the 
see four years.^ At that time extraordinary plenty and 
peace reigned throughout the world. 

Valei^tine, a Koraan, son of Peter, from the quarter of 
the Broad-way, endowed with every virtue, filled the see 
fourteen days.^ He was elected in the Laterau palace by 
one hundred bishops, and tlie chief men of Eome with all 
the people, and being taken from the church of St. Mary, 
mother of Grod, was placed on the papal throne; but he 
died shortly afterwards in sanctity. 

Geegort [IV.], a Eoman, son of John, distinguished for 
his noble person and birth, and a wise and holy bishop, 
filled the see sixteen years.^ In his time the Saracens made 
irruptions from their own territories on the islands and 
states of the Christians, which they grievously ravaged, 
butchering the inhabitants, and destroying in their fury the 
churches and dwellings of the faithful. Pope Gregory sur- 
rounded Ostia with walls to protect it from their incursions, 
from which it was afterwards called Gregorianopolis.* His 
other good deeds were numerous ; for he built many 
churches, and, translating numerous relics of the saints, 
deposited them in suitable receptacles. He consecrated one 
hundred and eighty-five bishops, and was buried at St. 
Peter's. The bishopric was vacant fifteen days. 

Sergius [II. ]j a Koman, whose father's name was also 
Sergius, filled the see three years.^ Although he was ca- 
nouically elected, John the deacon, with a band of armed 
peasants, burst the gates, and, trampling on all the tradi- 
tions of law and order, forced their way 'into the papal 
palace. But in the course of an hour the troops, being 
seized with a panic, took to flight, and John the intruder 

1 June 5, 824— August 27, 827. 

* August to September, 827. 
3 A.B. 827—854. 

* The Saracens made themselves masters of Crete and Sicily between 
the years 820 and 830, which induced Gregory IV. to fortify Ostia, to 
protect Rome from their attacks. 

* January or February, 844 — January 27, 847. 



A.D. Sli— 855.] SERGIUS 11. — LEO IT. SG9 

was made prisoner, and having been scourged was degraded 
from his office of deacon.^ At that time the emperor 
Lothaire sent to Eome Drogo, archbishop of Metz, with hi? 
own son Lewis, attended by many bishops, abbots, and 
counts. On their route they made great slaughter in the 
towns and country, so that the native inhabitants, terrified 
at their cruelty, were forced to take refuge in woods and 
dens. Then, on a certain day, the sky grew black with 
clouds, and some of Drogo' s chief attendants were struck 
with lightning and killed. Lewis, however, proceeded to 
Eome, when Pope Sergius anointed him with holy oil, and 
consecrated him king of the Lombards.^ This pope or- 
dained twenty-three bishops and founded several abbies and 
churches. He was buried at St Peter's, and the bishopric 
was vacant two months and fifteen days. 

Leo [IV.], a Eoman, son of Eadvald, sat eight years, 
three months, and six days.^ He shone brightly, like the 
sun, in the world, by his inestimable gifts, serving the 
church of God in various ways, both by building and 
embellishing churches, and by other useful undertakings. 
Presently, after the death of Pope Sergius, the Saracens 
pillaged the churches of St. Peter and St. Paul; but as 
their fleet was returning to Africa it was destroyed by a 
tempest."* At that time there was such an earthquake at 
Eome that all the elements seemed in disorder. Pope Leo 
prohibited laics from remaining in the sanctuary while 
mass was celebrated. In the first year of his papacy, he 
drove away by his merits and prayers a basilisk which, lurk- 
ing in the dark caverns of Eome, destroyed many persons 
j with its pestiferous breath. This holy pope also extinguished 

^ The election of Pope Sergius II. was hardly completed when John the 
deacon forced his way into the papal palace. 

^ Lewis II., son of the emperor Lothaire, arrived in Rome on 
Sunday the 8th of June, 844, and was crowned by Sergius II. the 15th of 
the same month, king of Lombardy; a young prince who defended his 
kingdom and the imperial rights in Italy with great spirit. 

3 January 2? or 28, 847— July 17, 855. 

* The pillage of the churches of St. Peter and St. Paul, both then fnnrl 
mnri, by the Saracens occurred in the month of August, 846, and con- 
sequently in the time of Pope Sergius. They were attacked by Lewis at 
the head of the Franks on their retreat, but gained their fleet, in the ship- 
wreck of which the booty they carried off from Rome was lost. 
VOL. I. B B 



870 OEDEKICUS YITALIS. [b.II. CII.XIX. 

ji fire whicli raged furiously in the street of the Saxons, by 
yimply making the sign of the cross.^ He founded and 
embellished many churches, rebuilt cities, and repaired the 
walls of !Rome. He also built a wall round the church of 
St. Peter, and was in some sort the founder of a city, since 
called from his name, the Leonine city, which he consecrated 
in the presence of the whole population of E-ome with 
great rejoicings on the 4th of the calends of July [28th 
June].^ 

Ch. XIX. Continuation of the series of pojpes^ from the 
death of Leo IV., a.d. 855, to Innocent II, the reigniny 
pope, A.D. 114:2. 

I HAYE now given, in a short chapter, such an account of a 
hundred popes who presided in the apostolical see after St. 
Peter, as I could collect from the writings of Pope St. Da- 
masus to Jerome, or in the Pontifical? But further, respect- 
ing the forty popes who filled the apostolical see from the 
time of Leo IV. to the present time, I have not yet been 
able to discover any genuine accounts ; I shall, therefore, 
venture to say but little about them. Their names only it 
will be my endeavour to supply in regular order, but I am 
under the necessity of observing silence on their origin and 

* The fire here mentioned is that which is represented by Raphael in 
his celebrated picture, which goes by the name of Incendio del Borgo. 

- Pope Leo IV. repaired many of the churches and monasteries, which 
he enriched and embellished, particularly the churches of St. Peter and 
St. Paul, from which he was anxious to remove all traces of the devasta- 
tions made by the Saracens. The repairs of the walls of Rome, and the 
fortifications with which he surrounded the Vatican, including the church 
of St. Peter, commenced in 848. These latter works lasted six years. 
Gibbon remarks of Pope Leo : " The capital of Christendom owed its 
salvation as much to the heroism of the pope Leo IV. as to the valour of 
the imperial troops. Born a Roman, the courage of the first ages of the 
icpublic glowed in his bosom." 

^ It is generally understood that the Pontifical, attributed during the 
middle ages either to Pope Damasus or St. Jerome, was the work of 
neither; but its history is too obscure and too complicated a subject to be 
discussed in a note. SuflSce it to say, that it now bears the name of 
Anastasius the librarian, who, if not its author, was at least its compiler and 
editor. Ordericus has miscounted the number of popes contained in his 
list, which (including the antipope Felix II.) amounts to one hundred and 
forty. 



A.D. 855 — 10-17.] SUCCESSION OF POPES. 371 

acts, until, by Grod's help, I shall have been able, as I wish, 
to meet with fuller records concerning them. 

Pope Benedict filled the see one year, six months, and 
ten days.^ 

Pope Nicholas, four years and ten months.'' 

Pope Adriatst, five years.^ 

Pope John, ten years.* 

Pope Marinus, one year and four months.^ 

Pope Adrian, one year and four months.® 

Pope Agapitus, one year.' 

Basil Stephen^ one year ; then Formosus,^ John,^** and 
Stephen," flourished in the time of Lewis d'Outremcr,** 
They were followed by Marinfs, Agapitus, Octavianus, 
Leo, Benedict, Benedict, Gerbert, Silvester, Aga- 
pitus, and Benedict. Thus, for nearly a hundred and ten 
years, eleven popes filled the apostolical see of whom I have 
been hitherto unable to discover either the genealogies, or 
the time of their elevation, or the date of their deaths.^^ 

Clement Suitger, who had been bishop of Bamberg, 



1 Benedict III., July 17 or 18— September 1, 855— April 8, 858. 

2 Nicholas I., April '24, 858— November ] 3, 867. 

* Adrian II., November 13 or 14, 867 — December 13 or 14, 872. 

* John VIII., December 14, 87-2— December 15, 882. 
•'' Marinus I., December, 882— May, 884. 

« Adrian III., May, 884— September, 885. 
' Agapitus was the same person as Adrian HI. 

^ Stephen V., who bore the name of Basil in his youth, September, 885 
— August 7, 891. 

* Formosus, September, 891 — April, 896. 

^^ For John, read Boniface VI. He was pope only fifteen days. 

^' Stephen VI., August, 896 — 897 ; about fourteen months. 

'* Our author is mistaken in representing the last three popes as con- 
temporary with Louis d'Outremer, whose reign began in June, 936, and 
terminated the 10th of September, 954. 

^^ Ordericus Vitalis omits the fifteen popes who filled the see of Rome 
between Stephen VI. and Marinus II. (897 — 942). Instead of Octavian 
read John XII. The tiara was contested between Leo VIII. and Benedict 

V. The crowning of Otho the Younger by John XIII. took place on 
Christmas day, 967. There should be inserted in the text between Benedict 

VI. and Benedict VII., Donus II., who filled the papacy for gome months 
in 976; after Benedict VII., John XIV., John XV..' John XVL, and 
Gregory v.; after Silvester II., John XVII., John XVIII., and Sergiua 
IV.; and after Benedict VIII., John XIX., Benedict IX., and Gregory 
VI. 

13 B 2 



372 ' oEDEEicus YiTALis. Fb-ii. cn.xix. 

filled the see nine years, and crowned the emperor Henrv 
and his empress Agnes.^ 

Damasus, formerly bishop of Aquileia, sat one year.^ 
Leo, a Lorrainer, sat five years. TTnder the name of Bruno 
he was bishop of Toul. AYhen pope he came mto Gaul and 
held a great council at Eheims. He restored to vigour 
many ancient decrees of the holy fathers which had fallen 
into disuse, and made many useful reforms both in civil and 
ecclesiastical affairs.' 

Gebehakd Yictoe filled the see three years.* 
Frederick Stephen^, son of Duke Gothelon, sat one year.^ 
Gerard Nicholas, the first pope of the French nation, 
sat two years.® 

Alexander of Lucca filled the see eleven years .'^ 
Gregory Hildebrand, a monk from his childhood, filled 
the see fourteen years. In his time tlie emperor Henry 
expelled the pope, and, intruding Guitberg, bishop of Ha- 
venna, into the apostolical see, caused great disturbances in 
the church of E.ome.^ 

> Desiderius Victor, who was abbot of Monte-Casino, 
filled the see eleven months.® 

Urbais' Odd, who had been a monk of Cluni, and bishop 
of Ostia, sat twelve years. He it was who stirred up the 
armies of Christendom to march to Jerusalem against the 
infidels.^' 

^ Clement II. (previously bishop of Bamberg), December 25, 1046 — 
October 9, 1047. He crowned Henry III. and his queen Agnes, on the 
very day of his own installation. 

^ Damasus, July 16 — August 8, 1048. This pope was not previously 
patriarch of Aquileia, but bishop of Brixen. 

^ February 12, 1048 — April 19, 1054. As to this pope, see book i. p. 
151. 

* March 13, 1055— July 28, 1057. 

** Stephen IX., August 2, 1057— March 29, 1058. 

" Nicholas II., December 28, 1058— January 18, 1059— July 21 or 22, 
1061. Ordericus, when he describes this pope as the first Frenchman who 
filled the holy see, forgot Silvester II. (Gerbert), who was a native of 
Auvergne. 

' Alexander II., bishop of Lucca, September 30, 1061 — April 21. 1073. 

« Gregory VIL, April 22— June 30, 1073— May 25, 1085. Gilbert, 
archbishop of Vienna, was elected by an assembly at Brixen, the 23rd of 
June, 1080, and died in ] 100, after an intrusion of twenty years. 

" Victor III., May 24, 1086— September 16, 1087- 

^0 Urban II., March 11,1 088— July 29, 1099. The date of the council 



A.D. 1099 — 1142.] succEssioK or popes. 378 

Pascal Eeiker, a native of the valley of the Brutians, 
a monk, sat twelve years.^ 

Gelasius John, born at Gaieta, sat two years.'* 

Calixtus Guy, son of William, duke of Burgundy, who 
was archbishop of Vienna, filled the see six years.* 

HoNOEius Lambeet, who was bishop of Ostia, sat five 
years.* 

Innocent George, of the family of the Papii, has filled 
the see twelve years. He held a great council at Rome in 
the ninth year of his papacy, at which many affairs were 
determined, although there are but scanty records of its 
proceedings.^ 

of Clermont, where the first crusade was preached, is given before, book i. 
p. 154. The crusaders formed a junction at Nice the 14th of May, 1097, 
and laying siege to Jerusalem on the 7th of June, took it by assault on 
Friday, the 15th of July, in the same year. 

1 Pascal II., a native of Bleda, August 13, 1099 — January, 1118. 

* Gelasius II., born at Gaieta, and not, as our author describes him, at 
Cadiz, Gaditaniis, January 25, 1118 — January 19, 1119. 

* Callistus IL, February 1, 1119— December 12, 1124. He was the 
son of William, earl of Boulogne, and filled the archiepiscopal see of Vienna 
at the time he was elevated to the papacy. 

* Honorius II., December 21, 1 1 24— February 14, 1130. 

^ Innocent 11,, February 15, 1130 — September 23, 1143. Ordericus 
calls him Papiensis; but he was not a native of Pavia, as he is described 
more expressly towards the close of book i., but belonged to the family of 
the Papii. The council here mentioned was the second Lateran (the tenth 
general council), which met on the 8th of April, 1139, and was attended 
by nearly a thousand bishops. 

The mention of twelve years having elapsed since the election of Innocent 
II., proves that this passage was written in the year 1 142, and consequently 
some time before the last paragraph but one in the first book. 



374 OEDEKICirS yitalis. 

BOOK III/ 



THE PEEFACE. 

It is our duty to devote ourselves unceasingly to the Cre- 
ator's praise in all liis works, although his majesty and 
might are beyond our powers of comprehension, and we are 
quite incapable of speaking in fitting terms of his ineffable 
loftiness and unwearied lovingkindness. These are exhi- 
bited in every page of the Old and New Testament ; these 
are the subjects of the study and meditations of every wise 
man. But who can penetrate the mystery of the immensity 
of God ? The knowledge of the love of Christ is above the 
skill of man, while to search it out and embrace it, and use 
our utmost efforts in pursuing it, is both our proper task 
and fraught with the fulness of everlasting salvation. For 
this, holy men whose worth is recorded in authentic writings, 
now associated with the angels, triumph in the heavens ; 
having despised transitory things and courted eternal 
realities, and abhorred carnal delights, that they might 
outer upon the blessed fruition of those that are spiritual. 
Following their Saviour's footsteps through the difficult 
path of a holy life, they have left us a salutary example, by 
imitating which we also may reach by the way of righteous- 
ness the heavenly inheritance ; an enterprise rendered so 
difficult to our sloth and weakness by the burden of our 
sins. Still it is our duty to struggle faithfully in their 
steps and follow the course they have pursued, that partici- 
pating in their merits, we may, by Grod's mercy, be one day 
found worthy to share the joys of their blessed society. 
In the former part of my work, I have had the satisfac- 

^ The title prefixed by our author to this book in hia own MS. of St. 
Evroult, is Book III. of the Ecclesiastical History op Ordeuicus 
ViTALis, THE Englishman. In Duchesne's edition, the words Second 
Part are added, with the following enumeration of the contents : Con- 
taining a clear account of the Norman wars in France^ England, and 
Apulia ; of the foundation of monasteries ; and a nearly complete series 
of the bishops and abbots of Normandy, loith many other important matters 
in the time of Duke William II., surnamed the Bastard. 



PEE FACE TO BOOK III. 375 

tlon of giving an account of some of these friends of God, 
and masters and rulers of his people, to meditate on whose 
lives, or to speak of them faithfully is an agreeable exercise 
for the soul, and a salutary remedy for her invrard disorders. 
JSTow, however, my superiors have set me another task, and 
an ample field opens before me in the history of the Nor- 
mans, who issuing from Denmark^ were addicted not to 
letters but to arms, and who, until the time of William the 
Bastard, were more given to fighting than to reading or 
writing. 

Dudo, dean of St. Quentin, has related with eloquence 
the wars of the first three dukes, of whose actions his work 
is a copious and poetical panegyric." It was dedicated to 
Eichard, the son of Gronor, whose good graces the author 
wished to secure. This work was neatly abridged by 
William, surnamed Calculus, a monk of Jumiege, who 

^ Dacia. At the time our author wrote, and, indeed, long afterwards, 
Denmark was confounded with Dacia ; the Danes called Daciy and the 
Norwegians, Norici. We may also observe, that the Normans as well as 
the Anglo-Saxon writers made no distinction between the tribes of the 
Northmen who came from Denmark, and the Norwegians. They are for 
the most part indiscriminately called Danes; Denmark having been more 
known, lying nearer to the eastern coast of England, and consequently 
supplying, at one time at least, the great body of the adventurers. It need 
hardly be remarked that both these people were derived from a common 
stock. RoUo, we know, came from Norway. Tradition still points out 
the coves where his galjies were fitted out, near Aalesund, on a small island 
at the mouth of the Romsdal's Fjord« 

* The word panegyric is justly applied. The work of Dudo de St. 
Quentin : Dudonis super congregatiouem S, Quiniini decani de moribns 
et actis primorum NormannicB Diicum libri iii., published in Duchesne's 
Historits Normannorum Scriptores Antiqui,, is, in truth, much less a 
history, properly so called, than a verbose, rhetorical, and often false 
panegyric of the first three dukes of Normandy. Though the author had 
great opportunities for collecting and describing faithfully the events of the 
times, as he lived at the courts of Richard I. and Richard II., he has 
in most cases either omitted, altered, or falsified the facts, and replaced 
them sometimes by the exaggerations of the grossest flattery, and at others 
by accounts taken hap-hazard from the lives of persons who lived in earlier 
times, or from traditions altogether fabulous. The consequence is, that 
instead of throwing light on the annals of the first age of Norman history, 
he has only made the darkness in which they are involved more visible. 
The three dukes of Normandy, whose history was written by Dudo, are 
Rolio, William I., surnamed Longue-Epee, and Richard 1., surnamed 
Sans-Peur, 



S7G OKDElilCUS VITALIS. [b.TII. 

flourished somewhat later, and added a short but perspi- 
cuous account of the four succeeding dukes.^ 

* This historian is vastly superior to Dudo de St. Quentin, but still he 
has committed the error of copying and adopting the, more or less, 
monstrous fables of his predecessor, and his work has had the misfortune 
of being disfigured by a continuation, the author of which has so interpolated 
it, and made so many injudicious additions, as to have essentially altered 
its character. William de Jumieges wrote the histories of Richard II., 
Richard III., Robert I., and William II., called at first the Bastard, 
and afterwards the Conqueror. It appears from what Ordericus Vitalis 
here says, that the eighth book of William de Jumieges in our editions was 
not written by him, as it gives the history of Henry I., eighth, or rather 
ninth duke of Normandy. In point of fact, he died in 1090, and his work, 
its it now stands, extends far beyond that year. 



377 



BOOK HI. 

Cn. I. Foundation of monasteries in Normandy — tliey are 
ravaned hi/ the Danes — restored hi/ Hollo and succeeding 
dukes — otliers founded — series of the dukes to William 
the Bastard. 

I COMMENCE my present undertaking with speaking of that 
vine of the Lord of hosts which he himself plants/ and 
preserves throughout the world against the devices of 
Behemoth. The shoots of this vine were freely propagated 
by the labours of the Lord's husbandmen in the country 
formerly called Neustria, but now Normandy," producing 
abundant fruit in men devoted to a holy life. These faith- 
ful labourers founded in that province many monasteries 
where the true branches of the vine, that is good Christians, 
planted themselves in common accord, in order to struggle 
more safely to the end against the wiles of their spiritual 
enemies. 

The blessed bishop Ouen, who flourished in the time of 
Dagobert king of the Franks and his son Clovis, and was of 
distingnished worth both in civil and ecclesiastical affairs, 
founded a convent for nuns at Pecamp, and another for 
monks in the city of Eouen, where he was himself buried in 
the year of our Lord G78, and his remains lay undisturbed 
for one hundred and sixty-five years, until Eouen was 
ravaged by the Northmen.^ 

' The metaphor of our Lord's vine, so frequently used in the holy 
scriptures and the writings of the fathers, seems to have been a favourite 
with our author. He had already made use of it in the commencement of 
his first book. 

'■* It was a common error to consider Neustria as synonymous with Nor- 
mandy ; it included not only Normandy, but all the territory between 
the Meuse, the Scheldt, the Loire, and the sea. More lately, indeed, the 
name was no longer given to t|ie country between the Seine and the Loire, 
and from this era may be dated the improper application of the term to 
describe exclusively sometimes Brittany, sometimes Normandy. 

^ St. Ouen, who died, not in 678, but in 683, cannot be considered the 
actual founder of the convent for nuns at Fecamp, which was commenced 
by his contemporary, St. Waninge, in 658. Still less did he erect that of 
St. Peter at Rouen, which took his name when his remains Avere translated 
there, but which dates its foundation as far back as the reign of Clotaire L 



378 OKDEEICUS TIT ALTS. [b. III. CIT.I. 

In the time of this bishop, St. "Wandrille collected a 
numerous society of monks at Fontenelles, and the blessed 
Philibert, the brave standard-bearer of this noble army, shed 
lustre on Jumieges.^ 

In earlier times, also, when Hilperic, and Childebert his 
nephew, governed the Franks, and protected the innocent 
against evil-doers by their royal authority, Evroult, a native 
of Bayeux, guided by the instructions of an angel, founded a 
monastery in the forest of Ouche.^ He thus effected the 
reformation of the rude natives who before lived by plunder 
and robbery, attracting them to a better course of life by 
the doctrines he taught them and the miracles he exhibited. 
In other places also the Lord propagated his vine by the 
labours of faithful husbandmen, abundantly filling the 
hearts of the Gauls with the sweetness of his salvation. 

The kingdom of the Franks having been, by God's favour, 
highly exalted above the neighbouring nations, and widely 
extended by the frequent triumphs of the Frank kings, 
Pepin, Charlemagne, and Lewis the Pious,^ avarice, pride, 
and lust, began to prevail excessively among all ranks of 
men, from the highest to the lowest, plunging them into 
the depths of iniquity, and causing them to rebel against 
the Author of their salvation, whose commandments they no 
longer obeyed. Both the clergy and laity of every degree, 
infected with these disorders, fell from their former virtue, 
and yielding to the seductions of the world, the discipline 
for which they were once remarkable, became enervated and 
extinct. Still the divine comipassion long spared the guilty, 
calling them to repentance in various ways. The penitent 
mercifully snatched from the snares of iniquity obtained 

One hundred and fifty-eight, not one hundred and sixty-five years, elapsed 
between the translation of iSt. Ouen's remains to Rouen and the ruin of the 
abbey by the Northmen in 841. 

' The abbey of Fontenelle, now St. Wandrille, was founded in 648, and 
that of Jumieges in 654. 

* St. Evroult, a native of Bayeux, retired with three companions to the 
vast solitudes of the forest of Ouche in 560. 

* The emperor Lewis, called Pius by the Romans, Le Debonaire by the 
French. The laxity of manner?, and of ecclesiastical discipline, which our 
author attributes to this age, began long before, at least as far back as the 
usurpation of the property and dignities of the church by laics in the time 
of Cliarles M artel. 



A.D. 841 — 876.] THE DANES EAYAGE ^^OIllrANDY. 879 

pardon, while those who perished in their evil courses incur- 
red the infliction of the scourge of the divine anger. 

In the time of Charles, king of the Franks, surnamed the 
Simple, Biorn, also called Iron-sides, son of Lodbroc, king of 
the Danes, accompanied by Hasting, his tutor, and a nume- 
rous band of young warriors, issued from their homes like 
a sword from the scabbard, for the destruction of the 
nations. Suddenly sweeping over the shores of France, 
like a whirlwind rising from the sea, and reducing to ashes 
towns, cities, and holy minsters, for thirty years the invaders 
and their confederates harassed the Christians with con- 
tinual inroads.^ Then Rouen and Noyon, Tours and 
Poictiers, and other principal cities, were burnt,^ the de- 
fenceless inhabitants were butchered, the monks and clergy 
were scattered, and the relics of the saints were either left 
unhonoured in their tombs within the ruined churches, or 
were transported by their pious worshippers to desolate 
places. 

But, in the dispensations of Providence, the same race 
which inflicted desolation on Neustria, became not long 
afterwards the means of her restoration. About thirty 
years after the ravages of Hastings,^ Duke Rollo, at the head 
of a powerful band of Danish youths, invaded Neustria, and 
strove by ceaseless attacks to exterminate the Franks. In 
a pitched battle he slew their standard-bearer Pioland, and 

* The whole of this paragraph, borrowed by Ordericus from preceding 
writers, is a tissue of misrepresentations, which contemporary writers enable 
us to correct. Biorn I., king of Upsala, surnamed Jarnsida (Ironsides), 
appears to have lived about the end of the eighth century, or beginning of 
the ninth, and he never set foot in France. Hasting, whose invasions and 
ravages are singularly exaggerated, according to authentic accounts did not 
make his appearance in the valley of the Loire and in Brittany till 867, 
and again in 869 and 882; afterwards, in that of the Somme, in 890. 

* Rouen was first ravaged the 14th of June, 841, Tours in 853, and 
Noyon in 859. As for Poitiers, it was first attacked in 855, but making a 
vigorous defence, it did not fall into the hands of the Northmen till 863. 

* According to the Saxon Chronicle, followed by Henry of Huntingdon 
and Florence of Worcester, Rollo landed in Normandy in a.d. 876. Our 
author, who has placed the invasions of Hastings under the reign of Charles 
the Simple, here makes his first expedition in France to have been in 847 
or 848, forgetting that he had before told us that Rouen was first attacked 
by the Northmen a hundred and sixty-five years after the year 678, and 
consequently in 843, which of all his calculations is that nearest the truth. 



880 OEDERICUS VITALIS. [b.III. CH.I. 

defeated Eeginald duke of Orleans -with the army of the 
Pranks. He besieged the city of Paris for four years, but, 
God defending it, was unable to reduce it. Baieux he took 
by storm, putting to the sword its count Berenger, whose 
daughter Poppa he married, and had by her a son called 
"William Longue-epce.'^ In this and innumerable other 
conflicts he crushed the Pranks, and laid waste almost the 
whole kingdom, as far as Burgundy, with fire and sword. 
The Pranks being unable to resist these attacks, and uniting 
in their supplications for peace, King Charles gave his 
dau2:hter Gisela in marriap^e to Eollo, and ceded to him in 
perpetuity the entire country from the river Epte to the 
ocean. ^ 

In consequence, Bollo was baptized by the lord Prancon, 
Archbishop of Eouen, in the year of our Lord 912, and 
casting away the idols which he before worshipped, with 
all his army devoutly embraced Christianity. He died 
five years after his baptism.* AVilliam, his son, who suc- 

^ Roland seems to have been a supposititious character, invented by the 
Norman historians; and the person they call Duke of Orleans was a duke 
of Maine, killed under the walls of Rouen in 885. RollO; who is not 
mentioned in any authentic account till 911, was not present at this battle, 
nor at the siege of Paris. All that concerns his taking Baieux, including 
Count Berenger and his daughter Poppa, is still the subject of controversy. 

^ The French editors of Ordericus Vitalis consider that all these expedi- 
tions of Rollo, as well as his marriage with Gisela, are but attributions to 
that chief of misrepresentations of anterior occurrences. 

' It certainly appears from a charter of Richard I. to the abbey of St. 
Denys, that his grandfather Rollo took the name of Robert. This is the 
only authentic proof we have of his baptism, and there is reason to 
doubt his having been so faithful and zealous a Christian as our author 
supposes. It appears, however, that he did make donations or restitutions 
to several churches, and particularly to those of St. Denys in France and 
Rouen in Normandy. 

The French editors of Ordericus consider that Dudo made a great 
mistake in fixing the death of Rollo five years after his baptism, namely, in 
917, an account, they say, implicitly copied by all the authors of the 
middle ages. Our Saxon Chronicle says, under the year 876, when it 
first mentions, and for the only time, Rollo's invasion of Norway, " And 
he reigned fifty winters," which would agree with our author's calculation 
— 917. M. Le Prevost, however, says that several MSS. of the Saxon 
Chronicle (one as old as 1001) place Rollo's death fifteen years after his 
baptism, namely, in 927. M. Deville quotes a passage from Frodoard, 
which speaks of Rollo retaining the son of Ddo as an hostage, to prove that 
the Norman duke was alive in 928 j but M, Le Prevost refers to another 



A.D. 942 — 99G.] DUKES or lTOIlirA^'DY. 381 

ceedecl him in the duchy of Normandy and held it twenty- 
live years, restored to its former condition the monastery of 
Jumieges, which Philibert had founded, but which had been 
laid in ruins by Hasting. 

In the year of our Lord 942, when Lewis was king of 
the Franks, Duke William was murdered by the treachery 
of Arnulph governor of Flanders; and Eichard his son, then 
a boy of twelve years of age, became duke of Normandy, 
and through various turns of fortune, some prosperous and 
I some adverse, held the dukedom fifty-four years. Among 
his other good deeds, he founded three monasteries, one at 
Fecamp, dedicated to the Holy Trinity,^ another at Mont 
St. Michel in honour of St. Michael the archangel, and the 
third at Eouen in honour of St. Peter the apostle, and St. 
Ouen the archbishop. 

In the year of our Lord 996, on the death of Elchard the 
elder, he was succeeded by Richard Gonorriaes his son,^ 
who piously governed the duchy of Normandy thirty years. 
He rebuilt the abbey of Fontenelles whicih St. Wandrille 
had founded and Hasting had ruined ; and Judith his wife, 
sister of Geoffrey earl of Brittany, founded a monastery at 
Bernai in honour of St. Mary, mother of God. 

On the death of Richard Gonnorides, his young son 
Kichard succeeded, but he held the dukedom not quite a 
year and a half.^ Then it fell to his brother Robert, who 

passage from the same historian, in which he mentions a treaty concluded 
between William Longue-epee with Charles the Simple at Eu, in 927, to 
establish the fact that Rollo was then dead, or otherwise his son would not 
have been the party to that treaty. M. Le Prevost also adduces the 
testimony of the monk Richer, to prove that Rollo was slain in 925, when 
defending Eu against the Franks under the command of King Rodolph. 

1 Richard I. founded a college of canons at Fecamp, the church of 
which was dedicated in 990, but they were not replaced by monks till 
after the year 1101, at which time also the abbey of St. Ouen was restored, 
and therefore under Richard's successor. 

'^ Gonnor was second wife of Richard I. For the singular occurrences 
which introduced this lady into the ducal family, see the continuator of 
William de Jumieges, book viii. c. 86. 

^ All this part of the chronology of Normandy is surrounded with diffi- 
culties. The following are the probable results of a careful examination 
by the French editors: Richard II. (Gonnorides) died a.d. 1027; Richard 
III. is supposed to have taken the administration of affairs in 1026, during 
the life of his father, who pnssed the last months of his life in the abbey of 
Fecamp, and to have died in 1028. The same uncertainty attends the 
date of Richard III.'s death ; it appears that he died before the r2th of 



382 ORDERICUS VITALIS. [b.IIT.CH.T. 

held it with great honour seven years and a half, and follow- 
ing the example of his ancestors, laid the foundations of the 
abbey of Cerisi. Moved however with the fear of God, he 
. relinquished his worldly honours and undertook a voluntary 
pilgrimage to the tomb of our Lord at Jerusalem, and died 
as he was returning home at Nice, in Bithynia, in the year 
of Christ 1035. 

William his son, who was then only eight years old, was 
invested in the duchy of Normandy, which he governed 
firmly fifty-three years, notwithstanding the machinations ot 
his jealous enemies. He devoted himself to follow the 
example of his ancestors in all that related to the worship 
of Grod, and by his favour surpassed them all in wealth and 
power. He founded two monasteries at Caen ; one for monks 
in honour of St. Stephen the first martyr, and the other for 
nuns in honour of the Holy Trinity. 

The barons of Normandy, moved by the zeal for holy reli- 
gion which they observed in their princes, were eager to 
imitate them, and animated themselves and their friends to 
similar undertakings for the good of their souls. They vied 
with each other in taking the lead in such good works, and 
in the liberality with which they made ample endowments. 
The most powerful nobles held themselves cheap if they had 
not on their domains some establishment of monks or clergy 
provided by them with whatever was necessary for the 
service of God. 

Thus Eoger de Toni founded the abbey of Chatillon, 
otherwise called Conches,' where Abbot Gislebert, a man of 
great worth and wisdom, rose to eminence. Goscelin 
d'Arques was the founder of a monastery, outside the walls 
of Kouenon the mount of the Holy Trinity, commonly 
called St. Catherine's,' which the venerable abbot Isambert 
governed with much prudence and piety. William, count 
d'Eu, at the instance of Lesceline his pious wife, caused the 
abbey of St. Mary to be built on the river Dive,* the disci- 
November, 1028, and the probability is that both he and his father died in 
the month of August of that year. From July, 1035, to September 9, 1087, 
the time of William the Conqueror's death, the fifty-third year was not 
completed, but only commenced. 

1 This abbey of Conches, called originally Chatillon, from the territory 
on which it was built near the town of Conches, was founded in 1035. 

2 Founded a.d. 1030. 

^ It was Lesceline herself who founded the abbey of St. Peter sur Dive, 



A.D. 1034.] ABBEY OF BEC FOUNDED. S83 

p]ine of whicli was long maintained by Ainart, a German of 
great holiness and extensive learning. 

In the time of Duke Bobert I., Gislebert, count of 
Brionne, made an inroad with three thousand armed fol- 
lowers into the district of Vimeux, but it did not turn out as 
prosperously as he expected ; for Ingelran, count of Ponthieu 
opposed him with a strong body of troops, and, giving him bat- 
tle, vanquished and put to flight all his force, taking some of 
the fugitives prisoners and killing or wounding others. In this 
extremity a knight named Herluin, being in peril of liis 
life, and using every eftbrt to save himself by flight, m.ade 
a vow that if he escaped safely from this imminent danger, 
he would never again devote himself to any other service 
than that of God. Being delivered in honour, by God's 
help, from the fate which threatened him, the knight, mind- 
ful of his vow, retired from the world and founded an abbey 
on his estate, at a place called Bee, which he dedicated to 
St. Mary, mother of God.^ The clergy of God's holy church 
then elected this noble and pious man to be the first abbot 
of the new monastery he had built. While it was under 
his rule Lanfranc, Anslem, and other profound philoso- 
phers, resorted there to the Christian schools ;^ and there 
William Eitz-Giroie, and Hugh count of Mellent, and other 
illustrious knights, enlisted themselves in the army of Christ. 
There, up to the present time, numbers both of clerks and 
layman live under the monastic rule, and fighting against the 
devil, laudably devote themselves to God's service. 

Humphrey de Yieilles, son of Thurold, began to erect 
two monasteries, one for monks and the other for nuns, at 
Preaux, which his son Boger de Beaumont kindly fostered, 
endowing them liberally from his own revenues.^ AVilliam 

A.p. 1078. It did not stand in the town of Dive, a small seaport at the 
mouth of the river of that name, but on its banks, some leagues inland. 

^ The precise date of this inroad into the Vimeux is not known, but Ingel- 
ran, count of Ponthieu, who made so brave a resistance, was living in 1043. 
The invasion must have taken place before 1034, which is the date assigned 
to the foundation of the abbey of Bee. 

^ The celebrated school at Bee was founded by Lanfranc in 1046. We 
shall hear more of this abbey and its inmates in the sequel. 

^ The abbey for monks called St. Pierre de Preaux, near Pont-Audemer, 
was founded shortly before the departure of Robert I. for the Holy Land 
in 1035, and that for nuns, dedicated to St. Leger, shortly afterwards. 



3S4< ORDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.III. CH.II. 

ntz- Osborne also founded two monastaries on his own 
domain, one at Lire, and the other at Cormeilles, where he 
himself lies buried.^ Many other Norman nobles, also, 
according to their means, constructed houses for monks or 
nuns in various quarters. Hugh de Grand-mesnil and 
Bobert, having their zeal roused by such examples, made a 
vow to build a monastery on their hereditary estates, for 
the good of their own souls and the souls of their ancestors. 

Ch. II. The abbey of St. Evroult — Notices of its founders 
and lenef actors, and other Norman lords — Particulars of 
its endowments. 

It was determined by Hugh and Robert that the monastery 
should be erected at Norrei,^ a vill belonging to them near 
Grand-mesnil ; and the work was already in progress, when a 
report was carried to William Pitz-Giroie their uncle, that 
his nephews, Hugh and Bobert, had commenced building a 
convent. This knight had been a man of great eminence 
in that age, terrible to his enemies, faithful to his friends. 
He was at the head of a powerful family, including sons, 
brothers, and numerous nephews, who were formidable to 
their foes, far and near. This knight, being invited by 
"William Talvas, son of William Belesme, to his nuptials, 
and unsuspectingly accepting the invitation, was, without 
any cause of accusation cruelly deprived of his eyes and his 
genitals, and the tips of his ears cut off. So odious a crime 
rendered Talvas universally detested, and some time after- 
wards he was stript of his honours by his own son Arnulf. 

AYilliam Giroie was all his life devoted to holy church, 
and held the monks, and clergy, and other men of religion 
in high honour. Twice he made pilgrimages to the tomb 
of our Lord at Jerusalem ;^ once when he was in the full 

1 William Fitz-Osborne founded the monastery of Cormeilles about the 
year 1060, and that of Lire as early as 1046. We shall presently find this 
powerful nobleman playing a distinguished part in the conquest of England 
and succeeding events. 

2 Norrei is situated between Grand-mesnil and Falaise. The founda- 
tions of the castle of the ancient lords of Grand-mesnil may yet be traced. 
Robert, the father of this Hugh and Robert, lost his life in the same battle 
in which Roger de Toni, founder of the abbey of Conches, fell. 

' It will appear in the course of this history, that pilgrimages to the 
Holy Land were as frequent among the Normans in the eleventh century, 
as those to Rome were among the Anglo-Saxons in the eighth. 



A.B, 1050.] ABBEY 01? ST. ETHOrLT EESTOEED. 385 

enjoyment of health and prosperity, and a second time when 
he had suffered the outrage which we have just mentioned. 
On his return from this second pilgrimage he determined 
on quitting the world, and going to Bee, there assumed the 
monastic hahit, and piously granted the church of Ouche 
to that abbey. Upon this, abbot Herluin sent Lanfranc, 
who was afterwards archbishop of Canterbury, with three 
other monks to Ouche, causing them to re-establish there 
the divine worship which had fallen into disuse. Mantling 
ivy overspread the mouldering walls of the church, and the 
place was deserted, except by two aged monks, Eestould 
and Ingran, who maintained the service of God in deep 
poverty, but to the best of their power, in the desolate 
wilderness. 

Some time afterwards, when William Giroie was informed 
of his nephews' vow to build a monastery, he sought them 
out and thus addressed them : " It causes me great joy, my 
dear sons, to find that Almighty God has vouchsafed to 
inspire you with the design of building a house in his name. 
But you must be sensible that the spot on which you have 
begun to build is not suited for a habitation of monks, 
because it wants water, and the forest is at too great a 
distance.^ It is quite certain that these two elements are 
absolutely necessary to the subsistence of a convent. Now, 
if you will take my advice, I will point out to you a more 
convenient site. The place is in the canton of Ouche, where 
there formerly dwelt a holy abbot, the friend of God, whose 
name was Evroult, who assembled there a large body of 
monks, and after performing many miracles died happily 
in the Lord. E-estore that monastery which was ruined by 
the pagans. You will find there abundance of water, and 
I possess a forest close by which will enable me to supply 
the convent with whatever is necessary. Come then and 
see this spot, and if it pleases you, let us join in building 
there a house of God, and place in it a company of faith- 
ful men who shall offer continual prayers on our behalf; 
and we will endow it from our domains with such secure 

1 It was almost indispensable in those times that the monasteries should 
be established near the verge of extensive forests for two reasons ; first, on 
account of having an abundant supply of fuel, and, secondly, for iiiQ 
pasturage of their large herds of swine. 

YOL. I. G C 



386 OTIDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.II. 

revenues that tliey may devote themselves altogether to the 
worship of Grod." 

IJpoii hearing this, his nephews Hugh and !Roberfc 
thanked him for his proposal, and they all proceeded 
together to survey the spot he had pointed out. On their 
coming there, a hook containing the life of the holy father 
Evroult was presented to Bobert, which he carefully perused 
and explained with intelligence to Hugh and the rest of his 
companions. Keed I say more ? The situation of Ouche 
pleased the two brothers ; but as it had been formerly 
granted to the abbey of Bee, and certain monks from that 
convent were already stationed there, as before mentioned, 
the brothers made over to the abbot and monks of Bee a 
vill called La Roussiere,^ securing in exchange the fee 
of the land at Ouche. 

In the year of our Lord 1050, the plan of restoring the 
abbey of Ouche being thus determined on, "William and 
Eobert, the sons of Griroie, with Hugh and Eobert, the sons 
of Eobert G-rand-Mesnil, applied to William duke of 
Normandy, and informing him of their intentions entreated 
the assistance of his paramount authority in the good work 
they had undertaken. They likewise made over the place 
so often mentioned to his guardianship, on a tenure so free 
tliat neither they nor any other persons whosoever should 
claim from the monks or their people either rent or cus- 
tomary dues, or anything else except the benefit of their 
prayers. The duke, very willingly acceding to their wishes, 
ratified the charter of the possessions which his nobles 
granted to St. Evroult, and caused it to be confirmed by the 
signatures of Mauger, archbishop of Eouen, and his 
suftragan bishops. 

Hugh and Eobert, having the duke's licence to choose an 
abbot, then proceeded to Jumieges, and besought the lord 
Eobert, who was then superior of that abbey, to allow the 
monk Tlieodoric to take the government of their new abbey; 
and abbot Eobert, readily complying with the request of his 
noble guests, yielded to them the monk whom he well knew 
to be well qualified for such a pastoral care. Hugh and 

1 This is still the name of a commune in the arrondissement of Bemal, 
between Broglie, Montreuil, and La Barre. Its church continued to belong 
to the abbey of Bee till the revolution. 



A.D. 1050.] TnEODOPvIC riEST ABBOT OF ST. ETEOrLT. 387 

Eobert now, witli great satisfaction, presented liim to the 
duke, who receiving him with due distinction, delivered to 
him the pastoral staff, as the custom was, thus giving him 
the preferment of the abbey of Ouche. Afterwards Hugh, 
bishop of Lisieux,^ with Osbern his archdeacon, and others 
' of his clergy, came to Ouche with the venerable monk 
: Theodoric in their company, and there solemnly consecrated 
him on the 3rd of the nones [5th] of October, being the 
Lord's day. Thus ordained, he betrayed no pride or 
arrogance, but both by his words and works pointed out 
the way of true religion to those over whom he was set. 
Brought up from his childhood in the Lord's house he had 
learnt b}' long practice the regular course of a religious life. 
He was constant in holy prayers, in vigils, in fasting. He 
so exposed himself to the rigour of the cold, that he some- 
times went without a cloak the whole winter. However, 
one day Avhen he was preparing, as he was wont, to offer 
the sacrifice of the mass, he perceived a cloak of dazzling 
vxhiteness laid on the altar. Not doubting that it was placed 
there by no human hands but by the ministry of angels, he 
returned thanks to God, and investing himself with it 
joyfully performed the divine service. That this happened 
in the church of Jumieges, while he was yet a cloistered monk, 
I have heard from trustworthy monks who then belonged 
to that monastery. He was baptized by the venerable 
Theodoric abbot of Jumieges,^ who caused him to be 
educated according to the monastic rule in the school of 
Christ and loved him much. Arriving at man's estate and 
being proved fruitful in good works, the abbot appointed 
him his vicar, to the great gain of the brethren's souls ; and 
he was afterwards made master of the novices, and charged 
with the care of the monastery as prior. At length, as we 
have before related, he was translated from Jumieges in the 
time of abbot Ilobert, and placed at the head of the new 
abbey of Ouche, in the year of our Lord 1050, the fourth 
indiction, being the nineteenth year of the reign of Henry 

^ Hugh, who was bishop of Lisieux from 1049 to 1077, was son of 
"William Count d'Eu, and Lesceline, foundress of the abbey of St. Pierre- 
sur-Dive. 

^ He was a native of Dijon, and abbot of Jumieges from a.d. 1014 to 
1027 or 1028. 

c c 2 



S88 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.II. 

king of the Franks, and the fifteenth of the dukedom of 
William duke of Normandy. 

In founding the new society, Theodoric had the assistance 
of his nephew Eodolph, with Hugh the chanter, and otliers 
of the brethren who suited his purpose. It was with them 
and bj them that the new abbot zealously established a 
regular system, and mild discipline, and becoming order, in 
divine worship. He admitted as probationers for a change 
of life applicants of every age and rank, diligently instructing 
them in the rule of the holv father St. Benedict. Amouir 
the first of those he humbly taught a stricter life in the scliool 
of Christ, were Humfrey, Reginald, and Fulk, son of the dean. 
Tulk, with some other skilful grammarians. He likewise treated 
with the greatest kindness Eicidf, an old man, and Roger, 
both country priests, and Durand the gardener, with Greof- 
frey, Olric, and other simple disciples. As these were unable 
to comprehend the depths of scripture doctrine, he fed them 
with the milk of pious exhortation, and imparted to them 
health and strength in their faith and devotion by the 
example of his holy life. In that house of Grod, also, Her- 
bert and Berenger, Joscelin and Rodolf, Gislebert and 
Bernard, Richard and William, with other youths of good 
natural disposition, were carefully instructed in reading, 
singing, and writing, and the diligent prosecution of other 
useful studies, suitable to the servants of God seeking to 
acquire the true knowledge. Meanwhile, the rude natives, 
witnessing the growth of so much holiness on a barren soil, 
now long deserted, were struck with admiration. This was 
the salvation of some, the ruin of others. Those who 
remarked the good conversation of the monks imitated their 
example; while others, becoming jealous of them, caused 
them all sorts of inconveniences : both received their just 
reward from God, who doeth equal justice. Nobles and men. 
of the middle order flocked to the abbey under a divine 
impulse, commending themselves devoutly to the prayers of 
the servants of God, and, offering their alms, gave blessings 
to God, who provided sustenance for his ministers, though 
on a barren soil. 

The abbey of Ouche, thus flourishing through the merits of 
the holy father St. Evroult, and continually increasing, to the 
glory of God, by the care and labours of the family of Geroie, 



I 



A.D. 1050.] ABBEY OF TROAEN rOUNDED. 389 

Roger de Montgomery/ Yiscoimt d'Exmes,began to be jealous 
of his neighbours, because they showed more zeal for the love 
of God than himself, and he bethought him what w^ork he 
could imdertake of a like nature for the good of his own soul. 
He therefore resolved on attaching to himself Gislebert, 
abbot of Chatillon, with his monks, who had begun to 
establish themselves at Norrei ; but, on Hugh and Eobert's 
altering their plans, as before mentioned, refused to follow 
them, nay, more, left them altogether, accusing them of fickle- 
ness, for having changed the site of their intended monas- 
tery. E-oger de Montgomery, therefore, invited these 
monks, and granted Troarn to them, that they might there 
erect an abbey, expelling the twelve canons who had been 
placed there by his father.^ These secular clergy being thus 
ejected because they abandoned themselves to gluttony, 
debauchery, carnal delights, and worldly occupations, he 
settled in their place monks who were subject to regular 
discipline. In short, under the government of father Gis- 
lebert, the monks established a strict religious rule in the 
church of St. Martin at Troarn, the maintenance of which 
they committed to their successors to the time of their 
death, and which has been preserved to this day under the 
enlightened fathers Gerbert, Durand, and Arnulf succes- 
sively. 

• I wish now to take some short notice of Giroie, son of 
Arnold-le-Gros, of Courceraut,^ son of Abbo the BretoD, 
whose family conferred many benefits on the monks of St. 
Evroult, in order that posterity may know who and what he 
"was. He derived his origin from nobles of the highest 
rank, both of France and Brittany, and distinguished himself 
by his virtues and courage in the reigns of Hugh the Great 

^ Roger II. de "Montgomery, who by bis marriage with Mabel, daughter 
of William Talvas, inherited the vast domains of that family. He was 
afterwards one of the most distinguished followers of William duke of 
Normandy and conqueror of England, by whom he was created earl of 
Shrewsbury. There are frequent notices of this great nobleman in the 
course of the present history, the more so, perhaps, as Odelirius, our author's 
father, attended him to England, and became his trusty counsellor, being 
probably born in the earl's household. 

2 In lOoO Roger de Montgomery substituted monks for the canons who 
had been settled at Troarn since the year 1 022. 

*• Courceraut, near Mortagne, in the department of Orne. 



390 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.III. CH.II. 

and EoTDert, kings of the Franks. His sister Hildiarde had 
three sons and eleven daughters, \Yho, being married to 
honourable men, gave birth to numerous sons, who, in the 
next generation, became formidable to their enemies in the 
wars in Prance, England, and Apulia. Among the other 
gallant exploits of Giroie, was his battle, in concert with 
William of Belesme, against Herbert, count of Maine. 
"William and his followers were vanquished and put to flight; 
but Giroie stood firm, and bore the brunt of the conflict, 
until Herbert and his troops were forced to retreat, and 
Giroie gained a victory, which, to this day, commands the 
a])plause of all who are informed of it. Heugon,^ a powerful 
Norman kniglit, oftered him his only daughter in marriage, 
and gave him Montreuil and Echaufour, and all his lands 
adjoining these two places. Heugon dying soon afterwards, 
(xeroie succeeded to all his domains, although the lady to 
M'hom he was betrothed died prematurely before the mar- 
riage. In consequence, William de Belesme^ introduced 
Giroie to Kichard the duke of Normandy at Eouen; and 
the generous duke, in acknowledgment of his high deserts, 
granted all the lands of Heugon to him and his heirs for ever. 
On his return, Giroie married Gisela, a daughter of Turstin 
de Bastembourg, by whom he had seven sons and four daugh- 
ters, whose names are as follows : Arnold, AVilliam, Fulk, 
Ealplmial-Corona, Robert, Hugh, and Giroie; Herem- 
burge, Hawise, Emma, and Adelaide. 

Possessing richly all that this world can give, children, 
riches, and ample domains, the brave knight so often men- 
tioned faithfully served the Giver of all good things, and 
reverenced his church, and servants, and worship. Prom his 
own funds he erected six churches to God's honour, two of 
which were at Yerneuces, one dedicated to St. Mary, mother 
of God, and the other to St. Paul, doctor of the gentiles. 
The third, in a vill called Glos, in the canton of 
Lisieux, was dedicated to St. Peter, prince of the apostjes; 
the fourth at Echaufour, to St. Andrew the apostle; the 

^ The commune of Heugon derives its present name from this baron, 
being situate between his two principal domains, Montreuil I'Argillier and 
Echaufour. 

- William I. de Belesme was the father of William Talvas. The battle 
mentioned just before was fought about the year 1020. 



ABOUT 1020 — 1030.] FAMILY OP GIROIE. 391 

fifth, which he built at Moutreuil, to St. George the martyr ; 
and the sixth at Haiitrive, to St. Martin the confessor. 
"With such saints as his patrons, this brave knight lived long 
in honour in this world, and, dying, obtained, as we trust, by 
the merits of their intercessions, the pardon of his sins and 
everlasting rest in the society of the blessed. 

At the death of Giroie, his sons were of tender years, 
except two, Arnold and William, who had received knight- 
hood under these circumstances : Gislebert, count of Brioune, 
relying on his valour, and coveting an extension of his 
boundaries, invaded the territories of the young heirs with 
a formidable band, endeavouring to wrest Montreuil from 
them by force of arms. However, they collected a body of 
their kinsmen and retainers, and, boldly offering battle to 
Gislebert in the open fields, defeated him with much slaugh- 
ter, and put him to flight, not long afterwards forcibly 
seizing, by way of revenge, the burgh called Sap.^ Mean- 
while, Duke E-obert interfered, and compassionating the 
orphans, while he praised their bravery, he induced Gisle- 
bert to cede Sap to them, that the peace might be lasting. 
In the end, that same count, giving uneasiness to the seven 
sons of Giroie, and attempting to recover the burgh of Sap, 
which he had given up to them at the instance of Duke 
Eobert, met his death through their boldness and courage, 
although he was attended by a large body of men." 

All these brothers were brave and generous, skilled and 
active in warlike exercises, formidable to their enemies, 
gentle and courteous to their associates. They prospered in 
various ways ; but, notwithstanding, such is human life, they 
fell to decay at last. It would be too long and impossible 
for me to relate distinctly the acts of all the brothers ; but I 
am desirous, at least to leave something on record for pos- 

^ Sap is a village near Slontreuil and St. Evroult. 

- It lias been already remarked that the circumstances which caused the 
death of Gislebert, count of Brionne, were far from honourable to his 
memory. It appears that on two occasions he took advantage of the youth 
and weakness of Giroie's sons, to endeavour to wrest from them one of the 
best of their patrimonial domains. At the same time the details of his 
death, which did not take place till after the succession of Duke William., 
are also discreditable to the family of Giroie, two of whom, as William de 
Jumieges tells us, set upon him, and cruelly murdered him, when he was 
peaceably riding near Echaufrc, expecting no evil. Hist. Norman, vii. 2. 



392 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. Cn.ll. 

terity as to the end of each. Arnold, the eldest, a brave 
and honourable man, while one day amusing himself with 
sports at Montreuil, in wrestling with a powerful young 
man, fell against the sharp angle of a bank, and breaking 
three of his ribs, died on the third day afterwards. AVilliam, 
the second in order of birth, lived for many years, and all 
his life governed his brothers ; for he was eloquent and gay, 
liberal and brave, beloved by his inferiors, and the terror of his 
enemies. None of his neighbours ventured to make inroads 
on his territories in any shape, nor to subject his people to 
any kind of exactions. He exercised episcopal jurisdiction 
in the lands of Montreuil and Echaufour, and no archdeacon 
was permitted to interfere with the priests of 'those two 
lordships ; for it happened that when his father Griroie suc- 
ceeded to the domains of Heugon, as before related, he 
inquired of the inhabitants of the district in what bishopric 
it was situated. They replied that they belonged to no bishop- 
ric ; upon which he exclaimed: "This is quite wrong; far 
be it from me to live without a pastor, and exempt from the 
yoke of ecclesiastical discipline." Upon further inquiry, 
which of the neighbouring bishops was most devoted to his 
religious duties, being informed of the virtues of Boger, 
bishop of Lisieux, he placed all his territories under his 
jurisdiction, persuading Baldric de Bauquencei and his sons- 
in-law AYascelin d'Echanfre and Eoger de Merlerault, who 
enjoyed a similar exemption, to place their domains, in like 
manner, under the same bishop. Eoger, bishop of Lisieux, 
observing that these nobles made a voluntary surrender of 
their immunities, complimented them on their devotion, and 
granted them the privilege that the clergy on their estates 
should not be impleaded out of their lords' jurisdiction, and 
should be exempt from the oppressions of the archdeacon's 
visitations. This privilege was strictly maintained by 
AYilliam de Giroie, who obtained the same exemption for the 
monks of St. Evroult from Bishop Hugh.^ 

* This exemption from ei^iscopai jurisdiction of territories which were the 
fiefs of lay lords, was not, we believe, very common. There are, or were 
till recently, some traces of it in England in the case of parishes where the 
patronage had the name of a donative. It was very usual for the greater 
abbeys to obtain such exemptions, either from the pope, or the bishops 
themselves, as the monks of bt. Evroult obtained from bishop Hugh j and 



IBEFORE 1050.] FAMILY OF GIEOIE. 303 

William de Giroie married Hiltrude daugliter of 
Fulbert de Beine, who had built the castle of L'aigle in 
the time of Duke Eichard. By her he had a son named 
Arnold d'Echaufour ; and afterwards marrying Emma, 
daughter of AValchelin de Tannei, who bore him AYilliam, 
called afterwards in Apulia the Good Norman. 

The knight of whom we have repeatedly spoken was 
much beloved by Eichard and Eobert dukes of Normandy, 
for the fidelity which he maintained towards his liege lords 
Bobert de Belesme, Talvas and Geoffrey, and others, either 
his [feudal] superiors or allies. In so doing he was sub- 
jected to constant molestation and even danger. He even 
voluntarily razed his own castle of Montacute ^ to effect the 
redemption of his Lord Geoffrey de Mayenne, when he was 
taken prisoner by "William Talvas, and his liberation was 
refused on any other terms than the demolition of that 
castle which overawed the territories of Talvas. The release 
of Geoffrey from captivity having been thus obtained, he 
built the castle of St. Ceneri on the Sarthe, for the baroii 
Giroie, in return for the devoted fidelity he had shown. 
I could say mucli more of this William de Giroie, but 
with so much before me I must pass on to other affairs ; 
and I will now, as I promised, give a short account of his 
brothers. 

Eulk, the third, had one moiety of the fief of Montreuil. 
He had two sons by a concubine, Giroie and Eulk. After 
the death of Duke Eobert he was killed, along with his 
countryman Count Gislebert, with whom he served. Eobert 
[the fourth brother] held the castle of St. Ceneri with the 
adjacent territory for a long course of years. Duke William 
gave him his cousin Adelaide in marriage, and he had by 
her a son also named Eobert, who now serves in the army 

this was often accompanied by the abbots having conferred on them the 
jurisdiction of an ordinary in the parishes included in their domains, the 
origin probably of that kind of jurisdiction in deans and other dignitaries 
of the English church. 

1 Monie-Acuto, or Montagu, near Bais, in Mayenne ; a name preserved 
in the English peerage. Drogo de Montacute gave the same name to his 
castle in Somersetshire. The domain of St. Ceneri, otherwise St. Selerin, 
on the Sarthe, which William Giroie received in exchange, was famous 
for the monastery founded on it by its lord about the middle of the seventh 
century. 



394( OEDEEICTJS VITALIS. [B. III. CH. II. 

of Henry king of England. After many brilliant achieve- 
ments, when there were violent disputes between the Nor- • 
mans and Anjevins, this Hobert, lord of St. Ceneri, held the 
castle against Duke "William, and while besieged in it, in 
the twenty-fifth year of William's dukedom, died five days 
after eating a poisoned apple which he had snatched out of 
the hands of his wife. 

Ealph, the fifth brother, was surnamed the Clerk, on 
account of his knowledge of letters and skill in other arts. 
He was also called Mala-corona, because in his youth he 
gave himself up to military exercises and other frivolities. 
He was versed in medicine, and in many deep secrets of 
nature, so that old men even now speak of him with wonder 
to their children and grand-children. In the course of time, 
he retired from the seductions of the world to the convent 
of Marmoutier, where he became a monk under the abbot 
Albert, and devoutly prayed to God that his body might be 
overspread with the loathsome disease of leprosy, that so his 
soul might be cleansed from the foulness of his sins. Ob- 
taining his pious wish, he died happily six years after his 
conversion. 

Hugh, the sixth brother, was unfortunately slain in the 
flower of his youth ; for while he was returning one day 
from the castle of St. Scholasse, accompanied by his brothers 
and a large retinue, he stopped near the church of St. Grer- 
manus, on the lands of Echaufour, to practise with the lance, 
and his own squii'e, hurling a spear carelessly, mortally 
wounded him. Being of an amiable disposition, he pre- 
sently called for the squire and said to him privately: 
" Flee with all haste, for you have severely wounded me. 
God have mercy on you! escape before my brothers are 
apprised of this accident, or they will certainly kill you." 
The noble youth expired the same day. 

Giroie, the youngest of the seven brothers, while he was 
yet in the flower of his youth having plundered the lands 
of the church of Lisieux, while on his return to Montreuil 

^ It need hardly be remarked that in the middle ages clericus, clerk, 
was the designation of a person in holy orders, a clergyman, as it still is in 
legal phrase. By a metonymy it was sometimes applied to laymen, 
distinguished for their literary attainments, as our author here remarks 
respecting Ralph Giroie. King Henry I. was thus surnamed Beaic-Clerc. 



A.D. 1050.] EI^'DOWMEKT OP ST. EVEOULT. 395 

was seized with a frenzy, of which he died. Thus death, 
in various shapes, carried oft' all the sons of Griroie, without 
allowing one of them to live to old age. 

Heremburge, the eldest of the daughters was given in 
marriage to Yascelin du Pont-Echanfre, and had by him 
two sons, William and Ealph, who afterwards were firm 
adherents to Eobert Guiseard, duke of Calabria, in Apulia 
and Sicily. Hawise, the next daughter, was married to 
Eobert de Grrand-mesnil, by whom she had three sons, 
Hugh, Eobert, and Arnold, with the same number of 
daughters. On his death she married William, son of 
Eobert the archbishop, to whom she bore Judith, who 
became the wife of Eoger, count of Sicily. The third 
daughter of Giroie was Emma, who was given in marriage 
to Eobert de Melerant, from which marriage sprung Eo~ 
dolpli, and AYilliam, father of our neighbours Eodolph and 
Eoger. Adelaide, the fourth, married Solomon de Sable, 
and bore him Eeginald, whose son Lisiard is now a great 
supporter of Henry, king of England, against the count of 
Ajijou. Having said enough of the family of Giroie, let us 
now return to the matter from which we have somewhat 
digressed. 

In the first year of the foundation of the abbey of St. 
Evroult, "William and Eobert, sons of Giroie, and Hugh and 
Eobert, their nephews, assembled at Ouche, with their sons, 
nephews, and barons. Consulting together for the advantage 
of the unfinished monastery which they had begun to erect, 
they agreed in common that each of them should at his 
death bequeath his body to St. Evroult with the whole o 
his substance, and that none of them should make a gift 
whether of tithes, or of a church or anything appertaining 
to a church, nor even offer it for sale, without first giving tlie 
option to the monks of St. Evroult. This agreement was 
firmly ratified by the priest Fulcoin, and Osmond Basset, by 
Louvet and Eulk, sons of Eredenlend, Odo the Eed and 
Eichard son of Gulbert, Eobert de Torp, and Giroie des 
Loges, with others their barons. The founders of the monas- 
tery then took account of their possessions, and granted a 
fair portion, according to their ability, to the church they 
were building. 

These are the possessions which Eobert and Hugh and 



896 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.lf. 

Arnold, sous of Kobert de Grand-mesnil, granted to the 
abbey of St. Evroult for the good of their souls. In Norrei, 
the church, and all the tithes, with the priest's glebe and 
three plough-lands, together with the vill called Soulange ; 
in Ouillie, all the benefice which Tezcelin the clerk held, 
and the tithes of the mills of that vill ; English- Yille with its 
monastery -^ the church of Yillers with one yearly tenant ; 
in the vill called 0th, the monastery, the priest's land, 
and the tithes of the mills of that vill ; and in the monastery 
of Grueprei, they gave that part which their father Eobert 
held ; besides the tithe of La Eigne, and at Beaumais the 
third part of a mill with the tithe of the same ; and the be- 
nefice of the priest Fulcuin, namely the church and tithe of 
Grrand-mesnil, and the tithe of the mill of Olivet ; one yearly 
tenant at CoUeville with tlie tithe of the whole vill ; also the 
tithe of wax, and the tithe of St. Pierre d'Entremont; 
moreover the church in the village called Eougi, and that 
portion of the tithes of Coulonces which was held by their 
father Eobert. Hugh gave the lands of Quilli to the afore- 
said abbey, on the petition of the lords of that vill, whose 
tenure was allodial ; also the tithe of all his ploughs and 
beasts of burden, and the tithe of Mont-Chauvet, both of tolls 
and of corn, and the church of Louvigni with the priest's 
glebe. He gave besides the land called Noyer-Mesnard ; at 
the place named Mesnil Bernard, one plough-land, and the 
fields of the vill of La Tanaisie ; moreover the cell of Manselles 
with the priest's glebe ; and the tenth of the tolls of Sap ; 
and the farm called Mesnil Dode, and the church of Lim- 

^ The French editors have bestowed great pains in ascertaining the 
exact localities and modern names of all the places mentioned here, and 
elsewhere throughout the work, but as they possess little interest for the 
general English reader, these topographical notices are often omitted in the 
present edition. 

The number of "monasteries" enumerated in this terrier of the 
possessions of the abbey of St. Evroult, renders a word of explanation 
necessary. The French editor remarks, that in this case, and frequently 
in the writings of the middle ages, the word " monasterium," moutier, 
ought to be taken in the sense of parish church. But the churches are 
generally mentioned separately, and it is apprehended that the residences of 
the clergy attached, the manse, or parsonage, are what is meant; there being 
generally two or more priests employed in the services of the church in the 
larger country parishes, who lived together in a sort of conventual life, 
celibacy beginning to prevail even among the secular clergy. 



A.D. 1050.] POSSESSIONS OP ST. EVEOULT. 397 

beuf witli tbe priest's glebe ; together with the portion which 
belonged to their mother in Yieux-Mesnil. At Neuf-March6 
Hugh gave the fourth part of the monastery of St. Peter, 
and the tithe of one half of the tolls of the whole vill, as 
well as of the mills ; and in Serifontaine the monastery and 
the third part of the tithe with all the firstfruits and five 
curtilages. 

William, son of Giroie, with the consent of his sons 
Arnold and William, and his brothers Eobert and Eodolph 
Mala-corona, who joined in the grant, gave to the aforesaid 
abbey the monastery of Echaufour and the tenth of the tolls 
of that vill, with the land of the priest Adelelm, and the 
tithe of the whole forest belonging to that vill, both in 
swine and in money, and the wood for all necessary uses ; 
and moreover all the monasteries which were on his domain, 
one of which, dedicated to St. George, was built at Mont- 
reuil ; two at Verneuces, one in honour of St. Mary, the 
other in honour of St. Paul ; two at Sap, one in honour of 
St. Peter, the other in honour of St. Martin. All these he 
granted with the tithes and lands thereto belonging, and 
the tenths of all tolls, and all forest rights and other 
customary dues in Echaufour and Montreuil, and also 
in Sap. 

When Theodoric had been, by the grace of God, conse- 
crated abbot of the convent of St. Evroult, he boufrht of 
Arnold, son of William before-mentioned, with the consent 
of his uncle Eobert and at the command of Count William,* 
the farm of Eauquencei, as it had been held by Baldric the 
said count's archer, and that part of the domain of Echau- 
four which is situated between le Noir-Eau and Charen- 
ton, and Essart d'Henri, and the tithes of the mill of 
Echaufour. Moreover, Arnold himself gave to the same 
abbey the lands of Haute-rive, with all that belonged 
thereto, with all his monasteries and glebe-lands, and the 
farm of Douet-Moussu. 

^ The dukes of Normandy were indiscriminately called counts, or earls, and 
sometimes they assumed, or had conferred on them, the title of marquis, 
which is occasionally used by Ordericus, Richard II. received the title of 
marquis of Normandy from the king of France and the pope, and he is 
som.etimes also called consul, and in a charter of his to Ralph, count of 
Jvri, all these titles of duke, marquis, cuunt, and consul of Normandy are 
accumulated in his single person. 



398 OEDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.n. 

Pinally, "William his brother, son of the "William already 
mentioned, witli tlie consent of his brother Griroie, and his 
cousins Giroie and Fulk, granted all the monasteries he 
possessed, in consideration of no small sum of money paid 
him by the abbot of the said convent. One of these, dedi- 
cated to St. Sulpicius, was situated at Mesnil-Bernard, 
another at E-oiville dedicated to St. Leger, another at Mon- 
nai dedicated to St. Mary, with the moiety of the same 
Monnai in the tenure of Robert, he consenting ; the monas- 
tery also of Ternant, and one in Les Essarts dedicated to 
St. Peter, another at Augerons with the whole vill, and one 
in Bois-Herbert. All these monasteries, with the tithes 
and glebe-lands, were given to the abbey of St. Evroult, as 
well by the said "William as by the lords thereof; viz., 
'Roger Goulafre de-Mesnil Bernard, Herfred de Eoiville, 
Eobert de Monnai, Herfred de Ternant, William priest of 
Essarts, AYilliam provost of Augerons, and Eoger Eaitel of 
Bois-Hebert. 

Moreover AVilliam gave to the said abbey for the redemp- 
tion of the soul of his mother Emma a farm of one plough, 
situate at Yerneuces. He also, his brother Arnold con- 
senting, gave one moiety of the mills of Yerneuces, together 
with what he possessed there in his own right, viz., the farm 
of Warriu, and the wood of Landigou, and the farm of Bur- 
nend in Yerneuces, and two fishermen at Ternant, with two 
kilns and one burgess at Montreuil. Moreover, "William, 
son of Yauquelin de Pont-Erchanfre, gave the church of 
St. Mary to the said abbey, together with whatever Osbern 
the priest held, with the tenth of the tolls and the tithe of 
the mills and ploughs which he possessed or should possess 
there or elsewhere ; as also all the monasteries which he pos- 
sessed, or should thereafter possess, and that part of 
Eoiville which belonged to him. 

Moreover, Eobert son of Heugon, with the concurrence 
and assent of his lords, viz., "WilHam and Eobert, and their 
sons and nephews, sold the church of St. Martin on the 
rivulet called Bailleul to the monks of St. Evroult, and the 
glebe of the same place with another farm of eight ploughs, 
for which they paid no small price. He also gave the 
moiety of the monastery of St. Andrew, with the priests' 
glebe, and the moiety of all his land in the vill. Eobert 



A.D. 1050.] POSSESSIONS or st. eveottlt. 399 

also, the son of Theoclelin, gave the other moiety of the 
same monastery and of the whole vill. 

Eiirther, the abbot Theoderic purchased for eighteen 
pounds of AVilliam and Eobert, sons of Eobert surnamed 
Fresnel, the church of Our Lady of the "Wood/ as it was 
held by a certain monk of the name of Placidus. Moreover, 
Hubert de Anceins sold to the abbot the church of that vill, 
and some acres of land. All these belonging to the lord- 
ship of William Pitz-Osbern the steward, were granted by 
him. 

jN^ext, Bobert son of Giroie, ratifying and confirming all 
that his brothers and nephews with their allies had given to 
the abbey of St. Evroult, gave also to the same, of his own 
possessions, St. Ceneri, St. Peter de la Pote-des-nids, with all 
the tithes belonging thereto, and one half of the wood of 
St. Ceneri, with fishings in the Sarthe for the use of the 
monks who lived there, and St. Mary of Mount Gande- 
lain, and the whole tithes of Siral, and of all the lands 
which he should thereafter acquire. Then also, E-alph, son 
of Godfrey, his man-at-arms, gave with his consent the 
church of Eadon to the same abbey. Hearing of these 
benefactions, a good knight named Wadon de Dreux made 
a gift of the church of St. Michael on the Arve, in the 
canton of Evreux, with the consent of the lords under whom 
he held it, and his sons, kindred, and friends. 

These were the benefactions with which "William and 
Eobert and others their kinsmen, endowed the abbey of 
St, Evroult, and, making a charter of them, presented it to 
William duke of Nomandy for his confirmation. The duke 
gave a favourable reception to their petition, and graciously 
ratified their donations to the before-mentioned abbey. He 
also granted this special privilege to the abbey of St. 
Evroult, that it should be for ever exempt from all foreign 
jiu-isdiction. With respect also to the election of the abbots, 
he vested it entirely in the chapter of the brethren, subject 
to the rules of regular discipline, but on condition that the 
votes were not corruptly obtained, either by favouritism, or 
relationship, or certainly not by bribery. At the end of 
the charter the duke had this clause inserted, ratifying the 

^ " Sanctae Marite de Bosco," Notre- Dame-dii-Bois, originally the mother 
church of the parbh in which the abbey of St. Evroult wap built. 



400 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.II. 

whole in the following words : " I, "William, count of J^Tor- 
mandy, have caused this deed of gift to be put in \\Titing, 
and have had it confirmed, under pain of excommunication by 
the signatures of the archbishop of Eouen, and the bishops, 
abbots, and nobles, whose names and marks are hereunto 
subscribed, in order that its provisions may remain firm 
and undisturbed henceforth and for ever ; so that if any one 
shall presume to infringe them or shall in any wise injure 
them, either by himself or any other, he shall, by the au- 
thority of God and nil the saints, be excommunicated from 
all Christian privileges, and, if he do not repent, be ac- 
cursed for ever." Duke William subscribed this charter 
with the sign of the cross ; and it was afterwards signed by 
Manger archbishop of E-ouen, son of E-ichard Gonnorides, 
duke of Kormandy ; by Hugh, bishop of Lisieux, son of 
"William, count d'Eu; by Odo, bishop of Bayeux, uterine 
brother of Duke WilKam ; by AVilliam, bishop of Evreux, 
son of Gerard Fleitel ; Gislebert, abbot of Cbatillon ; 
William, Eobert, and Ealph, sons of Giroie; by their 
nephews Hugh de Grand-mesnil, Eobert and Arnold ; by 
William, son of Yascelin ; by Ealph de Toni ; by Ealph 
Taison ; by Eoger de Montgomery ; by William Eitz- 
Osbern ; by Eicbard de Beaufour, Eichard de St. Scholasse ; 
and many others of the Norman nobles, who were as- 
sembled in the forest of Lions at the duke's palace on the 
river Lieure,^ before the church of St. Denys, and confirmed 
the charter of the abbey of St. Evroult, in the year of our 
Lord 1050, the fourth indiction. 

The same year Eobert de Grand-mesnil put off the secular 
habit, and submitted to the monastic rule under abbot 
Theodoric at St. Evroult. AVe have already mentioned that 
he was the son of Eobert de Grand-mesnil, a powerful 
baron by Hawise the daughter of Giroie. In his childhood 
he applied liimself diligently to letters, and was distinguished 
among those of his own age for his retentive memory. But 
from his earliest youth he began to despise the inaction 
of learning, and sought with eagerness the toils of arms, 

^ Formerly Si. Denis-en-Lions. This seems to have been a favourite 
hunting-seat of the dukes of Normandy. Henry I. died there of eating 
lampreys, after returning from the chase (December 1, 1135). See Henry 
of Huntingdon's History , b. vii. p. 259 of Bohn's edition. 



A.D. 1051.] EOEERT DE GEAND-MESNIL TUllNS MONK. 401 

becoming for five years an esquire of Duke William. He 
was then raised by the same duke to the honours of chivalry; 
and having been knighted, received at the duke's hands 
noble rewards. Eeflecting however on the chances of life, 
he chose rather to serve humbly in the Lord's house than 
to flourish like grass in the courts of the wicked. For he 
recollected the perils of worldly warfare, which had been 

I experienced by his father and a host of others, who attack- 

I ing their enemies fell into the snares which they had laid 
for others and perished. Thus Ijis father Eobert joined 
with Roger de Toni in battle against Eoger de Beaumont, 
in which fight Eoger de Toni, with his two sons Elbert and 

I Elinance were slain outright, and Eobert received a mortal 
wound in his bowels. Being carried ofi" the field he survived 
three weeks, and divided his lands between his sons Hugh 
and Eobert, Dying on the 14th of the calends of July 
[18th of June], he was interred without the church of St. 
Mary at JNTorrei.^ This calamity roused his son Eobert to 
strive in abetter warfare. His first intention was to found a 
convent at Norrei, as it has been already stated, for the 
good of his soul and those of his ancestors, and to endow it 
liberally with the whole of his patrimony, if his brother 
Hugh consented. But his plans being changed, by the 
advice of his uncle William Giroie, he made the general 
deed of gift, jointly with his brother Hugh of the possessions 
already enumerated, and coming to St. Evroult there 
solemnly professed himself a monk according to the rule of 
St. Benedict. He suftered much inconvenience in supplying 

i the necessities of the church, and often laid hands on the 
substance of his kinsfolk, who were very wealthy, charitably 
distributing it in the support of the faithful, for the 
salvation of their souls. Paying his mother Hawise 
forty livres of Eouen, he deprived her of her dowry, con- 
sisting of lands in Noyer-Menard, Yieux-Mesnil, La Tanaisie, 
and Mesnil-Dode, which he transferred to the abbey of St. 
Evroult. He also presented to the monks of St. Evroult as 
his mother's gift, the great psaltery illuminated with pictures, 
which the choir frequently uses to the present time in 
chanting the praises of God. This volume was given 

1 See before, in book i. p. 150. what is said of the battle in whicb 
Robert de Graml-mesnil was mortally wounded. 
VOL. I. D D 



402 OEDEHICUS YITALIS. [b.III. Cn.IIT. 

by Emma, wife of Ethelred king of England, to Robert, 
archbishop of Eouen, her brother, and AVilliam who was 
son of that j-yrelate liad secretly abstracted it from his 
father's chamber and given to his wife Hawise to whom 
he was so much attached, that he sought every means of 
pleasing her. This Robert de Grand-mesnil conferred many 
other benefits on his church, and rendered himself very 
agreeable to his brethren both by the ecclesiastical orna- 
ments he furnished, and by the necessary comforts he 
procured for them. 

Ch. III. Notices of Theodoric first abbot of Evroult. — Sis 
care in collecting and mulitijAyinf/ copies of tlie scriptures 
and tlie fathers. — Legend rcspectiuf/ a copyist. — Norman 
conquests in Apulia, and other parts of the south of Italy. 

The venerable abbot Theodoric zealously enforced the 
monastic rule, and studied, both in his words and actions the 
profit of the community entrusted to his charge^ He was 
a Norman by birth, of tlie district of Talou ; he was of 
middle stature, his face ruddy, and his voice agreeable ; well 
versed in the sacred scriptures, and engaged in the duties 
of divine worship from childhood to old age. But as tares 
spring up unexpectedly among the wheat and are rooted 
out by the careful husbandman at the time of harvest, 
and delivered to the destroying flames, so sons of Belial are 
mingled in the company of the faithful, until at the time 
predestined, they are detected by the righteous Judge, and 
strictly subjected to the punishment they deserve. In the 
time of abbot Theodoric there was a monk in the society of 
Evroult named Romanua, who was instigated by the devil to 
to steal the linen, and breeches, and other articles of that 
nature ; and when he was repeatedly called to account by 
father Theodoric for such misdeeds, he stoutly denied being 
guilty of the theft, though he soon after confessed it. One 
night, however, while he was in bed he was seized by the 
demon and grievously tormented. The monks heard his hor- 
rible shrieks, and, coming to him and shaking him, sprinkled 
him with holy water, and with difficulty released him from the 
evil spirit which tormented him. Being come to himself, 
the monk understood that the devil had obtained this power 
over him on account of the thefts he had committed, and 



1050 — 1057.] MONKS OF ST. EVEOULT. 403 

made promises of keeping himself for the future from such 
offences. But afterwards he returned like a dog to his 
vomit, so that father Theodoric ordered his cowl to be 
stripped off, and turned him out of the convent. Thus expelled 
from the society of the brethren, it is reported that he 
undertook a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, but what was his 
future lot we are wholly uninformed. 

A certain priest whose name was Ansered, who lived in 
the commune of Sap led a very irregular life. But while 
suffering from disease he entreated the monks of St. Evroult 
to give him the habit of St. Benedict. Wrapped in this 
he was carried to the abbey and sent to the infirmary. But 
as soon as he recovered from his sickness, he resumed as 
nearly as possible the same irregularity of conduct which 
he had exhibited under the secular dress, so true it is as a 
wise writer says ; — 

" No change of clime can bring an altered mind." ^ 

This man changed, indeed, his habit, but not his habitual 
conduct. The abbot Theodoric observed his reprehensible 
life and conversation, and heard that he detested the 
religious rule ; for he had sent word to his father and 
mother that he was slandered, and entreated them to remove 
him from the monastery. The abbot therefore, acting in 
this case on the apostolic precept, " Put away from among 
yourselves the wicked person;" and that which saith : "If 
an unbelieving brother depart, let him depart,"^ permitted 
him to retire from the abbey and enter again into the world. 
The man, adding sin to sin, kept company with a woman of 
light chraacter : and not satisfied with her, made love to 
another whose name was Pomula. He made an appoint- 
ment with her that they should go together to the shrine of 
St. Giles, hoping to keep the aftair from coming to 
the knowledge of his parents and friends. Having fixed 
with her a place of meeting from which they should 
proceed in compan}^, he himself set forth with some pilgrims 
w'ho were going to the church of St. Giles. The woman, 
however, without informing Ansered, broke her engagement 

* " Ccelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt." 

Hor. Ep. I. xi. 27. 
^ 1 Cor. V. 13 — vii. 15. 

dd2 



401 OHDEETCUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.Iir. 

and formed a connection with another clerk. Ansered, 
arriving at the appointed place of meeting, and not finding 
the woman there, said to his fellow pilgrims :_ "I must 
return home, having forgotten something for which I have 
occasion ; but you need not lose any time on the road, for 
I shall soon overtake you." Ketracing, then, his steps,^ and 
getting into the house in which the woman lived, by night, 
he found her in bed with the clerk. She signified to her 
lover that Ansered was there, upon which the clerk snatched 
up an axe, and striking Ansered on the head killed him on 
the spot. He then enclosed the body in a sack, and drag- 
ging it to a distance concealed it from sight in a hole in the 
ground. Sometime afterwards the body Avas found, for the 
wild beasts had disinterred it, devouring a leg and a thigh, 
and the discovery was made by the offensive smell. Indeed 
it was so pestiferous that no one could go near the spot. 
His father and mother, who were attached to him more than 
to any others, took up the remains and buried them outside 
the cemetery of the church. Such was the end of one who 
preferred returning to the vanities of the world, to spend- 
ing his days with the servants of God in the religious life 
which would lead him upwards to the heavenly kingdom. 

Another priest, whose name was Adelard, having assumed 
the monastic habit in consequence of his infirmities, gave to 
God and St. Evroult and his monks the church of Sap, with 
the tithes, of which he was enfeoffed, to be held by them in 
perpetuity. But having recovered his health, he repented 
of what he had done, and was bent on returning to the 
world. Abbot Theodoric, upon hearing this, caused the 
rule of St. Benedict to be read to him, and then thus 
addressed him : "You have heard the rule under which you 
have engaged to serve, if you can keep it, continue with us, 
but if you cannot, depart free ;" for he would not detain 
any such against their will. Whereupon, Adelard, obsti- 
nately persisting in his evil design, withdrew himself from 
the monastery, and resumed the secular habit which he had 
relinquished ; but when he sought to recover the church of 
Sap which he had made over to the monks of St. Evroult, 
Hugh de Grantmesnil, to whom the lordship of Sap be- 
longed, would not consent. He therefore retired among 
his relations at Friardel, for he was of a good family, and 



A.D. 1050 — 1057.] ABBEY OF ST. MARTIN AT SEEZ. 405 

lived there nearly fifteen years. But he was never restored 
to good health, being aMicted with incessant infirmities. 
At last, perceiving that his end was approaching, and 
alarmed at the punishment which awaited his apostacy, 
he entreated abbot Mainer, who was the fourth in succes- 
sion from the venerable Theodoric, that he might be allowed 
to resume the monastic habit which he had forfeited for 
his sins. But he died three weeks after his request was 
granted, being in such a state of weakness that he could not 
dispense with female attendance, so that he never returned 
alive to the monastery from which he had withdrawn. 

In the time of AVilliam, duke of Normandy, Ivo, son of 
"William de Belesme, held the bishopric of Seez,^ and, on the 
death of his brothers AVarin, Bobert, and William, inherited 
the town of Belesme as his father's heir. The bishop was 
handsome in person, learned, wise, and eloquent ; witty, and 
of a most cheerful temper. He treated his clergy and the 
monks with parental kindness, and held Abbot Theodoric in 
great reverence, as among the chief of his friends. They 
had much private intercourse, for the city of Seez is only 
seven leagues from the abbey of St. Evroult.' Boger de 
Montgomery, Yiscount d'Exmes, had married Mabel, the 
bishop's niece, with whom he acquired a large portion of the 
domains of William de Belesme. This Boger, at the sug- 
gestion and by the advice of the bishop, transferred the 
church of St. Martin at Seez to Theodoric, abbot of St. 
Evroult, and, in conjunction with his wife, earnestly begged 
that he would erect a monastery in that place. The bishop 
without delay commenced the work assigned to him, in the 
Lord's name, and settled at Seez Boger, a monk of St. 
Evroult, in priest's orders, together with Morin and Engel- 
bert, and others of his disciples, while he often repaired 
thither himself, remaining sometimes four or five weeks at a 
time, urging the prosecution of the work for the love of 
God and the good of posterity.^ Now, this Mabel was 
both powerful and politic, shrewd and fluent, but extremely 

1 He was bishop of Sdez from 1035 to 1070. 

- The leagues here spoken of appear to be about 2200 toises, of six feet 
each. 

^ This Roger de Montgomery, afterwards earl of Shrewsbury in England, 
was the patron of our author's father. See the preface to this volume, and 
b. V. c. 1. 



^06 ORDEEICUS YTTALTS. [b.TII. CH.III. 

cruel. Still slie had a liigh regard for the excellent Theodoric, 
and in some things submitted to his admonitions, although 
in general she was severe with men of religion. In conse- 
quence, her son Koger, whose cruelties to his wretched 
dependants has made him notorious in the times in which 
I live, was brought to Roger and the rest of the monks 
settled at Seez, to receive from them the holy sacrament of 
baptism. 

True grace makes those in whose hearts it rules the 
delight of the good and the terror of evil-doers. Thus Abbot 
Theodoric was deservedly beloved by all good men, while he 
was feared by the wicked. As far as possible avoiding 
worldly cares, he devoted himself with earnest zeal to the 
worship of Grod. But, though diligent in the offices of 
prayer, he did not neglect such manual labours as were fitting 
his station. He was a skilful scribe, and he left to the 
young monks of St. Evroult some splendid specimens of his 
calligraphy. The book of Collects, the Gradual, and Anti- 
pTionary, were all written in the convent with his own 
hand. He procured also, by gentle solicitations, from 
his colleagues who accompanied him from Jumieges, several 
precious books of the divine law. Thus, his nephew 
E-odolf transcribed the Heptateuch,^ and the missal from 
which the mass was sung daily in the choir; Hugh, his 
companion, made a copy of the commentary on Ezekiel, and 
the Decalogue, and the first part of the moral books ; and 
E-oger the priest, of the Paralipomena, the books of Solo- 
mon, and the third part of the moral books. 

The worthy abbot, so often named, by these scribes and 
other antiquaries whom he succeeded in engaging in this 
work, during the eight years he governed the convent of St. 
Evroult, was able to procure for the library of the abbey 
all the books of the Old and New Testament, with the 
entire works of the eloquent Pope Glregory. From the 
same school proceeded some learned and excellent penmen, 
such as Berenger, who was afterwards made bishop of 
Yenusa, Groscelin and Eodolph, Bernard, Turketil, and 
IRichard, with many more, who filled the library at St. 
Evroult with the works of St. Jerome and St. Augustine, St. 

^ The first seven books of the Old Testament. The books before men- 
tioned were offices used in the daily services of the church. 



A.D. 1050 — 1057.] THE CONTENT LIBKAET. 407 

Ambrose and Isidore, Eusebius and Orosius, and other 
doctors of the church/ while, by their useful labours and 
example they encouraged the youths who were to succeed 
them in similar pursuits. 

These novices the man of God himself instructed, often 
admonishing them carefully to shun the idleness of an 
unstable disposition, which is apt to enervate both mind and 
body; and addressing them in such words as these: "One 
of the brethren in a certain convent was guilty of repeated 
transgressions of the monastic rule, but he was a good scribe, 
and so applied himself to writing that he copied of his own 
accord a bulimy volume of the holy scriptures.'^ After his 
death, his soul was brought before the tribunal of the 
righteous Judge. There the evil spirits sharply accused 
him, laying to his charge his innumerable offences ; the holy 
angels, on the other hand, produced the volume which the 
brother had transcribed in the sanctuary of the Lord, 
countinfc letter for letter of the enormous volume ajxainst 
the several sins which the monk had committed. At last 
the letters had a majority of only one, against which all the 
devices of the devils failed to discover an equivalent failing. 
The mercy of the Judge was, therefore, extended to the sin- 
ful brother, and his soul was permitted to return to the 
body, in order that he might enjoy an opportunity of 
amending his life. Heflect frequently, my dearly beloved 
brethren, on this example, and cleanse your hearts from vain 
and sinful desires, offering continually the works of your 
hands as an acceptable sacrifice to the Lord your Grod. 

^ The French editors of Ordericus caused diligent search to be made in 
the public library at Alencon, to which the books saved at the destruction 
of the abbey of St. Evroult were removed, in the hope that one of the MSS. 
here mentioned might have escaped the ravages of time or violence, but 
nothing was discovered which could be traced to the period of abbot Theo- 
doric, except St. Gregory's Homilies. The precious psalter, which had 
belonged to Queen Emma, and was given to tlie abbey of St. Evroult by 
Ilobert de Grant-mesnil, had probably been long worn out by its daily use 
in the choir service. 

2 Mr. Maitland, in his valuable Essays on the State of Religion and 
Literature in the Ninth and foUoicing Centuries, refers (p. 198) to these 
interesting notices of the diligence with Avhich copies of the holy scriptures 
and writings of the early fathers were collected and nniltiiilied by the monks, 
as part of a great mass of evidence tending to show that the condemnation of 
what are called the dark ages in the popular idea, is i'nv too sweeping. 



403 OKDERICUS VITALIS. [b.III. CU.III. 

Shun sloth, that deadly poison, with the utmost care, for 
what s.iith our holy fatb.ei* Benedict? — 'Sloth is the mortal 
enemy of the soul.' Pouder often, also, on what is said by 
a doctor of eminence in his Lives of the Fathers: that 
only a single evil spirit vexes with his wiles the monk who 
is laboi-ioLisly occupied, while a thousand devils infest the 
idler, and provoke him by the keen impulse of manifold 
temptations, on every side, to loath the restraints of the 
cloister, and to hanker after the soul-destroying vanities of 
the world, and indulgence in fatal delights. You, indeed, 
have not the means of feeding the poor with your alms, 
being possessed of no worldly substance ; nor can you build 
noble churches, like the kiugs and great men of the world, 
confined, as you are to the cloister, and deprived of all 
power and influence; at least, then, bear in mind the exhort- 
ation of Solomon, and guard unceasingly the avenues to 
your hearts, striving earnestly to please God without 
ceasing. Pray, read, chant, write ; and be instant in other 
occupations of the like kind, thus prudently arming your- 
selves against the temptations of evil spirits." 

By such admonitions, Pather Theodoric instructed his 
disciples, ddigently stirring them up by argument, by 
entreaty, and by rebuke, to those good works of which he 
he himself set them the example, not only in the offices of 
devotion, but by writing and other useful occupations. For 
these he was hated by some of the monks, who preferred 
secular concerns to their religious duties. Alas ! they cen- 
sured him for that which merited the highest respect ; while 
they muttered : " This man is not fit to be an abbot, for he 
undervalues and neglects all worldly thrift. But how are 
the men of prayer to subsist, if the men of the plough are 
not forthcoming ? ^ He must be a fool wdio is more anxious 
about reading and writing in his monastery than about the 
means of procuring subsistence for the brethren." Some 
of the monks indulged insolent talk of this description, 
wronn^infi the man of God with more of the same sort : but 
William, the son of Giroie, constantly paid him deep reve- 
rence for his sanctity, and checked the ebullitions of the 

1 We are obliged to use a p riphrasis for one of those antithetical 
phrases, in which the writers of thos^ times delighted : Unde viveiii oratores, 
si dc/eceriut araiore^ ? 



A.D. 1050 — 1057.] TUEODORIC ABBOT OF ST. EVROULT. 409 

malcontents, Avliom I forbear to name, with great severity, 
affording him ready aid in all contentions which arose, both 
within and without the monastery. However, after some 
time, tliis noble soldier resolved on a journey to Apulia, 
upon business in Avliich the welfare of the abbey of St. 
Evroult was concerned ; and during his absence, which was 
much prolonged, the holy father Theodoric was left alone and 
forlorn in Normandy. 

The conduct of wicked men is no less repugnant to the 
good, than theirs is to men of corrupt minds ; so that as 
good men, by the grace of the Holy Spirit, use all the means 
in their power to bring the wicked into the way of righteous- 
ness ; so these, actuated by the malignant influence of the 
devil, often strive zealously to turn the righteous into the 
paths of wickedness. They may not, perliaps, succeed in 
ruining them utterly, but they are sometimes able to per- 
plex them in various ways, and cause them to be sluggish in 
their sacred calling. In this manner, while the abbey of 
Evroult was rising, and, enriched by good works, was 
becoming glorious both in the sight of God and man, some 
flagitious persons fomented various grudges against the 
society, causing infinite trouble in what concerned the sub- 
sistence, and the clothing, and the sacred entertainments' of 
the monks. But although tempestuous waves threatened to 
overwhelm the ship of the church, Christ, her true spouse, 
graciously manifested the brightness of his presence to 
succour his servants and confound the machinations of their 
enemies. 

I propose in this place to give a true account of w^hat 
happened to Mabel, daughter of William Talvas, though it is 
somewhat out of order. This lady caused many troubles, 
iniquitoudy contrived, to the monks of St. Evroult, on 
account of the hatred she bore to the founders of the abbey, 
notwitlistanding that the monastic rule was strictly observed 
from the beginniug, and the offices of charity were duly 
performed to all comers, as the custom is to this day. Eor 
she, as well as her father and all her kindred, fostered a 
never-ceasing animosity against the family of Giroie. But 
as her husband Eoger de Montgomery loved and honoured 

* Af/avn ; in the strict sense of tlie word, the love-feasts, peculiar to 
the apostolic and primitive ages of the church. 



410 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. Cn.III . 

the monks, slie did not venture to exhibit any open signs of 
her malicious feeling. She therefore made the abbej her 
frequent resort, attended by numerous bands of armed 
retainers, under pretence of claiming the hospitality of the 
monks,^ but to their great oppression in the indigence to 
which they were subjected by the barrenness of their lands. 
At one time, when she had taken up her abode at the abbey 
with a hundred men-at-arms, and was questioned by abbot 
Theodoric why she came with such a splendid retinue to the 
abode of poor anchorites, and was warned to abstain from 
such absurdity, she exclaimed, in great wrath : " When I 
come again, my followers shall be still more numerous." 
The abbot replied : " Trust me ; unless you repent of this 
iniquity you will suffer what will be very painful to you." 
And so it happened: for the very night following she was 
attacked by a disorder which caused her great suffering. 
Upon this, she gave instant orders for being carried forth 
from the abbey, and, hastening in a state of alarm to fly from 
the territory of St. Evroult, she passed by the dwelling of a 
certain farmer named Roger Suisnar, whose infant child she 
caused to suck her nipple, which occasioned her the severest 
pain. The infant died soon afterwards, while Mabel reached 
her home restored to health. She lived fifteen years after- 
wards, but never ventured to return to St. Evroult, after 
having there suffered under the chastisement of Grod ; and 
from thenceforth she was very careful not to meddle, either 
for good or evil, with the occupants of the abbey, so long as 
she enjoyed the checquered delights of the present life. 
Notwithstanding, she had a great regard for abbot Theodoric, 
and confided to him much more than to the convent of St. 
E\TOult, the cell of St. Martin, as I have already remarked 
in anticipation. 

[a.d. 1016—1030.]- "While Pope Benedict filled the 

^ A common grievance in the feudal ages. 

2 Our author here begins an account of the Norman conquests in the 
south of Italy, which is far from satisfactory ; it is therefore proposed to 
inquire shortly how much truth and how much error it contains. It was in 
the year 1016 that a band of forty Norman pilgrims returning from Mount 
Garganus, met Melo the Lombard, who invited them to assist him in 
recovering Apulia. But it belonged at that time to the Greek emperor 
not to the Saracens, although the latter had ravaged it for two centuries, 
but without establishing any settlement. The year following, Melo, with 



A.D. 1016 — 1010.] THE T^OHMAFS 1^ APFLIA. 411 

apostolic sec, the Saracens of Africa made an annual descent 
with their galleys on the coast of Apulia, levying with 
impunity whatever contributions they pleased from the 
degenerate Lombards, of the Apuliau cities, and the Greek 
colonies in Calabria. In those days, Osmond surnamed 
Drengot, hearing William Eepostel insolently boast, in the 
presence of the Norman nobles, of having dishonoured his 
daughter, slew him in the presence of Eobert the duke, in a. 
wood where they were hunting. Eor this crime he was 
forced to make his escape with his sons and nephews, first 
into Brittany, afterwards into England, and at length to 
Beneventum. He was the first ISTorman who established 
himself in Apulia, having obtained from the prince of 
Beneventum the grant of a town as a settlement for himself 
and his heirs. Afterwards, a Norman knight who had gone 
on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem with a hundred men-at-arms, 
was hospitably entertained with his followers, on their return, 
by the Duke Waimalch, who humanely kept them several 
days, in order that they might refresh themselves. "While 
they were there twenty thousand Saracens made a descent on 
the coast of Italy, and demanded, with great threats, tribute 
from the inhabitants of Salernum. While the duke and his 
guards were gathering the tribute from the citizens, the 

the help of the Normans, recovered this fine country from the Greeks, but 
in 1019 he was in turn defeated by Bugienus, and his Norman auxiliaries 
were reduced to two hundred and seventy. Osmond, or Godfrey Drengot, 
did not arrive until the year 1020. William Eepostel was not the favourite 
of Duke Robert, but of his father, Richard II. By the intervention of 
Pope Benedict VIII., this fresh band of Normans was received with open 
arms by the Lombard chief, who employed them in various wars against 
the Greeks, the Saracens, and sometimes among themselves. The story of 
the 20,000 Saracens surprised by one hundred Normans while they were 
taking refreshment in a meadow near Salerno, appears to be pure inven- 
tion. In Naples the Normans first established themselves at A versa, a city 
they built in the year 1030, on lands granted them by Sergius III., the 
then duke of Naples. Drengot was dead when the Emperor Conrad 
created his brother Ranulf count of Aversa in 1 038. About that time 
William Bras-de-fer, Drogon, and Humphrey, the sons of Tancred de 
Hauteville, came into Italy. William, as the eldest, was acknowledged 
their chief, and assumed the title of count of Apulia in 1043. Drogo, who 
succeeded him in 1046, was assassinated at the instigation of the Greeks. 
Robert Guiscard did not obtain the government until after the death of 
Humphrey (lOol — 1057). Further particulars of the Normal, conquests 
in the south of Italy will be found in the course of the present work. 



412 OEI>EEICUS VTTALIS. [b. III. Cn.IIT. 

pirates disembarked from their fleet, and began to prepare 
their meal in full security, and with great delight, on a 
grassy plain lying between the city and the sea-shore. The 
Normans, witnessing this, and finding that the duke was 
collecting money to pacify the infidels, gently rebuked 
the Apulians for thus ransoming themselves like defenceless 
women, instead of defending themselves, sword in hand, like 
brave men. They then flew to arms, and, making a sudden 
attack on the Africans who were waiting for the tribute in 
perfect security, many thousand of them were slain on the 
ispot, and the rest were driven with disgrace to the refuge of 
their ships. The Normans returning, laden with gold and 
silver plate and other valuable booty, were much pressed by 
the duke to remain in honour at Salernum ; but as they were 
anxious to re-visit their own country, they declined to accept 
his proposal. Some of them, however, promised to return, 
or speedily to send to the duke a chosen band of Norman 
youths. When, therefore, they had reached their native 
land, they had much to tell their countrymen of all that 
they had seen, and heard, and done, and suffered. In the 
end, some of them, fulfilling their engagement, retraced their 
steps to Italy, and by their example induced a number of 
their light-hearted countrymen to join in their enterprize. 
In short, Turstin surnamed Citel, and Ranulph ; Bichard, 
son of Ansquetil de Quarrel,^ the sons of Tancred de 
Hauteville, viz. Drogo and Humphrey; "William and 
Herman ; E-obert surnamed Guiscard, and Roger with their 
six brothers ; William de Montreuil, Arnold de Grrant-mesnil, 
and many others, lefc Normandy and reached Apulia, not all 
together, but at diff'erent times. On their arrival, they in 
the first instance took service, as mercenaries against the 
infidels under the Duke Waimalch and other nobles. After- 
wards, however, disputes arising, they attacked those to 
whom they were previously subject, and by force of arms 
reduced Salernum, Bari, and Capua, with the whole of 
Campania and Calabria, under their own dominion. They 
also gained possession, in Sicily, of Palermo, Catania, Castel- 
Griovanni, and other cities and fine towns which are held by 
their heirs to the present day. 

* Richard de Carel married a daughter of Tancred de Hautville, and 
obtained for his share of the conquest the principality of Capua. 



A.D. 1050 — 105G.] WILLIAM GIROIE'S mission to APULIA. 413 

Among the Normans who crossed the Tiber, no ono 
distinguished himself more than AViiliam de Montreuil, son 
of William Giroie, and, being appointed to the chief 
command of the Eoman troops, he carried the banner of St. 
Peter to the conquest of the fertile plains of Campania. 
Being a friend and brother of the monks of St. Evroult, to 
whom he made large grants, as already mentioned, before he 
left Normandy, he sent to desire them to despatch a trusty 
messenger, by whom he might forward the presents he had 
prepared for them. His father William being informed of 
this, voluntarily offered to undertake the mission for the 
good of holy church. Abbot Theodoric heard the proposal 
with mingled joy and grief; joy, at the devotion which 
inflamed the heart of his friend, and induced him, old as he 
was, to undertake so toilsome a journey ; grief, at losing the 
society of one who was ready at all good works. At length, 
the holy father and Robert the prior, with the whole chapter, 
commended the Lord William to God's protection, selecting 
for his companions Humphrey, a most intelligent monk, and 
Roger of Jumieges, a skilful penman, with twelve other 
honourable attendants. Crossing the Alps he travelled to 
Rome^and thence pursued his journey to Apulia, where he 
found his son and other friends, kinsfolk, and relations. 
His arrival caused them all the greatest joy, and, prevailing 
on him to remain with them a considerable tim.e, during 
which he was entertained with the highest distinction, they 
committed to his charge many magnificent presents for the 
support of the abbey for which he was a suitor. Wishing 
however to send relief to the poor brethren without delay, 
he sent back the monk Humphrey, with a considerable sum of 
money ; but, by the mysterious decrees of God's providence, 
this enterprize turned out otherwise than he had hoped * 
for Humphrey, having got as far as Rome, determined to 
winter there, in the monastery of St. Paul the apostle. But 
he was poisoned by the Romans for the sake of the gold he 
had in his possession, and so the venerable pilgrim died in 
the confession of the faith of Christ, on the ides [13th] of 
December, Shortly afterwards AViiliam himself took his 
departure for Normandy, conveying a large sum of money, 
but when he reached Gaieta, so called from the nurse of 
^Eneas the Trojan, he was seized with a mortal disease. 



414 OllDERICUS YITALTS. [b.III. CU.III. 

Thereupon lie summoned to his side the two knights, 
Ansquetil du Noyer, son of Ascelin, and Theodelin de 
Tanie, and thus addressed them : " You know that vour 
twelve companions who came out of Normandy together in 
full health, all but you are dead ; I also am attacked by a 
severe disease which is fast hurrying me to the grave. I 
therefore commend to your custody Ansquetil, in the pre- 
sence of Theodelin as witness, the money of which I am the 
bearer, in order that you may honestly carry it to the lord 
abbot Theodoric, and my nephew E-obert, and the other 
monks of St. Evroult, for whom I am now in a foreign land. 
Te are both liege-men of the abbey, and are bound to do it 
faithful service. Let no love of lucre lead you astray. 
^Reflect well that all your comrades having perished, you 
only survive, through the merit-s of the blessed Evroult, in 
order perhaps that you may faithfully render him this 
service. Bear my last farewell to the monks at St. Evroult, 
whom I love in Christ as my own life, and earnestly entreat 
them to supplicate Almighty Grod on my behalf with zealous 
fervour." With this and such-like discourse he brought 
forth the gold, and rich palls, with a silver chalice, and other 
articles of great price, and, making an exact inventory of 
them delivered them to Ansquetil. Not long afterwards, his 
sickness prevailing to extremity, the noble knight departed 
in the faith of Christ, on the nones [5th] of Eebruary, and 
received honourable interment in the church of St. Erasmus, 
bishop and martyr,^ which is an episcopal see. Ansquetil and 
Theodoliu then pursued their journey into Erance, and 
arrived safely at home. Some days afterwards Ansquetil 
went to St. Evroult and announced to the bretln'en the 
death of the lord AVilliam and his companions, but observed 
total silence as to the money with which he had been 
entrusted and had already dishonestly converted to his own 
use. On hearing the death of the founder of their abbey 
the monks were in great tribulation, and zealously offered 
prayers, and masses, and other sacred offices on behalf of his 
soul to God, in whom all things live ; which are diligently 
continued by their successors to the present day. When 

1 St. Elmo, or Erasmus, bishop of Formise, and martyr, who perished 
in Diocletian's persecution. His remains were deposited in the neighbour- 
ing cathedral of Gaieta. 



A.D. 1050 — 105G.] DEATH OF FOUNDER OF ST. EYEOULT. 415 

Ansquetil had returned home, his comrade Theodelin came 
to St. Evroult and inquired of the monks what had been 
brought to them from Apulia, and was astonished to find 
that they liad received nothing but the sorrowful tidings of 
the death of their friends. He therefore related to them the 
whole trutli, describing all that had occurred, both in 
prosperous and adverse circumstances during their peregri- 
nations. Upon this, Abbot Theodoric sent for Ansquetil, 
and demanded from him the money committed to his charge. 
At first he denied having received it, but, being confronted 
with Theodelin, he admitted the truth : " I did receive," he 
said, " the money you demand from my lord A¥illiam ; part of 
it I have applied to my own use, and the rest I deposited at 
Hheims, by the advice of my lord Hodolph Mala- Corona, 
who met me there." On hearing this the monks despatched 
him twice to E^heims to Grervase the archbishop,^ to recover 
the money deposited, once in company with E.eginald of Sap, 
one of the monks, and again with Fulk. The monk was 
received with great kindness by the metropolitan, who 
assisted him, as far as it was in his power, in the object of 
his journey. For while he was bishop of Mans, often 
repairing to the court of William, duke of Normandy, with 
whom he was intimate, the monks of St. Evroult used to give 
him honourable entertainment with all his attendants. On 
seeing therefore the monk Fulk, he was anxious to return 
kindness for kindness. But as a long time had elapsed, and 
Ansquetil had carelessly deposited the things for which Eulk 
made inquiries, he was only able to recover a few of the least 
valuable of all the articles which were sent from Apulia; 
witli difficulty obtaining the silver chalice, two chasubles, an 
elephant's tooth, a griffin's claw, and some others. The 
monks, taking into consideration the fraudulent conduct of 
Ansquetil, summoned him to trial in their court at St. 
Evroult, where Eichard d'Avranches, son of Turstin, and 
many other barons appeared to support him. But, on the 
just complaints of the monks, judgment was fairlv 
pronounced against him of forfeiture of the whole of the fief 
he held of the abbey. In the end, by the mediation of 
friends on both sides, this agreement was made : Ansquetil 

^ Gcrvais of Chiiteau-du-Loir, bishop of Mans, 1C36 — 1055, archbishop 
of Rheiins, 1055 — lOU/. 



416 OEDERICUS YITALIS. [e.IIT. CII. III. 

openly confessing his guilt, gave pledges to abbot Theodoric 
for bis future good conduct, and humbly supplicated pardon 
from the monks ; and, as a compensation for the loss which 
he had caused them by his default, he surrendered to the 
abbey of St. Evroult, in the presence of many witnesses, the 
third part of the burgh of Ouche, which he possessed as heir 
to his father. In token of this, he oftered on the altar of St. 
Evroult one mantle of silk, of which a cope was made for the 
chanter. The monks, thereupon, satisfied by his penitence, 
pardoned his offences, and kindly restored to him all the rest 
of his fief, except the part which he had surrendered by the 
advice of his friends, Not long afterwards Ansquetil w'ent 
into Apulia, where he was slain. 

The old enemy never fails to disturb the peace of the 
church by the incentives of manifold temptations, bringing 
those with whom he is able to prevail into subjection to 
w^orldly vanities, and grievously alllicting those who by pru- 
dent watchfuhiess in the simplicity of the Catholic faith 
stand manfully upright in the perfection of their Christian 
virtues. AVhen therefore he saw a regular monastery rising 
by God's help, in the forest of Ouche, and that abbot 
Theodoric was by word and deed profiting the souls both of 
young and old in the neighbouring town, he burnt with the 
same malice which wrought the expulsion of the protoplast 
Adam from Paradise through the desire of the forbidden fruit, 
and stirred up the prior Eobert, after the death of AVilliam 
de Giroie, to a presumptuous opposition against hio abbot; 
and by the dissensions thence arising for a long time dis- 
quieted the minds of the subject members of the fraternity. 
This Eobert, as 1 have fully noticed before, was of high rank, 
beinjr the brother of Hugh de Grant-mesnil ; and all the 
levity of his youth, indomitable resolution, and worldly : 
ambition, still clung to him. His continence and other | 
monastic virtues were praiseworthy; while, on the other 
hand, as Horace says : — 

" Man's happiness is ne'er complete," ^ 

he was reprehensible for many failings. For whether wnat 
he coveted was right or wrong, he was hasty and headstrong 
in gaining his ends, and was quickly irritated when anything 

1 Odes, B. II. xvi. v. 27. 



A.D. 1050 — 1056.] THEODOEIC, ABBOT OP ST. EVEOULT. 417 

he heard or saw offended him ; more prone to lead than to 
follow, to command than to obey. His hand was always 
open both to receive and to disburse, and his mouth to give 
ready vent to his wrath in violent ebullitions. Illustrious 
by the high lineage already mentioned, and being 
one of the founders of the abbey in which he had 
collected from all parts brothers whose duty was to perform 
divine worship, and having amply endowed them with all 
things necessary for theii' subsistence, he found himself' 
unable to submit to the strict rules of a monastic life in the 
new establishment. He therefore frequently complained in 
private to his spiritual father, that the holy man was more 
occupied with his religious duties than with secular concerns. 
He even sometimes opposed him openly, and found fault 
with some of his acts simply relating to exterior objects. 
So that the man of God often took refuge in his quiet 
retreat at Seez, abiding there six or eight weeks, doing God's 
work in peace and zealously promoting the salvation of men 
by all the means in his power. He thus waited for the 
improvement of his refractory brother, fulfilling the apostle's 
admonition: " Give place imto wrath. "^ Finding, however, 
that the rancour and the scandals did not cease, but rather 
increased, to the great injury of the brethren, he tendered 
his pastoral staff to William the duke of Normandy, offering 
to resign his rank and office of abbot. The duke thereupon, 
taking judicious counsel, com.mitted the whole matter to the 
decision of Maurilius, archbishop of Eouen, enjoining him 
to inquire diligently into the causes of the dissension, and 
to make such order thereon as, by the advice of prudent 
counsellors, he should think right. 

In the year of our Lord 1056, the eighth indiction, when 
Pope Victor filled the apostolic see, Henry, surnamed the 
Good, emperor of the Eomans, and son of Conon [Conrad] 
departed this life, and was succeeded by his son Henry, who 
reigned fift}^ years.^ The same year, Maurilius the arch- 
bishop, and Eulbertthe sophist, his chancellor, with Hugh, 

1 Rom. xii. 19. 

'•^ The emperor Henry IIL, son of Conrad (not Conon), died on the 5th 
of October, 1056. He was succeeded by his son, Henry IV., who died 
August 7, 1 10(5. Pope Victor II., installed April l3, 1055, died the 28th 
of July, 1058. 

VOL. I. E E 



418 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.IY. 

bishop of Lisieux, Ansfrid, abbot of Preaux and Lanfranc, 
prior of Bee, with several other dig^tiitaries of sound 
judgment, assembled at the abbey of St. Evroult; and 
celebrated the feast of the apostles St. Peter and St. Paul 
on the third of the calends of July [29th June]. Having 
inquired into and carefully considered the grounds of the 
dissension, it was ordered that the abbot Theodoric should 
continue the government of the abbey, as he had done before, 
and Eobert the prior was admonished, in the fullest terms, to 
conform to his vows of poverty in Christ, and to obey his 
spiritual father, for the love of God, in all humility. The 
commissioners having returned home, a sliort period of repose 
was enjoyed by the flock at St. Evroult ; but a year after- 
wards, when the news arrived of the death of William de 
Giroie, the smothered strife again broke out, and disputes 
adverse both to the spiritual and temporal welfare of the 
monks distracted the community. And now Theodoric, to 
whom peace was dear, was in difficulties on every side. For 
at Scez it was out of his power to promote the salvation of 
souls, and to finish the building of the cell which Eoger and 
his wife had begun to erect, because they were then much 
occupied by worldly affairs, and exposed to serious attacks 
from their enemies in various quarters ; while at St. Evroult 
he could neither further his own good nor that of others, 
by reason of the vexations which he had to endure from 
some of the more influential monks. At last, after long 
reflection upon the course he ought to pursue, according to 
the will of G-od, he determined to abandon all and undertake 
a pilgrimage to the tomb of our Lord at Jerusalem. 

Ch. TV. Account of the pilgrimage to Jerusalem, under- 
taken ly Theodoric, first abhoi of St. JEvroult, after 
resigning his charge — Mis death at the island of Cgprus. 
On the fourth of the calends of September [August 24th], 
abbot Theodoric left Seez, where he had rested long, and, 
proceeding to St. Evroult, convoked a chapter of the monks 
to whom he made known his intentions, and admonishing, 
absolving, and blessing them all, he commended them to 
G-od. Thence he went to Lisieux, and surrendered his cure 
of souls to the bishop, by whom he was much beloved ; then 
he commenced his holy pilgrimage for Christ amidst the 



a.d.1057-105S.]tiieodoiiic'spilgeimaqetojeei:salem. 419 

tears of many of his friends. Herbert de Montreuil, the 
first monk he admitted to the monastery of St. Evroult, 
accompanied him, as well as the clerk William, surnained 
Eonne-Ame, son of Radbod bishop of Seez, who some time 
afterwards held the metropolitan see of Eouen for nearly 
twenty-six years. 

In those days there existed a noble hospital on the con- 
fines of the territories of the Bavarians and Huns,^ which 
the truly Christian and powerful barons of the neighbouring 
provinces had founded for the reception of the poor and 
pilgrims. At that time Ansgot, a Norman, governed this 
hospital, having been elected by the natives. He was a 
cousin of Robert de Toni, called the Spaniard, who had 
borne arms with distinction under E-ichard and Robert, 
dukes of Normandy ; but inspired with the fear of Grod, he 
had relinquished all worldly advantages, and had chosen to 
undergo voluntary poverty during the remainder of his life 
for Christ's sake. Recognizing Theodoric and his compa- 
nions as countrymen, he gave them a cordial reception and 
entertained them for some days with great hospitality, 
paying them the kindest attentions. 

Meanwhile, a certain religious, the chief bishop of the 
Bavarians, going on a pilgrimage arrived at the hospital, 
where he was honourably received, with all his retinue, as 
the custom was by the liberal Ansgot, and prevailed on to 
sojourn for a while. He also earnestly recommended the 
venerable Theodoric and his attendants to the care of this 
bishop, pointing out his sanctity as a father in God, and his 
worldly rank in his own country. The bishop, hearing the 
abbot's character, gave thanks to Grod, and, cordially paying 
the respect due to a man of his station, took him in his 
company as far as Antioch. There a difference of opinion 
arose among the pilgrims. Some of them wished to con- 
tinue their journey by land, as they had hitherto prosecuted 
it, the whole way to Jerusalem. Others, alarmed for their 
safety among the fierce infidels, determined to take ship 
and pass into the Holy Land by sea. In this proposal the 
bisliop and abbot, with some others, concurred. While, 
however, the bishop was engaging a ship and an able crew, 

^ M. Pertz conjectures that this hospital was situated at Molk in Lower 
Austria, where a celebrated abbey was founded twenty-six years afterwards. 

£ E 2 



420 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.IT. 

and a certain religious, who was archimandrite of the con- 
vent of St. Simeon in the port of Syria/ was hospitably 
entertaining Theodoric and his companions, Herbert the 
monk of St. Evroult was seized with the desire of hastening 
his journey, and preferred to continue his pilgrimage to the 
holy places by land rather than by sea. His abbot accord- 
ingly gave him permission to go as he pleased. Taking, 
therefore, the road through the country, with a crowd of 
pilgrims on foot, and having reached Laodicea, he there fell 
sick, and was compelled to abide for some time, his com- 
panions proceeding on their way. As soon as he was able 
to rise from his bed, he did not take one step further in 
advance, but bidding farewell to the east, turned westward, 
and hastened back to J^^ormandy. 

The bishop, with Theodoric and AVilliam Bonne-Ame 
with their companions, embarked at the port of St. Simeon, 
and sailed to the island of Cyprus. They found there on 
the sea-shore a convent founded by St. JN^icholas the con- 
fessor, archbishop of Myria.' Entering the church, they per- 
formed their devotions as each was inspired by divine grace ; 
and Theodoric, on rising from his prayers, during which he had 
wept much, sat down exhausted in the church, for his frame 
was shattered by the weight of years, his sufferings at sea, 
and other fatigues. The bishop, his faithful companion, 
inquiring of him what had happened, he replied : " I had 
proposed, my father, to visit the earthly Jerusalem, but I 
believe that the Lord has otherwise disposed of his servant. 
I am suffering great bodily anguish, and I am led to think 
that I must turn my face to the heavenly, instead of the 
earthly, Jerusalem." The bishop made answer, " Rest here, 
dearest brother, while I go to procure a lodging for your 
reception." The bishop leaving him for this purpose, 
Theodoric approached the altar, and was for some time 
engaged in prayer to Grod, whom he had faithfully served 
from his youth upward. He then prostrated himself 

1 This port appears to correspond with a place called by the Arabs 
Soueyda, on the northern shore of the gulf, at the mouth of the Orontes. 
It took its ancient name from St. Simeon Stylites, who died in a monastery 
near it about the year 592, 

* There is a place, marked St. Nicholas on the maps, near Cape St, 
A-ndrew, on the northern point of the island of Cyprus, but we find no 
account of the monastery mentioned by our author. 



A.D. 1058.] DEATH OY ABBOT THEODOEIC. 421 

before the altar, witli liis face to the east, and decently 
gathering his robe round him, lay on his right side, as if he 
was composing himself for sleep, when laying his head on 
the marble step, and crossing his hands on his breast, he 
thus gave up his devout soul to God who created it, on the 
calends [the 1st] of August. 

Meanwhile, the bishop having prepared a lodging, called 
the servant of the man of God, and sent him to the church 
to conduct his master to it. But when he found the holy 
man lying dead in the church, he returned to the bishop in 
great alarm, and trembling, told him of the unexpected 
calamity. The bishop, however, not believing that the man 
of God had so suddenly departed, said to him : " The good 
old man is much exhausted by his sufferings at sea, and the 
intense heat ; and therefore he is enjoying refreshing sleep 
in the coolness of the church on the cold marble. Let us 
go and see him." He then proceeded to the church, 
attended by his clergy. But when he had carefully felt the 
body of his comrade, and found that it was really chilled in 
death, he was overpowered with grief. Immediately col- 
lecting all the pilgrims who, dispersed in their several 
lodgings, were procuring refreshments, he commanded them 
to assemble in the church, while he fully made known to 
the inhabitants of the place the character of the companion 
of their pilgrimage who there lay dead. The inhabitants 
were filled with joy for his holy life, and freely offered their 
services to the other pilgrims. The bishop, then, with his 
clergy, paid the last offices to the remains of the defunct, 
ordering the rest of the pilgrims to prepare a place for his 
interment before the church-door. Having, therefore, dug 
a grave with their staves where the bishop directed, they 
returned to the pavement where the corpse lay, with the 
bishop standing by, to carry it forth for burial. But it 
was so ordered by God that the body was so heavy, that 
they were utterly unable to raise it from the spot where 
the holy man fell asleep. The bishop and all the spec- 
tators were much astonished at this, and consulted together 
for some moments what was to be done. At length the 
bishop, divinely inspired, said : " This was a most holy 
man, and his life, as it is now clearly manifest, was well 
pleasing to God. I am, therefore, of opinion that he 
ought to be interred iu a spot more worthy of him, and 



422 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.V. 

that his remains ought to be treated, with all the reve- 
rential ceremony which it is in our power to bestow. I 
propose, therefore, with the assistance of my clergy, to 
offer the holy sacrifice of the mass for the good of his soul, 
and you shall prepare a more fitting grave for him near the 
altar." The pilgrims giving a willing consent, and the 
mass being performed with all reverence, and the grave 
carefully made, they raised the corpse without difficulty and 
decently interred it before the altar ; and there afterwards 
many persons suffering from fevers and other disorders were 
miraculously cured. 

The monks of St. Evroult were filled with grief when 
they received intelligence of the death of their reverend 
father on the return of his fellow pilgrims to Normandy. 
They did not fail of performing faithfully the due offices of 
religion for the repose of his soul, and his memory is yearly 
kept to the present day with a solemn service on the 
calends [1st] of August. They also studiously adhered to 
the religious rules which he had learned from the venerable 
abbots Eichard of Yerdun, William of Dijon, and Theodoric 
of Jumieges,^ and had faithfully transferred to the new 
establishment committed to his charge, which rules are still 
diligently taught to the novices preparing themselves for 
the monastic life. 

Ch. Y. Itohert de Grant-mesnil, second oMot of St. Evroult 
— Offends Duke William, and heing expelled, becomes ahhot 
of St. JEupJiemia in Calabria — Affairs of Normandy, and of 
the Normans in Apulia, Sfc. 

In the year of our Lord 1059, the twelfth indiction, the 
monks of St. Evroult elected for their abbot, Eobert de 
Grant-mesnil, considering with reason the many advan- 
tages of such a choice, arising both from his illustrious 
descent, his zeal for the interests of the community, and his 
aptitude and perseverance in business. His election being 
ratified by the unanimous assent of the entire chapter, he 
was conducted to Evreux by a delegate of the brethren who 
presented him to Duke William, and, announcing the elec- 
tion, petitioned the duke to confirm it. The duke consent- 

1 Richard de Verdun died July 14, 1046; William de Di'on, January 1, 
1031. Theoderic, abbot of Jumieges, in 1027 or 1028. 



A.D. 1059.] EGBERT DE GRAKT-MESiaL SECOND ABBOT. 423 

ing, invested the abbot elect with the exterior jurisdiction 
of the convent by the crosier of Ives, bishop of Seez, and 
"William, bishop of Evreux, committed to him the interior 
cure of souls in matters spiritual, by episcopal consecration 
on the eleventh of the calends of July [June 21st]. 
E,obert, thus made abbot, entered diligently on the admi- 
nistration of the conventual concerns, making abundant 
provision from the wealth of his family of all things neces- 
sary for the service of God. Far from diminishing the 
proper observances which his pious predecessor had insti- 
tuted, he augmented them, having regard to what was 
timely and reasonable, and taking for his guide the 
authority of the ancients and the practices of neighbouring 
communities. While yet a novice he had, by the permis- 
sion of the venerable Theodoric, visited the abbey of Cluni, 
at the time that Abbot Hngh, the glory of the monastic 
order in our days, presided over that community. Return- 
ing some time afterwards from Cluni he brought with him, 
by the indulgence of the generous Hugh, an illustrious 
monk named Bernefrid, who was afterwards made a bishop, 
and obtained his assistance while he assimilated the prac- 
tices of the monks of St. Evroult to the Clunian model. 
During the abbacy of Bobert, Mainer, son of Gunscelin 
d'Echoufour, came to St. Evroult for his probation: he 
afterwards rose to the government of the convent, which he 
ruled well twenty-one years and ten months. 

At that time Ealph, surnamed Mala-Corona, came to St. 
Evroult, where he abode a long time with Abbot Robert, 
who was his nephew. As I have before remarked, he was 
studious from his childhood, and learnt the secrets of 
science with signal success, in the schools of Erance and 
Italy, being deeply skilled in astronomy as well as in gram- 
mar and dialectics, and also in music. He was so complete 
a master of the art of medicine, that at Palermo, where the 
most ancient school of medicine had long flourished, he 
was unrivalled except by one most skilful matron. But 
although his learning was so extensive and profound, he did 
not abandon himself to a peaceful life, but served in the 
wars, and often distinguished himself among his comrades, 
both in council and in the field. The natives of Montreuil 
still relate many things which appear to us wonderful con- 



424 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.Y. 

cerning liis experiments in cases of disease and other 
accidents, such as they were witnesses of themselves, or 
heard from their fathers, to whom he was well known by 
his long residence among them. At last, apprehending the 
destruction of a tottering world, and taking the precaution 
of a prudent retirement, he despised its luxury, and betook 
himself to Marmoutier, a cell dependent on the abbey ot 
St. Martin at Tours, where for seven years he lived in sub- 
mission to the monastic rule under Albert its venerable 
a,bbot. After he had been confirmed in that order, he came 
to St. Evroult, by permission of his abbot, to assist his 
nephew, who had lately undertaken the government of the 
new monastery. This noble soldier having obtained from the 
Lord by earnest prayers the disease of leprosy to expiate 
the multitude of sins which burdened his conscience, his 
nephew gave him a chapel which he had built in honour of 
St. Evroult, where he lived for a considerable time, having 
the monk Groscelin for his own comfort and the service of 
God, and did much good by his counsels to numbers who 
flocked to him on account of his deep wisdom and high rank. 
At his earnest request. Abbot Eobert invited Hugh, 
bishop of Lisieux, a true father and director of the monks, 
who came and consecrated the chapeP in honour of the 
holy confessors St. Evroult, St. Benedict, and Leudfrid, on 
the second of the nones [6th] of May. Eeport says that 
this church was founded as early as the time of St. Evroult, 
and that it was his custom to retire to it, to the exclusion 
of all worldly cares, in order that he might devote himself 
more earnestly to heavenly contemplations. The site is 
pleasant and well suited to a hermit's life. The little river 
Carenton flows through a wild valley, dividing the bishopric 
of Lisieux from that of Evreux. The summit of the moun- 
tain is clothed with a forest, the thick foliage of which 
forms a screen from the blasts of the wind ; the chapel 
stands on the declivitv, between the wood and the rivulet, 
surrounded by an orchard. A fountain bursts out before 
the door, which forms the source of the Ouche, from which 
the whole district round derives its name. 

It need be no matter of wonder that the bishop of Lisieux 
should consecrate a chapel in the diocese of Evreux. At 

^ This chapel stood between the abbey and the village of Echaufonr. 



A.D. 1061.] WAE, BETWEEN FEENCH AND NORMANS. 425 

that time, three prelates of distinguished liberality and 
great courtesy presided over adjoiniug dioceses. Hugh, son 
of William count d'Eu, was bishop of Lisieux ; AV^illiam, 
son of Gerard I'leitel, was spiritual ruler of the people of 
Evreux ; and Ives, son of William de Belesme, had the cure 
of souls at Seez. These three bishops were then distin- 
guished in Normandy for their zeal and unanimity, so that 
each of them, as time and circumstances required, adminis- 
tered all divine offices on the confines of a neighbouring 
diocese the same as if it were his own, without any conten- 
tion or jealousy. 

At the instigation of the devil, who never ceases from 
mischief to mankind, violent hostilities broke' out between 
the French and the Normans. Henry, king of France, and 
Geoffrey Martel, the valiant count of Anjou, crossed the 
frontiers of Normandy with numerous forces and committed 
great ravages. On the other hand, William, the brave duke 
of Normandy, was not slow in taking ample revenge for the 
injiu-y done, taking many of the French and Angevins 
prisoners, putting some to death, and throwing numbers 
into prison, where they long suffered. The reader who de- 
sires to make himself acquainted with the particulars of the 
attacks and devastations, which ensued on one side or the 
other, will find them described in the works of AVilliam, a 
monk of Jumieges, surnamed Calculus, and William of 
Poitiers, archdeacon of Lisieux, who have written the his- 
tory of Normandy with great care, and dedicated their 
works to William, then king of England, whose favour they 
wished to secure.^ 

At that time Eobert, son of Giroie, revolted against 
Duke William, and, uniting with the Angevins, strongly 
garrisoned his castles of St. Ceneri and La E-oche d'Ige, 
holding them for some time against the attacks of the duke 
with Norman troops. But all mortal strength is transitory 
and fades like the flower of grass, for this great soldier, after 
his gallant actions, while he was making merry as he sat 
by the hearth in winter, seeing his wife Adelaide (who was 
the duke's cousin) with four apples in her hand, snatched 

^ For an account of this war, which took place in 1054, see William de 
Poitiers, in Duchesne, Hist. Norman, p. 181, and William de Jumieges, 
ib. p. 276. 



426 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.T. 

two of them in sport, unconscious of tlieir being poisoned, 
and ate them in spite of all her efforts to prevent him. 
The poison made rapid progress, and to the great grief of his 
friends, he expired five days afterwards, on the 8th of the ides 
[6th] of February. On his death Arnold, sou of William de 
Griroie, succeeded to the command, in his uncle's place, 
encouraffins: the townsmen bv his entreaties and admoni- 
tions to defend to the last the inheritance of his father. 
But the prudent duke disarmed his hostility with smooth 
words, and engaged him by his promises to consent to 
peace. Arnold, by the advice of his friends, agreed to the 
duke's proposals, and paying his homage, was invested with 
the fiefs of Montreuil, Echoufour, St. Ceneri, and all the 
domains he inherited from his ancestors. On the peace 
being settled, abbot Eobert requested permission from the 
duke to transfer the body of his uncle, which had lain buried 
at St. Ceneri for three weeks, to the abbey of St. Evroult. 
The duke at first refused, actuated by his recent animosity ; 
but being ashamed to keep alive his resentment against the 
dead, he presentlj'' gave his consent. The abbot lost no time 
in translating the corpse of Robert de Giroie to St. Evroult 
in a coffin of wood, and honourably buried it in the monks' 
cloister. All who were present wondered that, though the 
body had lain dead three weeks, no offensive smell was 
observed. Some persons pretend that the virulence of the 
poison which killed him had dried up all the humours in the 
body of the deceased, so that there was nothing to offend 
the nostrils of the by-standers. 

The monks of St. Evroult were well pleased that Arnold 
was restored to his lawful jurisdiction, and with his support 
resisted the oppressions of some troublesome persons who 
had taken advantage of their defenceless state. In the 
time of Abbot Theodoric and Eobert his successor, Baldric 
and Yiger de Bauquencey and their people, had not only 
carried themselves insolently towards the monks, and were 
insubordinate to them as their lords, but often harassed 
them and their servants. Eobert, on his becoming abbot, 
thought it disgraceful to submit any longer to such 
conduct. He therefore, having consulted the brethren, gave 
up the rebels to his cousin, that he might chastise with a 
soldier's strong hand the stubbornness of men who were too 



A.D. 1059 — lOGL] AFFAIES OF ST. EVROULT. 427 

proud to submit to tlie gentle rule of the monks. Arnold 
laid upon them the burden of many hard services, compel- 
ling them and their people to guard his fortified castles 
of Echaufour and St. Ceneri. Upon this they earnestly 
entreated abbot Robert and the monks that they would be 
pleased to take them again under their own rule, promising 
in future entire submission and better conduct. The abbot 
and monks, listening to their prayers, besought Arnold to 
restore them to their service under the church, which to 
those who are humble and well disposed is truly liberal. 

At this time Roger, the eldest son of Engenulf de Aquila, 
was slain. Engenulf and his wife Eichveride came to St. 
Evroult in deep grief, entreating the prayers and good 
offices of the monks for the good of the souls of themselves 
and their son Roger, which were granted ; and they there- 
upon off"ered his best horse to God and the monks. The 
horse being very valuable, Arnold begged to have it, yielding 
up Baldric and his people with the fief of Bauquencey to be 
subject to the monks as before. This was done : Arnold 
receiving the horse from his cousin Robert and restoring 
Baldric with the land of Bauquencey to his former tenure 
under the abbey. Baldric, overjoyed at having thus escaped 
from the burdensome service of Arnold, granted to the 
monks a domain which he possessed in the vill of St. Evroult, 
as also his land upon the rivulet of Douet Villars, and that 
of the Norman Mica and Benignus. Then Baldric swore 
fealty to abbot Robert with joined hands, promising suit 
and service, and demanding that his fief should not again 
be severed from the estates of the monks. They granted 
and ratified this, and both Baldric and Robert his son, from 
that time to the present day, have done service to none but 
the monks for the lands of Bauquencey.^ 

The abbey of St. Evroult stands in the fief of Bauquencey, 
and this Baldric was a man of high birth. Eor Gislebert, 
Count de Brionne, nephew of Richard duke of Normandy, 
gave his niece in marriage to Baldric the German, who 
came into Normandy, with Yiger his brother, to take service 

^ Such surrenders of lay fiefs to the monasteries, for the purpose of 
holding under them, were very common in England, the object being to 
escape from the rapacities of the feudal lords, and exchange the military 
service for a milder tenure under the church. 



428 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. Cn.V. 

under tlie duke. From this marriage sprung six sons, 
besides several daughters, viz. : Nicholas de Basqueville ; 
Fulk d' Aunoun ; Eobert de Courcy ; Richard de Neuville, 
Baldric de Bauquencey; and Yiger of Apulia. They all dis- 
tinguished themselves by great valour under Duke AViiliam, 
from whom they received great riches and honours, and left 
to their heirs vast possessions in Normandy. 

Baldric who, with his brother Yiger, held the fief of 
Bauquencey, gave his sister Elizabeth in marriage to Eulk de 
Bonneval, a brave knight, and for her dowry the church of 
St. Nicholas, built by his ftither, with the lands adjoining. 
Fulk, not forgetful of the life to come, presented to Grod, 
for the good of his soul and those of his kindred, his son 
Theodoric, to whom abbot Theodoric was baptismal sponsor, 
offering to St. Evroult the youth and the abbey of St. 
Nicholas of which we have just spoken. Baldric, A^iger, 
and AVilliam de Bonneval, readily confirmed these ofierings ; 
they, ana many others who were present, assisting as legal 
witnesses of the gift, for the greater security of the church. 
Among them was Eoger, son of Tancred de Hauteville, who 
afterwards went into Italy, and, by God's help, became 
master of a great part of Sicily, having attacked, defeated, 
and subdued the Africans, Sicilians, and other nations, 
unbelievers in Christ, who ravaged that island. The boy 
Theodoric, thus separated from the world and devoted to 
God, lived fifty-seven years under the monastic rule, and, 
rising to the priesthood by regular degrees, waged his 
spiritual warfare with great fidelity. 

At that time Guy, surnamed Bollein, great nephew or 
the elder Giroie, lived in high honour with his wife 
Hodierna in the Corbonuois, and, having gained much wealth 
by his military service, managed his afiairs with entire credit. 
He had several sons, of whom Norman and Walter served 
in the wars, while Godfrey and "William, surnamed Gregory, 
being devoted to learning, obtained the ofiice of priests. 

The aforesaid Guy, by the inspiration of God, and his 
natural feeling for abbot Eobert, who was his cousin, showed 
great regard for the monks of St. Evroult, and shut out 
from the world and from himself his son William, a boy 
about nine years old, whom he placed in the convent of St. 
Evroult, to serve God under the monastic rule, on the feast 



A.D. 1059 — 1061.] THE GOOD MONK WILLIAM. 429 

of All Saints. Then AVilliam le Prevost, a noble knight, 
the lad's uncle, gave to St. Evroult the church with the 
whole vill of Augeron, vowing himself and the whole ot 
his substance to the same patron at the end of his life. 
By the grace of Grod the boy AVilliam grew up in a virtuous 
course and was diligent in his studies, so that his superiors 
gave him tlie surname of Gregory. Carefully nurtured in 
the bosom of our holy mother the church, and entirely shut 
out from the tumults of the world and carnal indulgences, 
he made great advances in those pursuits which are so 
especially fitting the sons of the church, being an excellent 
reader and chanter, and exceedingly skilled in copying and 
illuminating books. The works executed by his own hands 
are still very useful to us in reading and chanting, and serve 
for examples to deter us from idleness by the exercise of 
similar diligence. Assiduous from his very childhood at 
the offices of devotion and vigils, and submitting with 
moderation even in his old age to fastings and other mace- 
rations of the flesh, he was a strict observer of monastic 
discipline himself, and a zealous monitor of those who in- 
fringed the holy rule. He had committed to his tenacious 
memory the Epistles of St. Paul, the Proverbs of Solomon, 
and other portions of sacred scripture, which he quoted in 
his daily conversations for the benefit of those with whom 
he conferred. Devoted to these pursuits, he has already 
spent fifty-four years in the order of monks, and still con- 
tinues the practice of good works, in his usual manner, 
under abbot Eoger, that by ending well he may attain to 
the assurance of eternal rest. 

Wliile the community at the abbey of St. Evroult was 
nobly augmented by the accession of forty monks, and the 
monastic rule was there regularly observed according to the 
order of the divine Lord, its fame spread far and wide, 
disposing numbers of persons to become attached to it. 
Meanwhile, some being infected with a rancorous hatred 
were punished by the sharp edge of their own malice. 
Abbot Robert, endowed with genuine liberality, received 
willingly all who came from every quarter to enter on their 
probation, and steadily supplied the brethren with all things 
necessary for their subsistance and clothing. The revenues 
indeed of the abbey, which was situated in a barren district, 



430 OEDERICTJS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.V. 

were inadequate to supply tlie abbot's liberality; but, as 
it has been already remarked, lie often went among his noble 
relations and obtained from them the means which he ap- 
plied for the benefit of the monks with the willing consent 
of tlie donors. 

The old chapel, built by St. Evroult, being a small and 
rude edifice, he laid the foundations, in the first year of his 
rule, of a new church in a noble style of architecture which 
he resolved to dedicate to St. Mary, mother of God, and to 
enrich with many altars of the saints. On account also of 
the holy relics which were deposited in the old church in 
the time of St. Evroult (but on account of the lapse of time 
men now living are ignorant of their names, acts, and places 
of deposit), he determined to make the new building of 
such dimensions that it should include within its walls the 
whole of the ancient chapel, and thus for ever honourably 
contain the bones and tombs of the saints which lay hidden 
within. But he was compelled to desist from his undertak- 
ing by the storm.y times which began to threaten, and no 
one among his successors ventured to carry out the work in 
the proportions and on the plan and site which he had 
intended. 

In the year of our Lord 1059, the thirteenth indiction, 
Henry, king of France, after a glorious and prosperous 
reign, demanded of John, a physician of Chartres, who from 
some accident was called the Deaf, a potion which should 
restore his health and prolong his life ; but, being very 
thirsty, under the influence of his inclination more than of 
his physician's advice, he made his chamberlain bring him 
water privately, while the medicine, passing through his 
intestines, gave him great pain, and before they were cleared 
by it. Thus, drinking without the knowledge of his leech, 
he died, alas ! on the morrow, to the great grief of his peo- 
ple.^ He left the sceptre of France to his son Philip, who 
was still of tender years, appointing Baldwin, duke of 
Flanders, his guardian and regent of the kingdom. The 
duke was a fitting person to undertake his trust, having 
married Adela, daughter of Eobert, king of France, by 
whom he had Eobert, the Frisian, the queen of England, 

^ Henry IV., king of France, died, not in 1059, but on the 29th of 
August, 1060. 



A.D. 1058 — 1063.] DISCUSSIONS IN NOEMANDT. 431 

and Eudes, archbishop of Treves, with other children of high 
rank.^ 

The same year died Frederick, son of Duke Gothelon, 
who was also called Pope Stephen, he was succeeded by- 
Gerard, called also Nicholas.' This was the third year of 
Henry IV., son of Henry Conrad the emperor, and Agnes, 
empress, who reigned fifty years, being the eighty-seventh 
emperor from Augustus. 

Pope Nicholas died a.d. 1063, and was suceeded by Alex- 
ander, bishop of Lucca, at which time Sigefred, bishop of 
Mayence, and Gunter, of Bamberg, and many other bishops 
and nobles, made the pilgrimage to Jerusalem with numerous 
attendants.^ 

At that period, grave dissensions arose between William, 
duke of Normandv, and his barons. Por one ambitious 
man eagerly endeavoured to supplant another, so that bitter 
quarrels sprung up from various causes to the great injury 
of the wretched people. At this men of a cruel turn of 
mind found reason to rejoice, while all who loved piety and 
tranquillity were deeply grieved. Among those who regarded 
these disputes with satisfaction were Roger de Montgomery 
and Mabel his wife, who took the opportunity of gaining the 
duke's favour by fair professions, while they exasperated him 
against their neighbours by their crafty manoeuvres. The 
duke, naturally passionate, gave the reins to his wrath, 
more than justice required, disinheriting the distinguished 
Ivnights, Eodolph de Toni, Hugh de Grant-mesnil, and 
Arnold dEchaufour, with their barons, and compelling them 
to undergo a long exile without any real cause of oftence. At 
the same time, Kobert, abbot of St. Evroult, was cited before 
the duke's court, and a day appointed him to answer the 

^ Baldwin V., earl of Flanders (1034 — 1067), married Adelaide of 
France, king Henry's sister, by whom he had six children: Baldwin VI. 
and Rolieit, his successors; Eudes, archbishop of Treves; Henry, Matilda, 
wife of William the Conqueror; and Judith, who was married successively 
to Tosti, brother of Harold, and VVelph, duke of Bavaria. 

2 Stephen IX., elected pope August 2, 1057, and died March 29, 1058. 
Nicholas II. was elected December 28, 1058. 

3 Nicholas II. died the 21st or 2"2nd of July, 1061 ; and was succeeded 
by Alexander II., who was before bishop of Lucca. 

The two preceding paragraphs appear to have been interpolated in 
the margin of the MS. of St. Evroult some time after it was wn>ton. 



432 0RDEEICTJ3 TITALIS. [b.III. CH.Y. 

cliarges which were falsely alleged against him. For E/ainer, 
a monk of Chatillon, whom he had raised to be prior of St. 
Evroult, and had admitted without reserve to his most privy 
councils, as a confidential friend, had accused him of certain 
words, spoken in jest and thoughtlessly, of the duke's per- 
sonal character. Abbot Eobert, finding his sovereign to 
be violently enraged against himself and his whole kindred, 
and bent on their ruin, and having friendly intimation which 
satisfied him that the marquis's^ anger menaced him with 
bodily injury, he determined, by the advice of Hugh, bishop 
of Lisieux, to escape from the wrath which threatened him, 
before it inflicted any irreparable calamity. Accordingly, on 
the sixth of the calends of February [January 27], in the 
third year of his rule as abbot [a.d. 1061], after chanting at 
vespers the antiphon, JPeccata onea, Domine, he took his 
departure, and, mounting on horseback with two monks, Fulk 
and Urse, travelled through France, and thence proceeded 
to present himself to Pope Nicholas, and lay his case before 
him. 

Meanwhile, the duke of Normandy, by the advice of the 
venerable Ansfrid, abbot of Preaux, Lanfranc, prior of 
Bee, and other ecclesiastics, required Eainer, abbot of the 
convent of the Holy Trinity at E-ouen, to send to him 
Osbern, prior of Cormeille, who, little suspecting the duke's 
intentions, was by him invested with the dignity of abbot of 
St. Evroult in a synod at Eouen, the duke using the crozier 
of St. Maurilius, the archbishop, for the investiture. 
Thereupon, Bishop Hugh, by the duke's order, conducted 
Osbern to Preaux, and there consecrated him abbot ; and 
then taking him to St. Evroult, at the command of the 
imperious duke, set him over the sorrowing monks. This 
proceeding caused them the greatest trouble and perplexity; 
for, while their abbot was still alive, a prelate who had laid 
the foundations of the new church, had admitted many of 
them into the order, and whose expulsion had been effected, 
not by the judgment of a synod on just accusations, but by the 
tyrannical will of the imperious marquis, they were reluctant 
to receive another ruler ; but, on the other hand, they did 
not dare openly to refuse, fearing the duke's anger. At 

^ Our author is speaking of William I., duke of Normandy. See the 
note at p. 397 as to the various titles given to the dukes. 



A.D. 1061 — 10G3.] OSBEEN INTEUSIYE ABEOT. 433 

length, by the bishop's advice, they preferred to submit to 
the violent intrusion, and to tender their obedience to the 
master provided for them, rather than continue without any 
government, being in opposition to the power of God, and 
running the risk of ruining the new abbey, by drawing on 
themselves the still more violent displeasure of the duke by 
resisting his will. 

Meanwhile, Arnold d'Echaufour took signal vengeance for 
the act which disinherited him, by desolating the district of 
Lisieux, plundering and burning, and either putting to the 
sword or making prisoners the inhabitants for three years 
together.^ Coming one night to Echaufour, with only four 
men-at-arms, he secretly gained admission into the castle 
with his followers, and, raising great shouts, they so terrified 
the garrison which the duke had placed there, consisting of 
sixty men, that they deserted the fortifications which it was 
their duty to defend, and fled. Arnold forthwith set it on 
fire, causing great loss to the enemy. At another time, he 
committed the town of St. Evroult to the flames ; and his 
retainers, with drawn swords in their hands, made a diligent 
search in every corner of the monastery for Osbern, the 
new abbot, threatening him with instant death. But Provi- 
dence had so ordered it, that he was then absent. Some 
days afterwards, Herman the cellarer went privately to 
Ai'nold, and gently rebuked him for having threatened the 
ruin of an abbey which his father had founded for the repose 
of his soul. Arnold listened with reverence to the remon- 
strances of the servant of God, and, touched with the 
remembrance of his father's piety, bewailed his own ill-con- 
duct towards the abbey of St. Evroult, promising in his 
penitence a becoming amends. Accordingly, he soon after- 
wards came to St. Evroult, and, offering on the altar a token 
of his repentance for his evil deeds, sought absolution, 
putting Abbot Osbern in security for the future ; for the 
ceDerer had adroitly insinuated the truth that it M'as no 
ambition of the new abbot which had led to his elevation, 
but that he was compelled by the power of the duke, and 
instigated by his own superiors, to undertake the govern- 

* Our author has omitted to tell us in this place, from whence he made 
these hostile irruptions, but it appears afterwards that he made his head 
quarters at Courville, near Chartres. 

TOL. I. P P 



434 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH-T. 

nient of the widowed abbey, mucb against his own 
wishes. 

Meanwhile Abbot Eobert had made his way to Eome, 
where he laid before Pope Nicholas precise details of the 
circumstances which had induced him to undertake the 
journey. The pope, who was a native of France, received 
his countryman with great kindness, heard his complaints 
with interest, and promised to support him in his difficult 
position. Eobert also paid a visit to his relations in Apulia, 
where they had obtained possession of many cities and 
towns by force of arms. After havius^ a conference wath 
them, he returned to Normandy, furnished with apostolical 
letters, and accompanied by two cardinal's clerks, and boldly 
presented himself at the court of Duke William, which he 
then held at Lillebonne.^ Hearing that Abbot Eobert with 
the papal legates were arrived for the purpose of claiming 
the abbey of St. Evroult, and to take proceedings against 
Osbern, who was made abbot in his place by the duke's 
command, as an intruder on the rights of another, he was 
violently enraged, saying that " he would willingly receive 
the envoys which the pope, as the common father of Chris- 
tians, sent to him, touching the faith and the Christian 
relifjion, but that if anv monk in his territories brougrht 
charges against him, he would hang him with contempt on 
the highest tree in the neighbouring forest." Bishop Hugh, 
hearing this, communicated it to Eobert, recommending him 
to avoid the presence of the angry prince. He, therefore, 
departed in haste, retiring to the abbey of St. Denys, the 
apostle of the Gauls, in the neighbourhood of Paris, where 
he was received by his cousin Hugh, the venerable abbot, 
and was for some time honourably entertained by him, and 
others, his friends and relations, who were among the most 
powerful of the French nobility. From thence he sent a 
message, to Abbot Osbern that both should appear at 
Chartres, before the Eoman cardinals, when, the controversy 
being carefully inquired into, they should both submit them- 
selves unhesitatingly to the final judgment of ecclesiastical 
authorities, according to the decrees of the sacred canons. 

^ The dukes of Normandy had here one of their favourite and most 
frequented seats ; Julia-Bona, sedes regia a dominis Normannorum 
multum amata et frequentata, says Robert du Mont's Chronicle. 



A.D. 1061 — 1063.] ABBOT EGBERT DEPOSED. 435 

On receiving tlie summons, Osbern declared that lie would 
willingly go to the court of Eome ; but, by the advice of 
others, he did not appear at the appointed time and place. 
Whereupon Robert, by means of a servant of the abbey 
taken by Arnold, sent letters, by the pope's authority, 
excommunicating Osbern as an intruder, and positively 
requiring all the monks of the abbey of St. Evroult to sub- 
mit to him. 

It is impossible to describe the troubles with which the 
church of St. Evroult was now harassed, both within and 
without. Here was Robert, one of their founders, and 
their chief ruler, unjustly expelled from his seat, and 
compelled to become a fugitive from house to house 
in foreign lands ; while a stranger was thrust into this 
place by the secular arm, who, though a man of ability, 
and both religious and zealous for the interests of their 
order, was naturally enough suspicious and apprehen- 
sive and little disposed to put confidence in the native 
brethren. When, therefore, they heard of the excommuni- 
cation launched against the intruding abbot, and received 
the monition of father Robert commanding his sons to join 
him, with the pope's concurrence, some of them, turning 
their backs on Normandy, accompanied their abbot to the 
apostolic see. Almost all, indeed, were desirous to depart, 
but the young and the infirm, being more closely confined, 
were oblis^ed to remain against their will. Those who were 
strong enough, and who assumed greater liberty, went 
into voluntary exile with their venerable father ; whose 
names are as follows : Herbert and Hubert de Montreuil, 
and Berenger, son of Arnold, a skilful penman. These three 
monks, carefidly educated from their childhood in the Lord's 
house, and their minds stored with sound learning, were all 
their lives valuable members of a community devoted to 
Grod's service. There were also Reginald the Grreat, a 
skilful grammarian ; Thomas of Angers, of noble birth ; 
Robert Gamaliel, an excellent chanter; Turstin, Reynold 
Chevreuil, and "Walter the Little. All these abandoning 
Neustria, their native soil, after suffering various accidents 
reached Sicily, from whence some of them afterwards returned, 
while others, devoting their services to their shepherd, even 
to the end, closed their days in Calabria. 

F r 2 



43G OEDEEICTTS YITALIS. [b.ITI, CH.V. 

The lord Maiuer, who liad been appointed prior b}-" abbot 
Robert before he quitted the abbey, first betook himself to Bee 
a few days after his departure, and was the first to consult 
with Lanfranc prior of Bee, about substituting another 
abbot. He therefore implacably offended the father who 
had received his first profession. Alarmed at his denun- 
ciations, and exposed with shame to the taunts of his parti- 
sans, Mainer obtained leave from abbot Osmond to migrate 
to Cluni, where he submitted for a year to undergo with 
zeal the rigour of that rule under the venerable abbot 
Hugh. 

Amongst all these changes, the abbey of St. Evroult 
suffered great devastations, being robbed of many of the 
domains it before possessed. The neighbouring lords, who 
were kinsmen or tenants of the Giroies, seeing the right 
heirs expelled, inflicted grievous troubles and losses on the 
monks of St. Evroult. Eor each seized a farm, or a church, 
or tithes ; and the new abbot, being a stranger, was unac- 
quainted with all the grants of possessions to the monks, 
and he hesitated to inquire of those in whom he placed no 
confidence respecting, the domains which Kobert son of Heu- 
gon, and Giroie son of Fulk de Montreuil, Eoger Gulafre,^ 
and other evil-disposed neighbours, had usurped. So that 
at this period the abbey of St. Evroult lost many estates 
which to this hour it has never recovered. 

On the death of Pope Nicholas, he was succeeded by 
Alexander, to whom abbot Eobert presented himself with 
eleven monks of St. Evroult, and laid before him at length 
the wrongs of himself and his companions in exile. The 
pope comforted them with paternal kindness, and assigned 
them the church of St. Paul at Eome, where they might 
dwell and observe their rule, until they were able to 

^ A person of the family of Goulafre, GuUelmus Gidafra, figures in the 
Domesday Book among the inferior landholders in Suffolk. The Roger 
here mentioned by our author, appears to be the same person who at the 
instance of William Giroie II., gave the church of Mesnil- Bernard, after- 
"wards called La Gonlafriere, to the abbey of St. Evroult. It need not be 
wondered that the feudal lords of this period, alternately prodigal and 
rapacious, exhibited so much caprice in their dealings with the church. 
In this same paragraph we find Robert, the son of Heugon, after giving 
the patronage of his parish to the abbey of St. Evroult, become one of its 
greediest plunderers. 



A.D. 1061 — 10G3.] ABBOT ROBERT IK APULIA. 437 

find a fitting abode for themselves. Eoberfc then called 
William de Montreuil to his assistance, a call which he 
found him ready to attend to. This knight was standard- 
bearer to the pope, and had reduced Campania by force of arms 
and brought back the natives who were cut off" by various 
schisms from catholic unity to submission to St. Peter 
the apostle. He gave to his exiled cousin and his monks 
the half of an ancient city called Aquina.^ E-obert after- 
wards went to Eichard prince of Capua, son of Ansquetel 
de Quarel,' from whom he received much civility, but he did 
not carry into effect the promises he made with so much 
courtesy. Eobert, finding himself deluded by empty hopes, 
reproached him in much anger for his degeneracy from his 
father, whom he knew well, and taking leave of him, betook 
himself to Eobert Guiscard, duke of Calabria.^ The duke 
paid him great honours as his natural lord, and begged him 
to take up his abode permanently with his monks in his 
territory. Eobert Guiscard's father, Tancred de Hauteville, 
who was born in the Cotentin, had twelve sons and several 
daughters by his two lawful wives. He gave up his patri- 
monial estate to one of the sons whose name was Geoftrey, 
apprising the rest that they must gain their livelihood by 
their courage and by their talents beyond the bounds of 
their native land. All these young men migrated to Apulia, 
not together but at different times, in the guise of pilgrims 
with scrip and staff*, that they might not fall into the hands 
of the Eomans. In the course of events they all became 
dukes and counts in Apulia, Calabria, and Sicily. Geoffrey 
the monk, surnamed Malaterra, at the instance of Eobert 
count of Sicily, has lately published an excellent work on 
their noble acts, and bold enterprizes.* Of these brothers, 

^ Aquinium, a city of the Terra del Lavoro, the ancient Samnium, 
famous as the birth-place of Juvenal, Pescennius Niger, and St, Thomas 
D'Aquinas. 

'"* See before, p. 427. 

' Robert Guiscard had his title of count of Apulia, which he received 
from his companions in arms the preceding year, confirmed by Tope 
Nicholas I J. in lOGO. 

* He was a native of Normandy and a monk of the convent of St, 
Euphemia, and wrote a history of the conquest of Calabria, Apulia, and 
Sicily by the Normans, concluding with the beginning of July, 1098. 
The best edition is to be found in Muratori's Collection of the Hislorians 
oj Italy i torn. v. 



438 ORDERICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.Y. 

E/obert Guiscard obtaiDed the highest rank, and was the 
most powerful, having, after the death of his brothers Drogo 
and Humfrey ^ long possessed the principality of Apulia, and 
conquered the dukedom of Calabria from the Lombards and 
Grreeks, who struggled hard to defend their ancient rights 
and independence, trusting in their great cities and towns, 
but were at last reduced to submission by the event of arms. 
Crossing the Ionian sea with a small but brave band of 
Normans joined by Cisalpine troops, Eobert Guiscard in- 
vaded Macedonia, twice gave battle to Alexius, emperor of 
Constantinople, and put to flight his immense army, defeat- 
ing him both by sea and land." 

This lord, as I have mentioned before, received with 
honour abbot Robert and his monks, assigning to him the 
church of St. Euphemia, which stands on the shore of the 
Adriatic Sea, where the ruins of an ancient city called 
Brescia,^ and commanding him to build a monastery there 
in honour of St. Mary, mother of God. The duke, as well as 
other Normans, made large grants to this abbey, commend- 
ing themselves to the prayers of the faithful who were 
already collected or should be thereafter gathered there for 
the service of Christ. In this abbey was buried Predesend, 
wife of Tancred de Hauteville ; on whose behalf her son 
Guiscard endowed the church of St. Euphemia with a large 
farm. The same prince committed to father Robert the 

1 Our author omits to mention William Bras-de-fer, the eldest brother, 
who was the first count of Apulia (1043 — 1046). 

' The expedition of Robert Guiscard into Macedonia was undertaken in 
the years 1081 — 1082. 

' St. Euphemia does not stand on the coast of the Adriatic, but on the 
Mediterranean, to the west of Nicastro, near the confines of the two Cala- 
brias. The town which gives name to the neighbouring gulf was not built 
on the site of a place called Brixia, but on that of Lampetia. Our author 
must have confounded it with a village of the same name situate in the 
environs of Brescia, and consequently at the other extremity of Italy. 
The abbey of St. Euphemia, which was founded long before the arrival of 
the Normans, had been plundered and reduced to ruins, with all the 
neighbouring country, by the Arabs of Sicily, who so often carried fire and 
sword through this part of the coast of Calabria in the latter part of the 
ninth and the beginning of the tenth centuries. Restored by the Norman 
princes, it flourished for a long period. Richard, one of the abbots, was 
witness to a charter of Bonhomme, archbishop of Cosenza, in 11 99 ; and a 
monk named Peter was transferred from it to the bishopric of Strongoli in 
1234. 



A.T). 1061 — 10G3.] NORMAIf MONKS IN ITALY. 439 

abbey of the Holy Trinity in the city of Yenosa.^ Bobert 
selected Berenger, a monk of St. Evroult, son of Arnold, 
who was son of Heugon, whom he presented to Pope Alex- 
ander to be admitted to the government of the abbey of 
Venosa. Receiving the papal benediction, he administered 
it with distinction during the period that Alexander, 
Gregory, and Desiderius, filled the apostolical see, but in 
the time of Pope Urban he was advanced to the bishopric of 
that city, having been elected by the people. Born of a 
noble family, Berenger obeyed the monastic rule from his 
childhood under abbot Theodoric at St. Evroult, and dis- 
played superior talent in reading and chanting, as well as in 
the art of copying books. Having in the end, as already 
related, followed his abbot into banishment, and been chosen 
by him to undertake the pastoral charge of the abbey 
at Venosa, he found there only a small company of 
twenty monks, very much occupied with worldly vanities, 
and very slothful in Grod's service ; but by Grod's grace he 
raised the number of the community to one hundred, and 
inspired them with so much zeal for religion, that several of 
them were made bishops and abbots, and filled these high 
dignities of our holy mother church to the honour of the 
true King and the salvation of souls. Moreover, this great 
duke committed also a third monastery, built in the city of 
Melito' in honour of St. Michael the archangel, to abbot 
Eobert, which he presented to William of Ingran, who was 
born and became a clerk at St. Evroult, but whose profession 
of a monk was made at St. Euphemia. These three Italian 
monasteries therefore follow the usage of the chant at St, 
Evroult, and observe the same monastic rule, so far as the 
habits of that country and the inclinations of the inmates 
allow. 

Two uterine sisters of Abbot Robert, Judith and Anna, 
remained at Ouche in the chapel of St. Evroult, and having 
taken the veil apparently renounced the world, and were 
devoted to God only, in purity of body and soul. These 
nuns, hearing that their brother Robert flourished under the 
protection of the temporal power in Italy, and finding 
themselves of small account and without support in 

' Venoga is an episcopal city of the Basilicata. 
^ An episcopal city in the Lower Calabria. 



440 OEDERTCUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.YT. 

Normandy, they went into Italy and relinquisliing the veil 
gave themselves up with ardour to a worldly life, and both of 
them married husbands who were unconscious of their 
having taken the vows. Eoger, count of Sicily, married 
Judith, and another count, whose name I cannot recollect, 
married Emma. Thus, from love of the world, both quitted 
the veil the emblem of a religious life, and thus rendering 
void their first faith, neither were blessed with children, and 
for a short interval of temporal felicity they incurred the 
displeasure of their heavenly Spouse. 

After the departure of Abbot Eobert, his uncle Eobert 
Mala-Corona, perceiving the bitter persecution which was 
raging against his relations, and that strangers were ad- 
vanced to power in the abbey of St. Evroult which he and his 
brothers had founded for the service of Grod, withdrew from 
the chapel of St. Evroult, where, as already mentioned, he 
had taken up his abode, and retired to Marmoutier in which 
convent he had first made his monastic profession, and where 
he soon afterwards made a glorious end on the fourteenth 
of the calends of February [19th January], having lived 
seven years under the conventual rule. 

Ch. VI. William /., diilee of Normandy, augments his power 
— His marriac/e with Matilda — Their children — He recalls 
the exiled barons. 

At this time, Geoffrey Martel, count of Anjou, afler a 
succession of brilliant exploits and much worldly prosperity, 
departed this life,^ leaving his honours to his nephew 
Geoflrey, son of Aubrey count of Gaston, as he had no 
children of his own. Geoffrey however was after some time 
treacherously made prisoner by his brother Eulk, surnamed 
Eichin, who usurped his earldom and kept him captive in the 
castle of Chinon for thirty years.^ 

In these times William, duke of Normandy, vastly aug- 

^ He died at the abbev of St. Nicholas, in Angers, the 1 4th of November, 
lOGO. 

2 Geoffrey and Fulk were not the sons of Aubrey, count of Gaston, but 
of Geoftrey, count of Chutoulandon. Geoffrey Martel divided his terri-' 
tories between them, instead of leaving the whole to the elder, as cur 
author states. It was on the 4th of April, 1067, that Geoffrey was made 
prisoner by his brother, and confined at Chinon for the rest of his life. 



A.D. 1060 — 10G3.] TUE KORMAK EXILES RECALLED. 441 

mented his influence and power, surpassing all the neigh- 
bouring sovereigns in liberality and magnificence. He 
married the illustrious princess Matilda, daughter of 
Baldwin [V.] earl of Elanders, and niece of Henry, king of 
Trance, by his sister.^ Erom this marriage, by God's favour, 
he had the following sons and daughters ; Eobert and 
Eichard, William and Henry, Adeliza and Constance, 
Cicely and Adele.^ There is no lack of materials from which 
well-informed historians might compose copious narratives, 
if they would apply themselves diligently to hand down to pos- 
terity the eventful lives of these illustrious personages. For 
ourselves, living in monastic seclusion, intent on the rules of 
our order, and not being versed in the aftairs of courts, we 
will return to the thread of our history, shortly noticing 
what fiills within our own province. 

AYhen war broke out between the Normans and their 
neighbours in Brittany and Maine, Duke A¥illiam, by the 
advice of his counsellors, determined on restoring concord 
among his own barons, and recalling the exiles.^ Moved 
therefore by the entreaties of Simon de Montfort, and 
Waleran de Breteuil in the Beauvais, and other powerful 
friends and neighbours, he recalled Bodolph de Toni and 
Hugh de Grant-mesnil, great nobles who had been disinhe- 
rited and forced into exile with their followers as before 
related, and who were now restored to their hereditary 
estates. Arnold also, after levying war for three years, 
accepted a truce from the duke, and paid a visit to his friends 
and relations who had great possessions in Apulia, from 
whence he soon afterwards returned with a large sum 
of money and a rich mantle for the duke. 

Ch. yil. Oshern, the intrusive allot of St. Evroult, appeals 
to Pop>e Alexander II. — His letter — lie is confirmed 
— Management of his convent — Musical services. 

The storm of troubles with which the abbey of St. Evroult 
was beset being somewhat abated, Osbern, the intrusive 

^ Adelaide of France, the daughter of King Robert. 

^ Our author omits to mention Agatha, the eldest daughter, whose 
history is so affecting, and who was successively affianced to Harold and to 
Alphonso, king of Leon. 

^ The exiles were recalled in 1063. 



442 CRDERICTTS VITALIS. '[b.TII. CH.VII. 

abbot who was tortured by great perplexities, and eonsience- 
smitten bj the apostolic excommunication launched against 
him, took the course, with the advice and consent of the 
brethren, of recalling from Cluni the lord Mainer who was 
appointed prior of St. Evroult by Abbot Eobert, and restor- 
ing him to that office, from which Eulcher was now deposed. 
This Osbern, son of Herfast, a native of the district of Caux, 
was well instructed in literature from his very youth ; he 
was eloquent in speech, and had a lively genius for the 
arts, such as sculpture, architecture, copyino^ manuscripts, 
and many things of that sort. He was of middle stature, in 
the prime of years, his head covered with a profusion of 
black and grey hair. Severe towards the silly and the super- 
cilious, he was benevolent to the infirm and the indigent, 
and tolerably liberal to humble individuals and foreigners, 
being at the same time zealous for his order, and a diligent 
purveyor of all the brethren needed, both in their spiritual 
and temporal capacity. To the novices he was a strict 
disciplinarian, urging them, both with chidings and stripes, 
to progress in reading, singing, and writing. He made with 
his own hands writing implements for the youths and the 
uninstructed, preparing for them tablets overspread with 
wax, and required daily from each the portion of work 
assigned to them. An enemy to idleness, he had the art of 
impressing on the youthful mind profitable pursuits, and 
thus prepared for implanting the riches of science in future 
years. Osbern was at first a canon of Lisieux, at the time 
the lord Herbert was bishop ;^ but being afterwards desirous 
of submitting himself to a stricter rule, he threw off the 
secular habit ; and, to amend his life according to God's 
will, secluded himself in the new monastery which Groscelin 
d'Arques had founded on the mount of the Holy Trinity at 
E-ouen, where Abbot Isembert, a man of singular piety in 
our age, then flourished. Abbot Eainier, Isembert' s succes- 
sor, sent Osbern, after passing his probation in the order, to 
establish the monastic rule at Cormeilles, where William 
Fitz-Osbern, steward of Normandy, was founding an abbey 
in honour of St. Mary, mother of God. When, however, 
Abbot Eobert was deprived of his office, in the manner 
already described, Osbern was unwittingly and unwillingly 
1 Herbert, bishop of Lisieux, 1022—1049. ^ 



A.D. 10G3.] MUSICAL SEETICES AT THE ABBEY. 443 

preferred to the government of the abbey of St. Evreux, 
which he administered with diligence and success, so far as 
the troubles of those unhappy times permitted, for five years 
and three months. 

By leave of his abbot Eainier, he had brought with him 
to St. Evroult a very learned and religious monk whose 
name was Witmund, and made use of his counsels and 
suggestions as long as he lived. This monk was an 
accomplished musician as well as grammarian, of which he 
has left us evidence in the antiphons and responses which 
he composed, consisting of some charming melodies in the 
antiphonary and collection of versicles. He completed the 
history of the life of St. Evroult by adding nine antiphons 
and three responses. He composed four antiphons to the 
psalms at vespers, and added the three last for the second 
nocturn, with the fourth, eighth, and twelfth response, and 
an antiphon at the canticles, and produced a most beautiful 
antiphon for the canticle at the gospel in the second vespers. 
The history of the life of St. Evroult had been already written 
by Arnulph, precentor of Chartres,^ a pupil of Eulbert, bishop 
of that see, at the request of Abbot Eobert, for the use of 
his monks ; and it was first recited by two young monks, 
Hubert and Eodolph, sent for that purpose by the abbot of 
Ohartres. Afterwards, Eeginald the Bald composed the 
response, " To the glory of God," sung at vespers, with seven 
antiphons which still appear in the service books of the 
monks of St. Evroult. Eoger de Sap, also, and other 
studious brethren produced, with pious devotion, several 
hymns having the same holy father for their subject, and 
which they placed in the library of the abbey for the use of 
their successors. 

Abbot Osbern, still tortured with anxiety in consequence 
of the apostolical anathema under which he was compelled to 
live, determined, on prudent advice, to send an envoy to Eome, 
by whom he would humbly implore the papal benediction. 

1 Tlii? life of St. Evroult, the founder of the abbey of Ouche which 
afterwards bore his name, was written about the end of the seventh century, 
although Vo>siu3 thoiiglit it to be of the sixth, and Baillet of the eighth. 
Ordericus Vitalis has inserted it in the sixth book of his history, and 
Mabillon has published it entire, with notes and additions, in his Recueilf 
torn. i. pp. 354 — 361. 



444 OEDEEICTJS TITALIS. [b.III. CH.YII. 

He therefore instructed Witmund, a monk of great sagacity, 
to indite a suppliant epistle, which a young monk whose 
name was Bernard, with the addition of Mather, an excel- 
lent penman, was carefully to commit to writing. The 
following is the text of this epistle : 

" To our apostolical lord, Alexander,^ vicar of St. Peter, 
the common and most excellent father of mankind — his 
humble servant at a far distance, Osbern, abbot of St. 
Evroult in Normandy, sends health, devoted submission, 
and liis most earnest supplication. 

" Since, holy father, it belongs to your office, in prefer- 
ence to and above all other bishops of the church, to extend 
your care over the whole of Christendom, to seek zealously 
to gain souls, and by your authority to restore concord 
where dissensions have arisen, an obscure abbot as I am, 
but still clinging to the shelter of your bosom, I lift my 
voice to you with intense earnestness of mind, imploring 
your indulgence, and beseeching you to deign to interpose 
your righteous authority to deliver me from what I suffer 
from certain distractions in the order to which I belong:. 
The case is this. The abbey of St. Evroult, which I now 
possess, was formerly held by a cousin of your faithful 
servant, William of Normandy, the lord abbot Eobert, who 
for some cause of offence, vacated his office and departed. 
Upon this the sovereign prince of that country and the 
bishops of the church made me abbot in his place, and, as 
they then alleged and still allege, to remove my own doubts 
and fears, they duly and according to Grod's will conse- 
crated me to the vacant dignity. I know not whether they 
are right ; but this I assuredly know, from my own con- 
science, that I obtained the style and office of abbot neither 
by importunity, nor by bribery, nor by favour, nor by 
obsequiousness, or any other crafty device, but that as 
far as I am concerned I took it upon me solely in obedience 
to the commands of my superiors, and that in so doing no 
charge was brought against me. Abbot Eobert has become 
the superior of a convent in Calabria, at a great distance 
from our country, and there his wrath and hatred are still 
inflamed against me ; and he continues to slander and 
threaten me, asserting that I have usurped his office con- 
^ Pope Alexander II., November 30, 1061— April 21, 1070, 



A.D. 1063.] OSBERN's LETTEE to ALEXANDER II. 445 

trary to the laws of Grod. This schism is both full of 
danger to the souls of those who are placed under my 
charge, and places me in great perplexity between the two 
parties. For, on the one hand, I do not presume to dis- 
obey the bishops of my own province, who assert that I am 
regularly appointed, and enjoin me to hold my place ; while, 
on the other hand, I dread the wrath and hatred of my 
accusing brother, especially as we are both priests and 
monks. As indeed the voice of an apostle thunders in our 
ears : ' He that hateth his brother is a murderer ; ' ^ who can 
sufficiently express the greatness of the crime of a priest 
and a monk who hates his brother ? And who does not 
know that if in this state of mind he presumes to offer the 
sacrifice of the altar, he perils his soul ? 

" Therefore, most apostolical lord, the venerable father of 
all Christendom, prostrate on the earth at the feet of your 
merciful benignity, I earnestly supplicate with tears and 
groans that you who occupy the place of St. Peter in vigi- 
lantly feeding the Lord's flock, and guarding them from the 
crafty devices of wolves, would be pleased in your zeal for 
Grod to abate by a righteous judgment this fierce contro- 
versy between me and the brother of whom I speak, and 
altogether remove the present perplexity from my mind. 
Accordingly, my prayer is, that by virtue of your authority 
you cause to appear both myself and those who took part in 
my consecration, together with Abbot E-obert, my accuser, 
before fit and lawful judges, who shall impartially try the 
cause ; so that, if it be found that I was rightly instituted to 
the office of abbot, I may continue to hold it ; if improperly, 
I may surrender it. Graciously yielding to this my prayer, 
you will fulfil your office in a praiseworthy manner, and 
will conduct brothers into the way of peace. For whether 
it happens that I have to remain or to depart, my brother's 
anger will be set at rest by the decision of the judge, and 1 
shall be freed from perplexity, and shall serve Grod in peace 
and security. bishop of the bishops of the church, and 
father of fathers, the appointed refuge for all who are in 
tribulation, I beseech you by the holy power of binding and 
loosing which is vested in you over all mankind, listen to 
these my words of sincerity, and as far as I ask what is 

* 1 John iii. 15. 



446 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.III. CH.TIT. 

right, grant what I ask. And that you may believe I speak 
the truth, I call the omniscient God as witness, who knows 
that in my conscience, the language of my mouth is that of 
my heart. In conclusion, most pious lord, I especially 
request in all humility that you will be pleased, of your 
paternal kindness, to reply by letter under your seal by the 
envoy I send, so that 1 may learn the success of my peti- 
tion, and what course you will take in the matter, and when 
and where ; and having obtained some certainty, my per- 
plexities may be at an end, and I may rejoice that I have 
raised my voice to a most merciful comforter. Farewell ! 
Glorious father, most excellent ruler, and supreme head of 
the church on earth ; farewell ! watch over the Lord's fold ; 
which may you so do that you may meet the last judgment 
in security. Amen." 

This letter was carried to Eome by William, priest of St. 
Andrew, at Echaufour, and presented to Pope Alexander. 
The venerable pontiff read it in the presence of the Boman 
conclave,^ and having carefully examined the matter ab- 
solved Osbern at the request of abbot Eobert who was 
there present, sending back the bearer of the letter re- 
joicing to his own country with the papal benediction. As 
for Eobert, he now despaired of ever returning to Nor- 
mandy on account of the wrath of duke AVilliam, and being 
honourably detained in Calabria, as already mentioned by 
Guiscard and the other Normans who had usurped foreign 
domains, his former indignation against Osbern was allayed, 
and he now kindly interceded with the pope for the man 
he had before cruelly attacked by his subtle accusations. 
William the priest, having accomplished his mission, re- 
turned in safety to those who had sent him, and rejoiced 
the hearts of the monks of St. Evroult by relating what he 
had seen and heard at Eome. 

Osbern, now secure in his office, laudably occupied him- 
self both in the interior and exterior duties which devolved 
upon him. He only admitted four novices to profession, 
on account of the persecution to which he had been subject, 
but he diligently and profitably instructed in the sacred 
arts those whom he found admitted by his predecessors. 
He instituted a yearly anniversary on the sixth of the 

^ Ordericus calls the assembly of the cardinals, Romanus senaliis. 



A.D. 1063.] AEBOT osbeen's administeatiok. 447 

calends of July [2Gtli] June, for the fathers and mothers, 
and brothers and sisters, of all the monks of St. Evroult. 
The names of all the brethren are registered on a long roll 
when, called by God, they first make their profession. To 
these were added, underneath, those of their fathers and 
mothers, and brothers and sisters. This roll was kept near 
the altar throughout the year, and an especial commemora- 
tion is made before God of the persons inscribed, when the 
priest says in celebrating the mass: Jnimas famulorum, 
famidarum tuarum, &c., "Vouchsafe to join to the society 
of thine elect the souls of thy servants, both men and women, 
whose names are v.ritten in the roll presented before thy 
holy altar." The anniversary on the sixth of the calends of 
July, of which we are now speaking, is thus conducted. All 
the bells are rung for some time, both night and morning, 
for the ofiice of tlie dead. The roll of the deceased is spread 
open on the altar, and prayers are faithfully offered to God, 
first for the dead, and afterwards for living relations and 
benefactors, and all the faithful in Christ. The morning 
mass is solemnly sung by the abbot himself, assisted by all 
the clergy in their sacred vestments. The almoner as- 
sembles in the convent on that day as many indigent 
persons as there are monks, and the cellarer provides each 
with a sufficiency of meat and drink in the strangers' apart- 
ment, and after the chapter the whole community devotes 
itself to the service of the poor as in the Lord's supper. 
This institution of Abbot Osbern is still carefully main- 
tained in the abbey of St. Evroult, and it is likewise 
zealously observed by the monks of Noyon^ and Bocher- 
ville,~ and others which follow its rules. 

The man of God so often named had a particular regard, 
as I have said before, for the sick and the poor, supplying 
their wants liberally with all things necessary. He there- 
fore ordered that seven lepers should, for the love of God, 
have a yearly maintenance irom the abbey, and that the 
portions of seven monks should be daily distributed among 
them by the cellarer in meat and drink. This custom was 

^ Noyon-sur-Audelle, now Charleval, which was a priory under the rule 
of St. Evroult. 

2 St. George de Bocherville, an abbey two leagues from Rouen, which 
was affiliated to St. Evroult. 



448 ORDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.III. CH.TIII. 

observed by abbot Osbern and his successor Mainer, as 
long as they lived ; but when Serlo succeeded, as men's 
minds change, the institution was altered, and in the time 
of abbot Boger the number of the sick, in the name of the 
Lord, was reduced to three. 

Ch. YITI. Dulce William'' s invasion of Maine, under cover 
of ])rotecting the interests of the young Coimt Herhert — 
I)eath of his aunt 13ertha and her hiishand hi) 'poison, and 
of his sister Margaret, the young heiress. 

In the year of our Lord 1064-, on the death of Herbert the 
younger, count of Maine, duke William crossed the Sarthe 
with a strong army, and received with clemency many of the 
people of Maine, who submitted to him, remaining under 
his dominion for the rest of his life, that is, for twenty-four 
years. The young count, after the death of his father 
Herbert the elder ^ (wlio was commonly called Herbert 
"Watch-dog, on account of the destructive inroads which his 
neighbours of Anjou continually made on liis territories), 
by his mother Bertha's advice, placed himself and his 
estates under the protection of the powerful duke of Nor- 
mandy," affiancing his sister Margaret to the duke's son 
B-obert, with the reversion of his earldom of Maine, if he 
himself should die without children. But Walter, count of 
Pontoise, son of Count Drogo, who had undertaken tlie 
journey to Jerusalem in company Avith Eobert the elder, 
duke of Normandy, and died during his pilgrimage, had mar- 
ried Biota, daughter [sister] of Plugh, Count de Maine, who 
was the aunt of the young Count Herbert. In right of her 
he laid claim to the whole earldom, and had possession of 
part of it ; for Geoffrey de-Mayenne and Hubert de Sainte- 
Susanne, and other powerful adherents of AValter, held the 
city, which is the capital of the province, fearing to submit 
to the yoke of the Normans, which is always grievous to 
those who are subjected to it. While therefore the brave 
duke attacked the rebels with vigour, inflicting and suffer- 
ing losses, according to the lot of war. Count Walter and 
Biota his wife perished together, as the report is, by poison, 

^ Herbert T. was count du Maine from 1051 to 1062. 
^ Herbert II. was son of Hugh and grandson of Herbert I., counts of 
Maine. Duke William's invasion took place, not in 1064, but in 1063. 



A.D. 10G3.] INVASION or maine. 449 

treacherously administered by the contrivance of their ene- 
mies.^ On their death, the duke, now assured of success, 
attacked the rebels in great force, and recovered the city of 
Mans in triumph by the voluntary surrender of the in- 
habitants, the lord Arnold, the bishop, going out to meet 
him in great pomp, with a procession of clergy and monks 
carrying banners and crosses. 

Meanwhile, Geoffrey de Mayenne, envying the duke's 
success, sought all the means in his power to injure him, by 
encouraging his enemies, and contriving various ways of 
inflicting evil. The duke bore his insolence for a while, that 
he miglit have an opportunity of punishing him without 
injury to others. But, as he persisted in his obstinacy, the 
duke put in motion a large force, and took his town of 
Ambriercs, burning also Mayenne after a long siege. By 
reducing these two fortresses, he humbled the pride of 
Geoffrey, and thus compelled the most formidable of the 
nobles of Maine to do him homage, although he had 
persuaded other malcontents to join him in his resistance. 
On his submission, almost all his accomplices and the sup- 
porters of his rebellion were struck with consternation, and 
compelled to fear and obey AVilliam, a prince who was evi- 
dently protected by divine Providence. The duke entrusted 
the beautiful Margaret to the care of Stigand, the powerful 
baron of Mesidon, to be brought up in his family, but before 
she became marriageable, she was snatched away from the 
vanities of the world, and, dying happily, rests in peace, 
being buried at Tecamp, in the noble and flourishing monas- 
tery founded in honour of the holy and undivided Trinity. 

At that time Eobert de Gace, son of Eodolph, son of 
Eobert the archbishop, died childless, whereupon Duke Wil- 
liam, his cousin, united his whole inheritance to his own 
domains. He also gave the lands of Eobert de Yitot, Mho 
was banished for assassinating Count Gislebert [de Brionne], 
to Geoffrey Mancel, brother of the viscount Hubert ; from 

1 This tragedy was performed at Falaise, where Duke William had 
carried Walter and his wife prisoners, a circumstance which, notwithstand- 
ing the reserve of Ordericus, sufficiently hidicates by whose command the 
poison was administered. The duke's contemporaries, especially those who 
were opposed to him, spoke more plainly, and often told him the horror so 
foul a crime inspired, as we shall hnd in the sequel of this history. 
VOL. I. G G 



450 ORDEEicus viTALis. [b.iii. cn.ix. 

whom tlie lord Osbern, abbot of St. Evreux, bought the 
vill called Douet-Artus, with Tronquet and Mesnil-Joscelin. j 
Duke "William granted and confirmed it by a charter in pre- | 
sence of the barons of Normandy, William Fitz-Osbern, | 
E-ichard d'A\Tanches, son of Turstin, Eoger de Montgomery, i 
and many others mentioned in the charter. 

However, Eobert de Yitot, after some time reconciled 
himself with the duke, and, being restored to his lordship, 
laid claim to the land just mentioned against the abbey of 
St. Evroult, but not long afterwards the war with England, 
i]i which he was wounded in the cheek, being ended, he fell 
sick of a mortal disease. Finding his end approachiug, he 
freely gave all the land which he claimed to the faithful 
servants of God for the repose of his soul. This gift to 
St. Evroult was made at Dover, before Odo, bisliop of 
Baieux, Hugh de Grant-mesnil, Hugh de Montfort, and 
Hugh, son of Eulcold, and many other persons of high and 
low condition. 

This knight had forty nephews, all proud of theii' rank of ' 
knighthood, and engaged in such fierce contests with each 
other, that his inheritance has scarcely ever been suffered to 
rest undisturbed to the present day: for Matthiel and 
Eichard, his brother, Nigel, and Eualod the Breton, Nigel's 
son-in-law, succeeded at different times, and by their evil 
devices wroujrht much mischief. Everv one of these claimed 
the lands before named from the abbey of St. Evroult, but 
the judgment of God who is everywhere the mighty pro- 
tector of his church, compelled them to desist from their 
unjust attacks. It was Matthiel who, with great menaces, 
made the attempt to rob the church of her possessions 
during tlie reign of the great duke William ; and Eichard 
and other claimants during those of his brothers William 
Eufus and Henry ; but the Kmg of kings, helping his 
servants, they were unable to accompliiih their wicked 
designs. " | 

Ch. IX. Arnold d^ Eclioiifoiir 'poisoned — Fortunes of the 
great family of Giroie in Normandy and Ajndia after his 
death. 

Aejtold D'EcnoTJFOUR, son of William Giroie, returning 
successful from Apulia, presented himself at the court of 



ABOUT 10G3.] AENOLD d'echoufour poiso^^ed. 451 

Duke "William, and, oifering him a magnificent mantle, 
humbly entreated that his inheritance might be ret^tored. 
The duke, taking into consideration the high birth and dis- 
tinguished valour of this nobleman, and his own great want 
of brave soldiers for his wars with the people of Maine, the 
Bretons, and his other enemies, took a more lenient view of 
his oifences, and, making a truce with him, promised to 
restore his patrimony ; meanwhile giving him free liberty of 
passing and repassing through his territories for a limited 
time. The duke's empty promises caused Arnold great 
satisfaction, but without just reason, as we shall presently 
see. For Mabel, the daughter of Talvac, poisoned the 
refreshments which she ordered to be set before him as he 
was returning from the court of the duke to Trance ; but a 
friend of Arnold's gave him notice of the treachery 
intended. "While, therefore, he was conferring with some of 
his friends at Echo uf our, and was earnestly invited by 
Mabel's attendants to partake of the entertainment, he would 
on no account consent, remembering the friendly warning, 
and utterly refusing all meat and drink which he suspected 
to be poisoned. But Gislebert, the brother of Eoger de 
Montgomery, who had conducted him there, and was quite 
unconscious of the treacherous design, took a cup, without 
dismounting from his horse, and, drinking the poisoned 
■wine, died in consequence on the third day afterwards at 
Bemalord : so that this perfidious woman, attempting to 
destroy her husband's rival, caused the death of his only 
brother, who was in the flower of his youth, and much dis- 
tinguished for his chivalrous gallantry. Not long afterwards, 
lamenting the failure of her first attempt, she made another 
not less deadly efli'ort to accomplish the object of her desires. 
By means of prayers and promises she worked on Gulafre,^ 
Arnold's chamberlain, till she had bent the false retainer to 
her nefarious wishes. She then prepared the poisoned drink, 
which the chamberlain presented to his master, and to Gi- 
roie de Courville," and William, surnamed Gouet de Mont- 
mirail. Thus the three nobles imbibed the venom of the 
poison at Courville, at one and the same time ; but Giroie 
and AYiliiam, who were carried to their own homes, where 

1 This \vorthv has been mentioned before, p. 436. 

2 Courville, near Chaitres. 

G G 2 



452 OEDEEicrs titalts. [b.iii. cn.ix- 

they could command all necessary care, by the mercy of Grod 
aiding the skill of the physician, recovered, while Arnold, 
who, as a banished man, had no means of securing proper 
attentions in the house of a stranger, languished for some 
days, and at length, the disorder increasing, breathed his 
last on the calends [1st] of January. The day before he 
died, being alone in his chamber in bed, he saw clearly, and 
not in a dream, an old man of a noble presence, whom he 
took for St. IS'icholas, who addressed him to this effect : 
" Brother, trouble yourself not about your bodily health, for 
it is certain that you will die to-morrow, but direct your 
utmost efforts towards saving your soul, at the scrutiny of 
the just and eternal Judge." With these words the old 
man suddenly vanished, whereupon the sufferer sent imme- 
diately to St. Evroult to request that some of the brethren 
of the abbey would visit him. Without delay they sent 
Fulk do Gruernauville to Courville. It was there that the 
knight of whom we are speaking spent three years during 
his exile, with Giroie, the lord of that town, who was his 
kinsman and friend, and from thence, with the aid of the 
people of Corbon, Dreux, and Mortagne, and all others he 
could summon to his assistance, he carried on a desperate 
warfare to revenge his banishment. The sick man rejoiced 
greatly at Fulk's speedy arrival, and, making known to him 
the vision which he had seen the day before, he renounced 
the world, and professed himself a monk with a tender 
devotion of soul. Then, lamenting his sins, he died the 
same dav, and his body was carried to St. Evroult, and there 
honourably interred by the lord abbot Osbern and the whole 
community in the monks' cloister. 

On the death of Arnold, the noble family of Giroie fell 
entirely to decay, and, to this day, no one of their posterity 
has been able to recover the rank of his ancestors. Arnold 
had married Emma, daughter of Turstin, surnamed Halduc, 
by whom he had William and E^eginald, Petronilla and Geva, 
and other sons and daughters. Thus, losing their father in 
their tender years, when he was in the flower of his youth, 
and being settled in the houses of strangers, as we have 
already noticed, they were exposed from infancy to poverty, 
and all sorts of mortifications. Their mother found a refuge 
with her brother Odo, steward of the duke of JS'ormandy, 



AFTER 1063.] FAMILY OF GIEOIE. 453 

who dwelt in the Cotentin, and was distinguished for his 
wealth and power among the Norman nobles. She lived 
with him and her other friends almost thirty years in 
honoured wido\Yhood, being greatly respected for her 
chastity, gentleness, and other good qualities ; and towards 
the close of her life, renounced the world, and took the veil 
with much devotion at the hands of the lord Eobert, abbot 
of the Holy Trinity, at Lessai.^ 

AVilliam d'Echaufour, the eldest of Arnold's sons, had 
scarcely arrived at tlie age of puberty when he repaired to 
the court of Philip, king of France, Avho appointed him his 
squire, and afterwards knighted him for his good service. 
He afterwards went into Apulia, where he had kinsmen of 
high rank, and, being kindly entertained, advanced himself 
greatly by his gallant actions. He took to wife a noble lady 
of a Lombard family, and obtained possession of thirty 
castles under E^obert, count of Loritello, Gruiscard's nephew." 
The marriage was fruitful, and he had many children of both 
sexes, and, forgetting Normandy, lived almost forty years 
among the Lombards in great honour. 

E-eginald, the youngest son of Arnold, had been entrusted 
by his father, three months before his death, to Abbot 
Osbern, and was carefully educated at St. Evroult nnder the 
regular discipline of the abbey, receiving from the abbot the 
surname of Benedict, on account of his sweetness of 
disposition. His father, on offering liim to God as a monk, 
had granted a plough-land at St. Germain's, in the parish of 
Echaufour, to the abbey of St. Evroult, which it long since 
lost, in the troubles to which Arnold and his heirs were 
exposed, as already related. The youth was only five years 
old when he submitted to the monastic yoke, which he has 
steadfastly borne for fifty-two years,"'' under four successive 
abbots, both in prosperity and adversity. He fully learned 
the arts of reading and singing, which he taught to others 
without any mistakes, when he arrived himself at mature 
years. His vigorous memory enabled him to relate with 

^ Roger, from whose hands Emma received the veil, was a monk of Bee, 
and first abbot of Lissai in the diocese of Coutances, 1056 — 1094. 

■•^ Robert de Loritello, son of Geoffrey, Robert Guiscard's brother, and 
count of the Capitanata. Loritello, now called Rotello, is a royal domain,, 
near Lucera. ^ This was written in 1115 or 1116. 



454 OEDEETCUS TITALIS. [b.III. CH.IX. 

great fulness whatever he had seen or heard, and his 

companions were frequently charmed with his recitals from 

the sacred scriptures, and the statements of the learned. It 

was his study to gain the affections of the gentle, and modest, 

and teachable among the neophytes, by his affability and 

condescension; but he stoutly contradicted the conceited, 

and pretenders, and inventors of novelties. Twice he 

undertook journeys, by pennission of Abbot Eoger, and for 

the behests of the abbey of St. Evroult, as far as Apulia, and 

in that foreign land found his brother William, and many 

other relations possessed of great wealth. He remained 

nearly three years in Calabria, with AYilliam, abbot of St. 

Euphemia,^ son of Humfrey de Tilleul, and on his return 

brought back a cope of purple and white, the gift of Abbot 

Humfrey, who was his cousin, to the church of St. Evroult. 

Erom his infancy, Eeginald observed the monastic rules with 

praiseworthy regularity, and zealously assisted at the offices 

of divine worship, both in the day and the night. I have 

often remarked him performing the chant with such 

indefatigable zeal that scarcely a single versicle was sung in 

the choir by others, in which he did not take a part. But as 

it is written : " Many are the sorrows of the righteous,"^ he 

suftered much tribulation, both from within and without. 

Eor, being firm and severe to the froward, and disdaining to 

flatter the hypocritical, he was frequently subject to their 

attacks of various kinds. The eye of God seeth all things, 

and condemns with discriminating judgment even those 

which to men appear laudable, and he has afflicted our 

brother Eeginald with infirmity of body from his infancy, 

and that the just may be further justified, continues to 

this time, to increase the weakness of his limbs. AVhile he 

was yet a boy, as he never spared himself, and seemed 

stronger for every kind of labour than the rest of the 

brotherhood, he ruptured himself while carrying earth, and, 

not allowing himself any rest, the hernia became incurable. 

In short, he has now for seven years suffered such extreme 

torture, that he is neither able to raise his hand to his 

mouth, nor to do any office for himself without assistance. 

Almighty Grod, who healest those who are broken in heart, 

have mercy upon him ! Purge him from all stain of sin, 

^ See before, b. iii. c. 5. ^ Psalm vii. 20. 



A.D. 1061 — 1066.] nrcn aRAXT-MEsxiL. 455 

deliver him from the irksome prison of the flesh, and admit 
liim into the company of thj servants in rest eternal ! 

The two daugliters of Arnold, on the death of their father, 
mid their conseqnent destitution, chose rather to render 
themselves acceptable to God by their modest conversation, 
than to attain worldly prosperity by the perishing charms 
of their personal beauty. Both, therefore, dedicated their 
virginity to the Lord, and gave up the world to become nuns. 
Petronilla took the veil in the convent of St. Mary, at 
Angers, for a long time diligently observing the rules 
submitted to by consecrated virgins ; and afterwards for ten 
years within the enclosure, she became remarkable far and 
wide by her character for her sanctity and her exemplary 
virtues. Her sister Greva, taking the veil under the abbess 
Beatrice, in the convent of the Holy Trinity at Caen, 
founded by Queen Matilda, long practised and taught the 
holy rule, to her own profit and that of others.^ 

Ch. X. Tlie castle of Weiif-llarclie in the Beauvais com- 
mitted to the custoclij of Hugh de Grant-mesnil — Events 
there — Death of Oshern, ahhot of St. Ev7'oult. 

"Willia:m, the illustrious marquis of Normandy, finding that 
the people of Beauvais were making efibrts to ravage the 
borders of his territory, expelled Geofirey, the lawful heir, 
from the castle of Xeuf-Marche,^ for some trivial offence, 
and entrusted the defence of it to several of his barons ; but, 
by reason of the continual inroads of the people of Milli, and 
Gerberoi,^ and other neighbours, hardly any one of them 
was able to hold it for a single year. At length the great 
duke committed the castle to Hugh de Grant-mesnil, who 
"was eminent for skill and courage, joining with him Gerold, 
his high steward, and granting to Hugh one moiety of the 
fief. He did this by the advice of Boger de Montgomery, 
vrho was jealous of a bravery too nearly resembling his own, 
and sought to bring him into disgrace by some device or 

^ Beatrix de Huguevillc, the fifth abbess of the Holy Trinity at Caen, 
governed the convent at the time our author wrote. 

^ ]\Iarquis of Normandy, see note, p. 39/. Le Neuf-Marche-en-Lion?. 
The ruins of this castle are remarkable for the vast size of the stones of 
which the foundations were built. 

' Milli, a town tv.'o leagues N.W. of Beauvais. The celebrated castle of 



Gerberoi stands a league and a half N.E. of Goumai. 



456 OEDERICUS TITALIS. [b.III. CH.X. 

occurrence. Hugh, however, fhankfully accepted the 
custody (Tf" the fortress, and, by God's help, in the 
course' of a year, took two of the chief leaders of the men of 
Beauvais prisoners, and, striking terror into the rest of the 
enemy, restored tranquillity through all the country in that 
quarter. 

Pour c mons were in possession of the church of St. Peter 
the apostle at Neuf-Marche, but they were negligent in the 
performance of divine worship, and led a very worldly life. 
The noble Hugh, therefore, gave the moiety of the church 
which belonged to him to the abbey of St. Evroult, upon the 
terms that, upon the death of the canons, or their avoidance 
from any other cause, they should be succeeded by monks : 
which was carried into effect. For two of the canons who 
had been instituted to the portion held by Hugh, taking 
their departure, monks were appointed in their place, and 
have continued in possession of a moiety of the preferment 
to the present day ; Kobert the Bald, Ealph de la Eoussiere, 
and John de Beaunai, and other excellent men, resided 

there. 

On a certain occasion there was a violent quarrel between 
Count Hugh, so often named, and Ealph, count of Mantes, 
father-in-law of Philip, king of France,' and Hugh, boldly 
encountering the count of Mantes with inferior forces, was 
compelled to retreat. In the flight Eichard de Heudicourt, 
of the Yexin, was wounded ; for, urging his horse to full 
speed at the ford of the river Epte, he received in his back a 
sharp thrust, by the lance of a knight who pursued him. 
Being carried by his comrades to Neuf-Marche, and fearing 
he sh'ould die, by the advice of Count Hugh, to whose family 
he was attached by military services, he vowed that m 
future he would serve under the monastic rule in the 
exercises of virtue. He therefore sent for the monks of St. 
Evroult, and put himself under the government of Abbot 
Osbern. Afterwards, by the mercy of God, who, in 
different ways snatches sinners from the pit of de- 
struction, he somewhat recovered his health, though it was 
never entirely restored, living for seven years a zealous 
member of the order, and benefiting the church in various 

1 Ralph, count de Cressi and Valois, married, in 1062, Agnes, wife of 
Henry I., king of France, and died in 1074. 



A.D. lOGG.] DEATH OP ABBOT OSBEEIT. 457 

ways. Having neither wife nor child, he, after his being 
wounded, voluntarily ceded his patrimony in the Yexin to 
the church of St. 'Evroult, and procured from his uncle 
Pulk, and Herbert the butler (who was lord of the fief), as 
well as from his other relations, the entire surrender of theii' 
interest in the property. His wound was never entirely 
closed, and there issued from it daily, so those who were 
witnesses report, as much matter as would fill the egg of a 
goose; he zealously observed the conventual rules, and 
cheerfully performed the duties of his order. He went 
either on foot or on horseback wherever he was ordered, on 
the business of the convent, which he forwarded both by 
word and deed to the utmost of his ability. In consequence. 
Abbot Osbern esteemed him more than the other monks, 
and placed entire confidence in him, so that when he planned 
the new church, which he commenced building, he made him 
the overseer of the works, with the charge of the expenditure, 
and the superintendence of the stone-cutters. 

At the instance of this Eichard, and by his advice. Abbot 
Osbern undertook a journey to Trance, and made the 
acquaintance, through his agreeable conversation, of the 
eloquent Eobert, and of Herbert de Serranz, and Eulk de 
Chaudri, with other knights and persons of inferior rank in 
the Yexin, and took possession of the domain of Heudicourt 
for the abbey of St. Evroult, with the consent and 
approbation of the aforesaid nobles and their neighbours. 
On his return he took to his bed, and, his sickness 
increasing, he caused himself to be carried into the chapter, 
and ordered the letter, which, as before mentioned he 
addressed to Pope Alexander, to be distinctly read. This 
he did that all might clearly understand that he had not 
usurped the rights of Abbot Eobert, but had undertaken the 
government of the abbey against his own wishes, but in 
compulsory obedience to the will of others. He then 
strengthened the brethren by his exhortations, entreating 
them to regard his errors with indulgence, and to cherish his 
memory. And so, having made his confession and partaken 
of the holy communion of the body of our Lord, he expired, 
surrounded by the monks devoutly chanting litanies for him, 
on the sixth 'of the calends of June [27th May],' having 

1 May 27, 106 C. 



458 OEDERICUS YTTALTS. [b.III. Cn.XI. 

governed tlie abbey of St. Evroult five years and three 
nionths. On the morrow, Yitalis, abbot of Bernai, came to 
bury his friend, and interred him in the cloister of the 
monastery, near the church of St. Peter, prince of the 
apostles, from whence, seventeen years afterwards, his 
successor Mainer transferred his remains, with the bones of 
"Witmund, his companion, into the new chapter-house. 

Ch. XI. Death of Edward the confessor — DuJce TfilUam^s 
preparations for the invasion of England'. 

In the year of our Lord 1066 [the fourth indiction], in the 
month of April, there appeared in the zodiac, for fifteen days 
together, a star called a cornet,^ which, as clever astrologers, 
who have keenly investigated the secrets of nature, assert, 
portended a revolution. For Edward, king of England, the 
son of King Ethelred by Emma, daughter of Hichard the 
elder, king of Normandy, had died just before,^ and Harold, 
Earl Godwin's son, had usurped the English throne. Gruilty 
as he was of perjury, cruelty, and other iniquities, he had 
now held it three months, to the great injmy of many 
persons, inasmuch as his unjust usurpation had occasioned 
violent animosities between different families, from which 
mothers had to bewail the loss of their sons, and wives of 
their husbands. There is no doubt that Edward had 
bequeathed the realm of England to his kinsman William, 
duke of Normandy, announcing it, first by Eobert, archbishop 
of Canterbury,^ and afterwards by Harold himself, and, with 
the consent of the English, making the duke heir to all his 
rights.^ Moreover Harold had taken the oath of allef^iance 

1 This celebrated comet was visible not only throughout the whole of 
Europe, but even in China, where it was observed for sixty-seven days. 
It appears that it was first seen in the west of Europe, on the evening 
of the •24th of April. It is rudely figured on the Bayeux tapestry. 

2 On the 5th of January, 1066. 

' Robert Cham part, abbot of Jumieges in 1037, was successively bishop 
of London in 1044, and archbishop of Canterbury in 1050. Being expelled 
from his see by Earl Godwin in 1052, he undertook a journey to Rome to 
appeal to the pope, who decided in his favour; but he died at Jumieges on 
his return, and was buried there on the gospel, or north, side of the choir. 

* " Harold's visit to Noimandy, which we are inclined to fix in the 
year 1063, had no such object as coming to an understanding with William 
for securing him the crown of England after King Edward's death, as our 
author represents, its design being to obtain the release of his brother and 



A.D. 1066.] HAEOLD, KlXa OF ElfGLAlfD. 459 

to duke AVilliam at Eouen, in the presence of the nobles of 
Normandy, and doing him homage had sworn on the holy 
relics to all that was required of him.^ After that, the duke 
took Harold with him in an expedition against Conan, count 
of Brittany,^ presenting him and his retinue with noble war 

nephew, who had been detained as hostnges at- the duke's court from the 
time of his father, Earl Godwin's, revolt. The assertion that Edward's 
intentions were made known to his subjects, and received their concurrence, 
is equally unfounded ; but, notwithstanding, we have no sort of doubt of 
the reality of Edward's intentions, fomented, probably, by Archbishop 
Robert, who became his confidant. It appears quite natural that 
Edward, brought up in Normandy, a Norman in heart and manners, and 
continually surrounded by Norman ecclesiastics, should prefer bequeathing 
his crown to his cousin, Avith whom he had so many common sympathies, 
than to an offset of a family with which he was ever at variance, and his 
aversion to which he had never disguised. Our author has seriously erred 
in blindly follo^nng the Norman traditions regarding the circumstances which 
paved the way for the conquest of England. But those are not much 
nearer the truth wlio adopt without discrimination all the counter state- 
ments of the Anglo-Saxon write) s, as is now the fashion." 

The note of the French editors so well represents the state of the case, 
that there is little to add from what they seem to suppose an opposite point 
of view. There is little doubt of Edward's prepossessions in favour of the 
Norman succession, but the assertion of his having given them effect by any 
overt act, might have been more distinctly disclaimed. Edward's consti- 
tutional prudence and timidity would prevent its being wrving from him by 
the Norman archbishop even in his last moments, nor whatever may have 
been the value of either, does the supposed declaration in favour of Harold 
rest on a better foundation. 

On the whole, the English writers nearest the times, offer little in 
opposition to the account given by the Norman historians. The Anglo- 
Saxon Chronicle, Henry of Huntingdon, and Roger of Wendover, observe 
a prudent silence, but Florence of Worcester and Roger of Hovenden say 
that Edward before his death chose Harold for his successor. Of the three 
competitors for the crown, probably Edgar Atheling was the popular 
favourite, and ISIalmsbury states that Edward had actually " recommended 
him to the nobility as the nearest to the sovereignty in point of birth." 

^ The fact of William having ^ATung an oath of fealty from Harold on 
the holy relics, is so well attested that it is impossible to dispute it. Harold 
himself admitted it in a message to William, reported by Malmesbury, but 
took the ground that an obligation contracted under duress was not binding. 
Writers agree far less on the place where the ceremony was performed. 
"Wace makes it Baieux; our author Rouen; but William de Poitiers, a 
contemporary historian, is probably right ; he fixes it at Bonneville-sur- 
Tonque, a palace where the duke often resided, and near the cathedral of 
which William de Poitiers Avas archdeacon. 

^ Conan II., duke of Brittany, 1040— lOb'G. The Baieux tapestry 
represents several curious details of this expedition. 



4G0 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.XI. 

horses, splendid armour, and other gifts of value, in the 
presence of the army. This Englishman was distinguished 
by his great size and strength of body, his polished manners, 
his firmness of mind and command of words, by a ready wit 
and a variety of excellent qualities. But what availed so 
many valuable gifts, when good faith, the foundation of all 
virtues, was . wanting ? Eeturning to his country, his am- 
bition tempted him to aspire to the crown, and to forfeit 
the fealty he had sworn to his lord. He imposed upon King 
Edward, who was in the last stage of decay, approaching his 
end, by the account he gave of his crossing the sea, his 
journey to jS'ormandy, and the result of his mission, fidsely 
adding that Duke AYilliam would give him his daughter in 
marriage,^ and concede to him, as his son-in-law, all his right 
to the throne of England. The feeble prince was much 
surprised at this statement ; however, he believed it, and 
granted all the crafty tyrant asked. 

Some time afterwards, King Edward, of pious memory, 
died at London on the nones [fifth] of January, in the 
twenty-fourth year of his reign, and was interred in the new 
monastery which he had just built on the western side of 
the city, and at the consecration of which he had been pre- 
sent the week before. His body was laid near the altar 
which St. Peter the apostle had blessed with the working of 
miracles in the time of Mellitus, bishop of London. On the 
very day of the funeral, when the people were bathed in 
tears for the loss of their beloved king, Harold caused 
himself to be crowned by Archbishop Stigand alone,^ 
though the pope had suspended him from his functions for 
certain crimes, without the concurrence of any other bishops 
and the earls and barons of the realm. AVhen the English 
were apprized of tlie bold usurpation effected by Harold, 
they were very indignant and some of the most powerful 
lords, resolved on an obstinate resistance, refused to offer 

1 This part of Harold's statement which alleges his being affianced to 
Agatha, William's eldest daughter, was correct, as our author, contradict- 
ing himself, admits in the fitth book of his history. 

2 This is a common error of the Norman liistorians; Harold was crowned 
by Aldred, archbishop of York. Stigand was appointed to the arch- 
bishopric of Canterbury in 1053, but did not obtain the pall from Rome 
till 1U58. 



A.D. lOGG.] tostig's eevolt and exile. 461 

him any token of submission. Others, not knowing how to 
free themselves from the yoke imposed upon them, which 
soon became firmly fixed, and, on the other hand, consider- 
ing that they could neither depose him, nor while he held 
the reigns of government set up another king to the 
advantage of the realm, submitted to the usurpation, conso- 
lidating the power which he had already established. In a 
short time the throne which had been iniquitously seized 
was stained by horrible crimes. 

The earls Edwin and Morcar, sons of Algar the first of 
the Eno-lish earls, were attached by the strictest ties to 
H.arold,'^and employed all their eftorts to support his cause, 
he having married their sister Edith, who had been the 
queen of "^Grifiith a powerful king of Wales, to whom she 
bore Blethyn, his successor, and a daughter named Nesta.^ 
Tostig, however, Earl Godwin's son, finding that his brother's 
enterprise proved successful, and that the kingdom of 
England was subject to great oppression, was much dis- 
tressed, and determined to oppose him and even to levy war 
ao-ainst him. Wherefore Harold violently deprived him of 
his father's earldom, which as eldest son he had held for 
sometime during the reign of Edward,^ and drove him into 
exile. Tostig, thus banished, took refuge in Elanders, 
where he committed his wife Judith to the care of his 
father-in-law Baldwin, earl of Elanders, and then hastening to 
Normandy strongly remonstrated with Duke William for 

1 Edith was not married to Griffith -ap-Llewellyn, king of North Wales, 
but he had a daughter named Nesta, who after running oif with Fleance, 
son of Banquo, one of the characters in Macbeth, by whom she had Walter 
Stewart, married Trahern-ap-Caradoc, who succeeded Griffith after the 
death of that king's brothers, Blethyn and Rhywallon, Our author appears 
to have mistaken Blethyn for a son of Griffith, because he was his imme- 
diate successor. Edith seems to have been remarkable for her great 
beauty. She is called in the Domesday Book Edeva pulchra, Edeva 
faira', while the name of Edded regina is reserved for the widow of Edward 
the Confessor. Nesta had a daughter of her own name, who married Ber- 
nard du Neuf-March^. . . 

2 Tostig never obtained his father's earldom, consistmg ol Wessex, 
Sussex, and Kent, which was granted to Harold immediately after Godwin's 
death Tostig succeeded Siward in the earldom of Northumbria, from 
which he was expelled in 1065 by the indignation of the inhabitants at his 
murders and exactions. It was at Bruges that he placed his wife under her 
father's protection. 



462 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.XI. 

suffering liis perjured vassal to usurp the crown of England, 
which he pledged himself the duke would secure if he 
crossed the channel with a Norman army. These princes 
had been long attached to each other, having married two 
sisters, through whom their regard was frequently revived. 
William therefore received his companion with open arms, 
and thanking him for his friendly suggestions, and roused by 
his exhortations, assembled the barons of Normandy to 
consult with them publicly on what was to be done with 
regard to An enterprise of such vast importance. 

At that time Normandy was favoured by possessing many 
accomplished prelates and illustrious nobles. Maurilius, 
who from a monk became a metropolitan, was archbishop of 
Houen; Odo, the duke's uterine brother, was bishop of 
Baieux; Hugh, brother of Jtobert Count d'Eu, was bishop of 
Lisieux ; AVilliam of Evreux ; Geoffrey of Coutances ; John, 
son of Ealph, count of Bayeux, was bishop of Avranches ; 
and Ivo, son of William de Belesme, of Seez.^ All these 
prelates were distinguished by the splendour of their noble 
extraction, their zeal for religion, and their many excellencies. 

Foremost in the ranks of the laity stood Kichard, count 
of Evreux, son of Archbishop Robert ; Count Eobert, son 
of AYilliam viscount d'Eu; Robert, earl of Morton, uterine 
brother of Duke William; Rodolph de Conches, son of 
Roger Toni, standard-bearer of Normandy; AYilliam Eitz- 
Osbern, the duke's cousin and high steward ; William de 
Warrene, and Hugh Boteler ; Hugh de Grant-mesnil and 
Roger de Moubray; Roger de Beaumont, and Roger de 
Montgomery ; Baldwin and Richard, sons of Count Gislebert,^ 

' Maurilius, archbishop of Rouen, Sept, 1055 — August 9, 1067; Odo, 
bishop of Baieux, 1049 — February, 1099; Hugh, bishop of Lisieux, 1049 
— July 17, 1077; William Fleitel, bishop of Evreux, 1046 — February 11, 
1066; Geoffrey de INIoubray, bishop of Coutances, April, 1048 — February, 
1093; John, son of Ralph, count of Ivri, bishop of Avranches, September, 
1060—1067; Ivo de Belesme, bishop of Seez. 1035—1070. 

'^ Almost all the persons enumerated were relations of the duke of Nor- 
mandy, besides those expressly so described by Ordericus. Thus the 
counts of Evreux and Eu were his uncles by the custom of Brittany ; the 
standard bearer was son-in-law of the count of Evreux ; William War- 
renne was also the duke's uncle, according to the custom of Brittany; 
Roger de Beaumont and Roger de Montgomery's father were cousins- 
german of Duke Robert, and Baldwin de Meelus and Richard de Bienfaits 
cousins-german of Duke William. 



A.D. 1066.] PEELATES A2?D NOBLES OF NOEMAIfDT. 463 

with many others whose valour had gained them military 
distinction, and whose native sagacity and decision in coun- 
cil were not inferior to the matured virtues of the Eoman 
senate, but aspired to imitate them both in their inde- 
fatigable constancy, and the talent and courage they em- 
ployed in conquering their enemies. 

All these were summoned bv the duke's command to a 
general consultation ; and upon an affair of so much import- 
ance being submitted to their consideration, opinions were 
divided according to the differences in men's minds. The 
more daring spirits, willing to flatter the duke's ambition, 
encouraged their comrades to plunge into the contest, and 
were for engaging in so great an enterprise without hesi- 
tation. Others were opposed to an undertaking of so 
much difficulty, pointing out to those who were too venture- 
some, and were running headlong to destruction, its great 
inconveniences and perils ; they magnified the obstacles 
presented by the want of a fleet and the dangers of the 
voyage, and alleged that a handful of Normans were une- 
qual to the conquest of the numerous hosts of the English.^ 
At length the duke sent Gislebert,^ archdeacon of Lisieux, 
to Eome, to ask for advice from Pope Alexander on the 
state of affairs. On hearing all the circumstances, the pope 
favoured tlie legitimate rights of the duke, enjoined him to 
take up arms against the perjurer, and sent him the stand- 
ard of St. Peter the apostle, by whose merits he would be 
defended against all dangers. 

Meanwhile, Tostig received the duke's permission to 
return to England, having firmly engaged to assist him, 
both in bis own person and with all his friends. But as it 
is written: "Man proposes, but God disposes,"^ things 

^ Henry of Huntingdon relates a curious story, the gossip perhaps of 
the day, of the manner in which the malcontents were entrapped by Fitz- 
Odbern, the duke's favourite, into giving their consent to join in the expe- 
dition. — History, b. vi. p. 208. 

2 Probably Gislebert jNIaminot, son of Robert de Courbepine, and who 
was bishop of Lisieux, in 1077; as he was much trusted by the duke, 
serving him in the joint offices of chaplain and physician. It was perhaps 
from him that the bishops of Lisieux inherited the dignity of almoner of 
tlie dukes of Normandy, with the important exemption attached to it. 

' This proverb is not to be found in the bible, as our author seems to 
intimate. 



464 ORDEEICTIS TITALIS. [e.III. CH.XT. 

turned out very differently from what he expected. Por 
embarking from the Cotentin,^ he was unable to reach 
England. Harold held possession of the channel with a 
large fleet and the coasts with strong bodies of troops, in 
order to prevent the enemy from landing in the kingdom he 
had treacherously usurped without a severe conflict. Tostig 
was therefore in great perplexity, it being out of his power 
to make a hostile descent on England with his small force in 
the face of innumerable enemies, nor could he direct his 
course back to Normandy, the winds being contrary. 
Driven to and fro alternately by winds from the west, the 
south, and other quarters, he was exposed to great distress 
and encountered many perils while wandering over the sea, 
until at last, after severe sufteriugs, he landed in the domi- 
nions of Harold, king of Norway, sumamed Harfager.^ 
Being well received by this prince, and perceiving that he 
could not fulfil the promises he had made to Duke William, 
he altered his plans, and thus addressed him : " Great king, 
I come a suppliant to your highness, offering myself and 
my faithful services to your majesty, in the hopes that, by 
your aid, I may be restored to my hereditary rights. My 
brother Harold, who in truth ought to submit to me as his 
elder brother, has treacherously magnified himself against 
me, and even presumed, at the price of perjury, to usurp 
the English crown. Knowing therefore, your pre-eminence 
in power, and in forces, and every excellence, I earnestly 
entreat you, as one prepared to do you homage, to render 
me your powerful assistance. Humble the pride of my 
perfidious brother by a hostile invasion of England ; and 
reserving one half of it for yourself, confer the other on me, 
who will thenceforth preserve my fealty to you unbroken as 
long as I live." The ambitious king was highly pleased 
at this proposal. He immediately ordered an army to be 
assembled, warlike engines to be prepared, and the royal 
fleet was, during the six months following, completely 
equipped. The exiled wanderer encouraged the Norwegian 
king to this great enterprise, and by this skilful change in 

^ Probably from Barfleur, about the time of the spring equinox. 

'^ Harold Harfager, or Hare- foot, was contemporary with Rollo, and 
lived a century before these times. It was Harold Hardraade, or The 
Hardy, the third of the name, who was king of Norway from 1045 — 1066. 



A.D. 1066.] PEEPAEATIONS TOR INTADING ENGLAND. 465 

liis plans, while it flattered the king and saved himself from 
being treated as a sp3% aiforded him the opportunity of 
obtaining revenge for his banishment bj his faithless bro- 
ther. 

Meanwhile, the marquis of Normandy was making pre- 
parations for his own enterprise, uninformed of the disasters 
which had befallen his precursor, and had driven him north- 
ward so far out of his intended course. A fleet of ships 
was carefully fitted out in Normandy, supplied with all 
necessaries, in building which both the clergy and laity 
rivalled each other in contributing both funds and labour.^ 
Large bodies of troops were raised by a general le^y 
throughout Normandy. Eeports of the expedition drew 
many valiant men from the neighbouring countries, M'ho 
prepared their arms for battle. Thus the Erench and Bre- 
tons, the Poitevins and Burgundians, and other people on 
this side the Alps, flocked together for the war over the 
sea, and scenting the booty which the conquest of Britain 
offered, were prepared to undergo the various perils and 
chances, both by sea and land, attending the enterprise. 

^ William de Poitiers tells us that the duke's fleet, assembling at Dive, 
sailed from thence to St. Valeri-sur-Somme; and it is therefore probable 
that his ships were built and fitted out at Dive and the neighbouring ports. 
Taylor has published a curious MS. containing an account of the number 
furnished by the duke's principal vassals, lay and ecclesiastic. In this 
muster-roll, William Fitz-Osbern, and Hugh d'Avranches, and Roger de 
Montgomery, each figure for sixty ships; Hugh de Montfort for fifty ships 
and sixty knights; and the other barons for lesser numbers, varying pro- 
bably according to their means and zeal. Among the quota supplied by 
ecclesiastics, we find Remi, afterwards made bishop of Lincoln, on the list, 
with the modest contribution of one ship and twenty knights, while 
Nicholas, abbot of St, Ouen, a cousin-german of the duke's, contributed 
twenty ships and one hundred knights, and Odo, bishop of Baieux, the 
duke's uterine brother, no less than one hundred ships, the largest number 
furnished by any individual except Robert, earl of Mortagne, also the 
duke's brother, whose quota was one hundred and twenty. The whole 
number enumerated mounts up to 782. William of Jumieges says that 
William's fleet consisted of 3000 vessels, which must be a great exaggera- 
tion, small as most of them probably were. Guy of Amiens reckons 400 
ships with large sails, and 1000 transports. The duchess Matilda furnished 
the vessel in which the duke himself embarked. It was called the Mora, 
and had for its figure-liead the image of a child, gilt, pointing with its 
right hand towards England, and having in its mouth a trumpet of ivory. 

VOL. I. H H 



4:06 OEDEEICUS TITALIS. [b.III. CH.XII. 

Ch. XII. Maiiiier appointed abhot of St. JEvroult., and 
Lanfranc of St. Ouen — A new church and other hidldings 
erected at St. Evroult — The ononlcs farm and reclaim a 
harren estate in the Vexin. 

"While these transactions were takin<^ place, Osbern, abbot 
of St. Evroult, departed this life, as already related, and the 
chapter of the monks consulted the duke, before he crossed 
the sea, about appointing a successor. He was then hold- 
ing a council of his nobles at Bonneville.^ In consequence, 
by the advice of Bishop Hugh and other prudent counsellors, 
he chose the prior Maimer, and invested him with the 
temporalities of the abbey by the delivery of the pastoral 
staff, commanding him to have tlie forms which should com- 
mit to him the cure of souls duly complied with ; all which 
he willingly performed. 

On the same day,' the duke commanded the lord Lan- 
franc, prior of Bee, to appear before him, and gave him the 
abbey which he himself had just nobly founded at Caen in 
honour of St. Stephen the proto-martyr. Lanfranc was 
therefore the first abbot of Caen, but shortly afterwards he 
was promoted to the archbishopric of Canterbury. He 
was a native of Lombardy, deeply versed in the knowledge 
of the liberal arts, gifted with benevolence, generosity, and 
all the sacred virtues, and ceaselessly intent on almsgiving 
and other good works. Indeed, from the day already men- 
tioned, when at Bonneville he was first raised to rule in 
the church, for twenty-two years and nine months he was 
nobly distinguished for the good to multitudes of the faith- 
ful in the house of God. 

By the duke's command, the venerable Bishop Hugh 
conducted Maimer, the Lord's servant, to St. Evroult, and 
there consecrated him according to the statutes of the 
canons before the altar of St. JPeter the apostle, on the 
seventeenth of the calends of August [July 16th]. Mainier, 
having thus taken on him the name and office of abbot, 

' This place is mentioned in a note to ch. xi. as a favourite residence of 
the duke. It was the most centrically situated of all his palaces, and was 
very convenient at this time for superintending and hastening the equipment 
of his fleet. 

- Probably at the end of June, or the beginning of July, 106G. 



A.D. 106G.] MAINIEE ABBOT OF ST. ETHOFLT. 467 

lived worthilj, administering the government twenty-two 
years and seven months with great usefulness, for, by dod's 
help, he made great improvements in the monastery com- 
mitted to him, both within and without. He skilfully 
succeeded, by his kindness of manner and reasonable argu- 
ments, in satisfying the brethren who were somewhat dis- 
turbed at his election. They had selected for their 
governors two monks, eminent for their piety and their 
erudition of both sorts, Eeginald de la Eoche and Fulk de 
Guernauville, and were, therefore, at no little variance with 
the abbot who was set over them, without their concur- 
rence, by the bishop and their neighbours. Often, on occa- 
sions of this sort, disturbances are made by the worst of 
persons ; for while the perverse strive earnestly to give the 
preference to their own opinions, regular order and sounder 
counsels are hindered. But Almighty God extends his 
powerful protection to his church in all difficulties, cor- 
recting those who are in error, and mercifully lending the 
aid which is needed, in the manner and by the persons he 
seeth fit. His good providence it was, as will hereafter 
plainly appear, which raised Mainier to the government of 
the abbey of St. Evroult, standing as it did in a barren 
territory and surrounded by most worthless neighbours. 
Mainier was born in the adjoining town of Echaufour, he 
was an accomplished scholar in grammar, dialectics, and 
rhetoric; skilful and severe in eradicating vices, he was 
zealous in inculcating virtue among the brethren. A dili- 
gent observer of the monastic rule, he pointed out the way 
of life both by word and deed to those who were committed 
to his charge, and encouraged many to work in the Lord's 
vineyard, both by being their leader and their anxious com- 
panion. 

Mainier began building the new church dedicated to St. 
Mary, mother of God, St. Peter the apostle, and St. Evroult 
the confessor, in which are seven altars consecrated to the 
divine majesty in honour of his saints. Eor the old church 
which St. Evroult had founded in honour of the prince of 
the apostles, when Chilperic and his nephew Hildebert were 
kings of the Eranks,^ was much dilapidated by the great 

^ It has been remarked before, that St. Evroult retired to the vast 
sjlitudes of the forest of Ouche about the year 560; he died there the 29th 

H H 2' 



, 468 OEDEEICUS YITALISs rB.III. CH.XII. 

I 

age, and was too small for tlie number of tlie monks, wliich 
was continually increasing. A building of stone at Ouche 
is a very laborious undertaking, because the quarry of 
Merlerault from whence the hewn stones are brought, is six 
miles distant.^ The overseer of the work had therefore the 
greatest difficulty to procure horses, oxen, and carts, for the 
transport of the masses of stone and other materials re- 
quired for so large a work. This abbot had not a moment's 
repose during the whole time of his rule ; but by his great 
anxiety for numerous objects, rendered important services, 
both to the community then governed by him and their 
successors. By Grod's help and the contributions and 
munificence of the brethren and his friends he completed 
the building of a spacious and beautiful church, conveniently 
adapted for celebrating divine service, a dormitory and re- 
fectory, kitchen, and cellar, with other necessary offices for 
the use of the monks. Among others, Lanfranc, archbishop 
of Canterbury, when he assisted at the consecration of the 
church of Caen, in the twelfth year after the war with 
England,' remitted to abbot Mainier twenty-four pounds of 
English money and two marks of gold, and he afterwards sent 
over from Canterbury forty pounds sterling by the hands 
of the lord Roger de Sap, who was known and esteemed by 
him for his learning. With these donations the abbey 
tower was carried up, and the dormitory for the monks 
built. Queen Matilda gave a rich mitre and cope for divine 
service, and one hundred pounds of Rouen currency to 
build the refectory. William de Ros, clerk of Baieux, who 
held three dignities in that church, being precentor, dean, 
and archdeacon,^ gave forty pounds sterling to the monks 
of St. Evroult. Not long afterwards he voluntarily relin- 

of December, 596. If he built his church during the reigns of Childeric 
and his nephew Childebert, it must have been some time between the year 
575, when Childeric succeeded his father, and the autumn of 584, in which 
Childebert was assassinated. 

• The quarries of Merlerault here mentioned are about 9000 toises from 
St. Evroult. The miles, therefore, must be about 1500 toises (of two 
English yards each) long, or three quarters of a post league. The roads 
must have indeed been almost impracticable at that time in a country so 
intersected with forests and swamps. 

" This consecration was performed on the 13th of September, 1077. 
. ^ Afterwards the third abbot of F4camp, from 1079 to 1108. 



A.D. 1066— 10S9.] ACTS OF ABBOT MAIKIEE. 469 

quislied the grandeur of tlie world, and became a monk at 
Caen, from whence he was preferred to the government 
of the abbey of Fecamp before he had completed the first 
year of his monastic profession. His name is inscribed in 
the register of the monks of St. Evroult, for the many 
benefits he conferred on the abbey, and masses, prayers, 
and alms were appointed for him as if he had been a brother 
there professed. It was by the help of these and other 
contributors that the fabric of the new church was raised, 
and the work begun both in that and the abbey buildings 
was nobly finished. 

During the government of abbot Mainier, ninety monks 
of various ranks and conditions, whose names are inscribed 
in the general register, put off the secular habit in the 
school of St. Evroult, and inspired by the counsels and 
example of excellent men, undertook to walk in the difficult 
path which leads to salvation. Some of these obtained the 
prize of their holy conversation during the lifetime of their 
venerable father ; others remained longer in their religious 
course steadfastly maintaining a protracted contest, and 
striving to render themselves acceptable to Grod by their 
prayers, and useful to men by their good works. Some who 
were of noble families contributed largely to the support of 
the monastery, and procured from their relations, acquaint- 
ance, and friends, donations of tithes and churches and 
ecclesiastical ornaments for the use of the brethren. It is 
quite out of my power to describe particularly the gifts 
made by each individual to their cherished abbey, but I wish 
with God's help, to record some of them faithfully, as far 
as my opportunities of reference permit, for the general 
good and the information of posterity. 

Hoger de Hautrive, the senior monk, by order of abbot 
Hainier, went into the Yexin to take possession of Heudi- 
court, the domain which the wounded knight gave to St. 
Evroult, as I have before related, but he found the land 
uncultivated, and almost a desert. In the first place he 
erected an oratory with boughs of trees in honour of St. 
Nicholas, bishop of Myrrha, from whence the village which 
now stands on the spot is called by the inhabitants to this 
day the chapel of St. Nicholas. It often happened in the 
night that while Eoger de Hautrive, as he himself used to 



470 - OEDEETCrS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.XII. 

relate, was singing matins in his cbapel of boughs a wolf 
took his station without, and as it were, responded to the 
chant by his bowlings. This venerable man, divinely sup- 
ported, attached to himself by ties of regard Herbert the 
Butler, who after the death of his cousin Herbert, who was 
brother of Kichard the wounded knight, gave one moiety 
of his fief to St. Evroult. There Roger de Hautrive 
laboured, with the assistance of his generous friend, until 
he had brought under cultivation the land which for a long 
season had been deserted on account of the war and other 
calamities ; and there Roger de Sap, after some years suc- 
ceeding the former senior monk, began the building of a. 
church of stone. The before mentioned knight (Herbert 
the Butler) had great power in the Yexin, and being pos- 
sessed of great wealth and surrounded by sons and valiant 
relations and kinsman was exalted above almost all his 
neighbours. His wife's name was Rolando, daughter of 
Odo de Chaumont, who bore him Grodfrey and Peter, John 
and AValo, with several daughters, by whom he had a 
numerous posterity. The father and brothers of whom we 
are speaking were all knights of distinguished courage, and, 
as far as outward appearances, of approved conduct both 
towards God and man. The mother has been all her life of 
exemplary virtue, being still living, though her husband and 
children are numbered with the dead. By the kindness 
and assistance of this family, the chapel of St. Nicholas, the 
bishop, was erected, with a convenient house for the monks, 
who live regularly and cultivate peace ; and so it remains to 
the present day. 

At the same time Fulk, son of Ralph de Chaudrei, had 
the greatest regard for the venerable Roger [de Hautrive] 
on account of his many virtues, so that he begged him 
kindly to be sponsor for his son at the holy font of baptism, 
which he willingly undertook. Their acquaintance and 
regard gradually increasing, he granted to his gossip the 
church of St. Martin de Parnes, the parish church, at which 
a congregation was assembled from seven neighbouring vil- 
lages on appointed days to offer prayers to God, and to hear 
his praises and precepts in a becoming manner. The 
worthy father coming to Parnes, Pulk, with the consent of 
"Wascelin his brother, gave to St. Evroidt the church with 



A.D. lOGG — 1089.] PAENES GEANTED TO ST. EYROULT. 471 

all the dues belonging to it, and one plough-land in the 
same vill, and the tithes of his plough, with two houses and 
one mill called Barre-cliemin. He also gave to the monks 
the archdeaconry which he held in fee of the archbishop of 
Rouen by inheritance from his ancestors, and he also 
granted to the monks the lordship of all the householders in 
Parnes, on condition that if they made any defeasance to the 
lords, they should not forfeit their houses, but be mulct in 
some other way. The inhabitants of Parnes^ were delighted 
at having the monks for their lords, hoping that under their 
protection they should be safe from the inroads of the Nor- 
mans in the neighbourhood, from wdiich they frequently 
suftered. In the course of time, when Groisbert the phy- 
sician was prior, Pulk gave the ground for the cemetery to 
promote the building of a new church. The foundations 
were then laid, but the work proceeded slowly through many- 
hindrances for twenty-four years, and is not yet completed.^ 
Fulk, the knight I am now speaking of, was brave and 
high-spirited, ardent in all his enterprises, irascible and fierce 
when roused to arms. He was very ready to lay violent hands 
on the property of others, and imprudently scatter his own 
in order to gain the empty honour of being accounted 
liberal. He took to wife Ita, daughter of Heremar de Pon- 
toise, by whom he had Walter and Mainier, Hugh and 
Grervase, Hermar and Fulk, with a daughter named Luxovie. 
Mainier and Fulk were devoted from their infancy to a mo- 
nastic life, but the other four sons followed the career of 
arms. 

Fulk's character being, as I have observed, so unstable, 
he sometimes honoured the monks, and stoutly defended 
them against all adversaries, while at other times he griev- 
ously oppressed them. There lived at Parnes, serving God 
under the monastic rule, the old Eoger and Goisbert the 
physician, Eobert the Bald, John and Isemberd, with several 
others, of whom Bernard, surnamed Michael, and Eeginald, 

^ Fames, near St. Clair-sur-Epte. See note on the vassals of the 
church, b. iii. c. 5. 

^ The date to be assigned to the erection of this remarkable church is a 
question of some importance in the history of art, as the apse, like that of 
St. Clair-sur-Epte, is polygonal, and not semicircular, a rare occurrence in 
the churches of Normandy. 



472 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.XIII. 

Theodoric, and "Walter the Bald, with "William of Caen, snr- 
named Alexander, after spending their lives devoted to pious 
offices, ended them there, and were there interred with great 
veneration. The grant of all that Fulk gave to the monks 
was confirmed by Robert the Eloquent, of Chaumont, who 
had the lordship in chief. Not long afterwards, while this 
Robert was carrying off the booty which he had collected 
with violence on the lands of St. Ouen, he fell from his 
horse in full armour, and, his helmet fixing in the ground, 
broke his neck and he perished miserably. His body was in- 
terred by abbot Mainier near L' Aillerie in the chapter-house 
of the monks of Elavigni, residing there. His sons Osmond 
de Chaumont, Guazon de Poix, and Robert de Beauvais, 
confirmed to St. Evroult all that their ancestors had given 
and granted to the abbey, as before related. 

In this manner the monks of St. Evroult obtained the 
church of Barnes, whicli was a very ancient structure dedi- 
cated to St. Martin, metropolitan [archbishop] of Tours, and 
in which the remains of St. Judoc, confessor of Christ, are 
reverently preserved to the present day. Who he was, and 
whence he came, I shall briefly write in a short passage of 
this history, faithfully making extracts from a book contain- 
ing an account of his holy life. 

Ch. XIII, Legends of St. Judoc, or Jbsse, a Breton saint, 

son of King Howel. 

[About a. d. 650.] The blessed Judoc,^ son of Juthail 
[Howel], king of the Bretons and brother of King Judicail,' 
being sought for to be elevated to the throne, relinquished 
the pursuit of learning to which he had devoted himself at 
Llanmelmon, and went in pilgrimage to Rome with four 
others. However Haymon, duke of Ponthieu, recognising 
his noble origin, detained him on the road, and having had 
him ordained priest, made him his chaplain. After seven 

1 St. Judoc, or Josse, priest and confessor. His death is fixed on the 
13th of December, about the year 658. There is an older and more 
complete account of his life in the Acta SS. Ord. S. Benidicti, scbc. ii., 
which seems to have furnished our author with the materials for his 
abridged history of tlie saint. 

* Juthail, or Hoel III., who died in 602. Judicail, his son, abdicated 
in 638, and died in the odour of sanctity the 7th of December, 658. 



BErOEE 668.] LEGEND OE ST. JUDOC. 473 

years Judoc became a hermit at La Broie on the river Autio, 
where he served God eight years, and fed with the hand 
several sorts of birds and small fishes, like domestic animals. 
At one time when he had only one loaf, and divided it 
among four poor persons, in spite of the remonstrances of 
his servant Yulmar, God sent him four small boats laden 
with provisions on the river Autio. He afterwards built an 
oratory in honour of St. Martin at E-uniac on the river 
Canche,^ where he lived fourteen years. One day an eagle 
carried off eleven hens, and the cock last ; the man of God 
made the sign of the cross accompanied by a prayer, when 
the eagle, shortly returning, brought back the cock and 
presently expired. Once when Judoc, in company with Duke 
Haimon, was searching for a suitable habitation in a thick 
wood, the duke was very thirsty, and weary with hunting he 
fell asleep, during which the man of God planted his 
walking staff in the ground and offering a prayer, a spring 
burst forth on the spot. Sick folk resort there and vene- 
rating the saint, drink the water, and are quickly cured. The 
servant of God constructed in the wood with his own hands 
two oratories of timber ; one he dedicated to St. Peter the 
bearer of the keys of heaven, the other to the eloquent 
St. Paul. He afterwards went to E-ome, from whence he 
brought back many relics of saints. Juliula, a young girl 
who was blind from her infancy, was admonished by a vision 
to bathe her eyes in the water wherewith Judoc had 
washed his hands, and upon her so doing recovered her 
sight. This happened while the man of God was returning 
from Eome, and a cross of wood being raised on the spot the 
place was called La Croix. 

Meanwhile, in the absence of Judoc at Eome, Duke 
Haimon caused a church of stone to be erected in the wil- 
derness where the hermit had dwelt, and on his return 
caused it to be dedicated to the honour of St. Martin, and 
gave for its endowment a certain vill in his domains, with all 
its appurtenances. Judoc, the faithful champion for God, 
there maintained a long warfare, and after happily ending 
the course of his holy life departed to Christ on the ides 
[13th] of December. 

^ Near Montreuil, at a place now called St. Josse, from an abbey 
dedicated to that saint which was built there in course of time. 



474 ORDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.ITI. Cn.XIII. 

His two nephews, "Wiuoch and Arnocli, succeeded liim, 
and were accustomed frequently to wash the body and clip 
the hair of the holy man whose remains long continued to 
show no tokens of decay. Drochtric, Duke Haimon's 
successor, had often heard this, but he did not believe it. 
Rashly determined, therefore, to investigate the matter, he 
caused the sacred tomb to be burst open, and looking in, 
started back in terror, exclaiming, "Ah! holy Judoc!" 
He became instantly deaf and dumb, and his whole body 
was paralyzed to the day of his death. His wife, struck 
with alarm at her husband's calamity, poured forth lamenta- 
tions to God, and for the salvation of his soul gave the two 
villages of Crespiniac and jSTetreville to St. Judoc. These 
events took place in the time of Dagobert, son of Lothaire 
the Grreat, king of the Franks. 

Isembard of Fleuri,^ at the command of Abbot Herbald, 
vrrote to Adelelm the monk, that the body of St. Judoc 
was discovered in the year of our Lord 977, during the 
reign of Lothaire, son of Lewis, king of France, in the 
following manner. A certain peasant, named Stephen, who 
gained his livelihood by being a miller, being admonished in 
a dream by one clothed in bright robes left his wafe and 
children, and went to the place where St. Judoc was interred, 
and there became a clerk. No man living then knew the 
spot where the body of the saint lay, but Stephen, inspired 
by the vision, began to search within the church, and at 
the suggestion of Pridian Sigeman, he found the coffin on 
the right side of the altar of St. Martin. Thereupon, 
amidst general rejoicings, and while hymns of thanksgiving 
were sung to God, the coffin containing the body of the 
saint was disinterred, and lifted from the grave. The news 
of the discovery was quickly spread, and multitudes of 
people hastened to witness the disinterment of the holy 
remains, and to make their prayers and offerings to the 
saint. Many miracles were wrought on the spot, and 
diseases of various descriptions were there cured. At last, 
on the eighth of the calends of August [July 25th,] the 

^ Isembard, a monk of Fleuri, flourished in the latter part of the tenth 
and the beginning of the eleventh century. On the discovery and trans- 
lation of the body of St. Josse in 977.- the monks of his abbey requested 
this writer to compose a life of their patron saint. 



A,D. 977.] EELICS OP ST. JUDOC TRA^s'SLATED. 475 

body of St. Judoc, was deposited with great reverence over 
the altar of St. Martin. 

The very same year, the foinidntions of a monastery were 
laid on tliat spot, means were taken for settling the order 
of monks, and the venerable Sigebrand was appointed abbot. 
One night, while the body of St. Judoc was deposited in the. 
church of St. Peter, there were seven tapers before the 
remains, one of which only was lighted by the sacristan, but 
while the guardians of the holy relics were asleep, the other 
six candles were lighted by fire from heaven. So, on 
I another occasion, when the body of St. Judoc was in his 
own church, a lamp which had been extinguished by the 
violence of the wind and showers of rain, had its light mira- 
culously restored in the presence of Sigeman. 

One Sunday, while Pridian was celebrating a solemn 
mass, a certain vassal of Count Hilduin, whose name was 
Garembert, was full of evil designs, wanting to plunder the 
church at his will, and to substitute for Sigeman an abbot 
more conformable to his purposes. When, however, it was 
read in the gospel for the day : " Why think ye evil in your 
hearts ?"^ the wretched man was smote by an invisible hand, 
and began to vociferate loudly, and being struck the third 
time by the power of God, he fell to the earth, vomiting 
clotted blood from his mouth. After mass he was carried 
out by order of Sigeman the sacristan,^ and on the morrow, 
bv the merits of St. Judoc, recovered his reason. This 
happened in the time of Hugh the Great. 

The same day, a woman named Ostrehilde was intending 
to leave the church after mass, but her feet were so firmly 
fixed at the threshold, that no one could release them ; she, 
however, felt no inconvenience except extreme cold from 
her knees to the soles of her feet. The next day she vowed 
to become the handmaid of God and St. Judoc ; and beincf 
immediately relieved, she piously kept her vow. 

It is related by the monks Adelelm and Eicher, faithful 
reporters, that while Stephen translated the relics of St. 
Judoc to the monastery of St. Eiquier during the erection 
of the church, the illustrious Bertsende, the marriageable 
daughter of Alsinde, suftered great pains from her hips to 

1 Matt. ix. 4. 

"^ It seems that Sigebrand and Sigeman were two different persons. 



476 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.iii. cn.xiii. 

lier feet for two years, so tliat she could not walk nor even 
move without the aid of a staff. Having prayed with faith, 
as well as her mother, before the relics of the holy confessor, 
she was cured of her infirmity, and her mother was so 
rejoiced at her daughter's recovery that she made an offer- 
ing of a rich mantle to the physician who so quickly 
answered her prayers. 

"While a man named Eobert was travelling alone at mid- 
day, he saw the spirit of error in the shape of a man, and 
was immediately struck blind. A long time afterwards, he 
sought the tomb of St. Judoc, and professed himself his 
servant before Abbot Guy. The same day blood flowed 
freely from his eyes, and he recovered his sight, and at 
vespers publicly declared that he could see the monks sitting 
on their benches. 

Grunzo, a priest of Lorraine, suffered for seven years 
extreme weakness in his hands and feet. Some one who saw 
him recommended him to go and find the physician Judoc 
in Ponthicu. He hastened to follow this advice. On a 
Sunday, about the third hour, he entered the church, and 
prayed prostrate on the pavement, which he bedewed with 
his tears. Having finished his prayers, he rose up sound. 
Then he joined in the mass with great joy, and gave a 
faithful account of his recovery to the people, with thanks- 
giving to God. 

Waldemar of Lorraine, having lost his right eye through 
sickness, determined, by the advice of his friends, on a 
pilgrimage to St. Judoc. But, missing his way, he happened 
to light in company with his friend on the fountain which 
Judoc in his lifetime had caused by his merits to burst forth. 
Waldemar, seeing a fountain of very clear water, called to 
his companion to stop, and sat down to rest ; presently, he 
washed his hands and his face in the fountain, and 
suddenly recovered sight in the eye which was blind. 
Thus cured, he came joyfully to the monastery, and gave 
thanks to God, surrounded by rejoicing friends. 

Two demoniacs, named Maginard, were set free at the 
tomb of St. Judoc, and lived long afterwards in the world 
with sound minds. 

Sieburg, wife of Bertrand, a man of distinction, having 
been subject for ten mouths to a flow of blood from her 



A.D. 977 — 1031.] MIRACLES OF ST. JUDOC. 477 

nostrils, was conducted by her friends to the shrine of St. 
Judoc to obtain a cure. She offered her prayers, but no 
relief immediately followed, and she left the church sorrow- 
ful and full of complaints. But when in bitterness of spirit 
she had set forth to return home, as she passed a cross set 
up by the way-side, the blood ceased to flow from her 
nostrils. Immediately turning back, she retraced her steps 
to the monastery of the holy man ; and her thanksgivings 
having been offered, she was entirely healed. 

Eobert de Terouenne, going alone at mid-day to oversee 
his work in the field, was suddenly seized by the devil, and 
tormented to such a degree that he was tempted by the 
adversary almost without intermission to destroy everything, 
and exen to devour men. His three brothers therefore, 
havmg kept the fast of the four seasons in June, brought 
him bound to the tomb of St. Judoc, where they remained 
from the fourth day of the week to Saturday. From that 
time the afflicted man began to be more tranquil, and being 
restored to a sound mind, devoted himself from thenceforth 
to the service of St. Judoc. At his request abbot Gruy 
ascended the pulpit on the feast of St. John the Baptist, 
and related the circumstances to the people, pointing out to 
them Eobert, who was present, and publicly testified his own 
deliverance. 

A certain man of ripe years, was for seven years so deaf 
that he could hear nothing. His wife brought him to the 
tomb of the blessed saint, where he prayed for a while. 
Then his wife, by Pridian' s order, led him to the fountain ot 
St. Judoc, and three times sprinkled his head with the 
waters of the fountain. Presently, returning to the church 
he heard mass, which, for seven years previously he had been 
unable to hear. 

Isembard de Pleuri at the request of Adelelm, wrote these 
accounts of what happened in the time of Hugh the Great, 
or King Robert ; but since that time the blessed Judoc has 
not ceased to work miracles in favour of those who oflered 
him their prayers, though from negligence they are not 
recorded. The rulers of the kingdom being changed, and 
the nobles engaged in mutual quarrels, the body of St. 
Judoc was again covered with earth from fear of the enemy, 
and lay so long in concealment that all those who were 



478 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.XIII. 

concerned in it forgot wliere it was deposited. In the time 
of Henry, king of France, Avhen the monks often complained 
of their not knowing where their patron saint, the blessed 
Judoc, rested, the holy remains were divinely revealed to a 
simple layman, who, pointing out the spot, they were 
solemnly raised under the superintendence of the abbot and 
brethren. The monks then admitted the discoverer of the 
sacred relics into their order, and made him guardian of the 
holy body, committing to his charge the offerings of the 
faithful. On the death of the abbot, his successor did not 
esteem the sacristan as he ought, nor treat him as 
courteously as his predecessor had done. Whereupon the 
sacristan, being much aggrieved, got possession of the holy 
relics by night and carried them with him into France. 
Geoffrey, lord of Gomerfontaine, honourably received him 
^vith the treasure he bore, and appointed him master of the 
castle church, in which there were four canons, for the term 
of his life. Some time afterwards, wars breaking out, Henry, 
king of France, besieged Gomerfontaine with the strength of 
the French army, driving out Geofirey, and setting the place 
on fire. But while the devouring flames were consuming the 
church and buildings of the castle, and horrible cries were 
raised by the assailants and the besieged, as happens at such 
times, one of the canons took the bones of St. Judoc from the 
tomb, and fled in all haste from the burning edifices. One 
of the king's soldiers met him on the bridge, and demanded 
of him what was the burden he carried. Upon his answering 
that it contained sacred vestments, and his own books, the 
soldier violently stripped him of all he carried, and took his 
prize with him to the territory of Fames. The man's name 
was Robert, surnamed Meslebren, that is. Mix-bran ; he Avas 
one of the retainers of Ealph de Chaudri, who was at that 
time one of the best knights in the French army. The 
soldier, greatly delighted with the prize he had made, caused 
it to be carefully deposited in the church of St. Martin, by 
the priest and parishioners, where, for more than seventy 
years, it was reverently preserved. Innumerable miracles 
were there wrought on the sick, and to this day are 
frequently repeated, when the faith of the supplicants merit 
relief, as the whole neighbourhood bears witness. 

"William de Merleraidt, a venerable monk and priest, has 



A.D. 1031 — 1108.] EELICS OF ST. JUDOC AT PAENES. 479 

composed an excellent work on the translation of tlie holy 
body, of which we have only here given a brief account, 
and of the many cures of the sick performed at Parnes. In 
this book he truly and clearly relates all the wonderful 
occurrences connected with the sacred relics. Philip, king 
of France, was afflicted with fever two years, nor could all 
the skill of his physicians afford him any relief. At the end 
of the two years he came to Parnes, and, drinking water 
made lioly by touching the relics of St. Judoc, he spent two 
nights in prayer before the holy body, and his pains ceased, 
and he recovered his health on the spot. In consequence, 
the king made an offering to St. Judoc of fifty sous of 
Pontoise, and granted a fair, to be held annually at Parnes 
in honour of St. Judoc, on the third day of the feast of 
Whitsuntide, confirming the grant by a royal charter.^ 

Besides these, manj^ other miracles have been wrought, 
and continue to be daily performed at Parnes through the 
merits of St. Judoc, of which some are recorded, but the 
greater part are buried in oblivion, from the negligence of 
those who were privy to them, or from the ignorance of those 
who saw or experienced them. For my part, though I must 
hasten to other matters which claim our attention, I have 
most willingly collected some few details relating to you, 
holy Judoc, inserting in this imperfect work notices of the 
heavenly gifts conferred on you, and devoutly extolling them 
so far as my limited powers permit. I beseech you there- 
fore, O glorious son of the king of the Bretons, and fellow 
of the angels, that you commend me to God by the efficacy 
of your merits, and obtain for me admission into the societv 
of the saints, with whom, contemplating in his glory the 
Creator of all things, I may ofler triumphant praises through 
all ages. Amen. 

^ There are no traces in the French historians of this pilgrimage of 
Philip I. to Parnes, nor of the grant which resulted from it. We shall, 
indeed, find him in the sequel suffering from painful and disgusting disor- 
ders, which were considered as the punishment of his adulterous connexion 
with Bertrade de Montfort, but which cannot be identified with the inter- 
mittent fever, which is said to have been the cause of his visit to Parnes. 



480 ORDEEICTJS VITALIS. [b.III. CH.XIT. 

Ch. XIY. Invasion of England hy William, duke of 
Normandy — JBattle of Stamford hridge — Battle of Hast- 
ings — William marches to Dover — Thence to Lo7idon, lohere 
he is croivned. 

J.^ the month of August,^ Harold, king of Norway, and 
Tostig, with a powerful fleet set sail over the wide sea, and, 
steering for England with a favourable aparctic, or north 
wind, landed in Yorkshire, which was the first object of their 
invasion. Meanwhile, Harold of England, having intelli- 
gence of the descent of the Norwegians, withdrew his ships 
and troops from Hastings and Pevensey, and the other sea- 
ports on the coast lying opposite to Neustria, which he had 
carefully guarded with a powerful armament during the 
whole of the year, and threw himself unexpectedly, with a 
strong force by hasty marches on his enemies from the north. 
A hard-fought battle ensued, in which there was great 
effusion of blood on both sides, vast numbers being slain 
with brutal rage. At last the furious attacks of the English 
secured them the victory, aud the king of Norway as well as 
Tostig, Avith their whole army, were slain. ^ The field of 
battle may be easily discovered by travellers, as great heaps 
of the boues of the slain lie there to this day, memorials of 
the prodigious numbers which fell on both sides. 

While however the attention of the English was diverted 
by the invasion of Yorkshire, and by Grod's permission they 
neglected, as I have already mentioned, to guard the coast, 
the Norman fleet, which for a whole month had been waiting 
for a south wind in the mouth of the river Dive and the 
neighbouring harbours, took advantage of a favourable 
breeze from the west to gain the roads of St. Yaleri.^ 

^ This expedition did not sail till the month of September. Tostig 
arrived first at the rendezvous in the mouth of the Humber with fifty ships, 
but was driven off by Earl Edwin, and being afterwards joined by the king 
of Norway on the coast of Scotland, the united fleets sailed up the Humber 
to the neighbourhood of York. Huntingdon's History, p. 209. 

^ The battle of Stamford Bridge, in which Harold of Norway and Tostig 
fell, was fought on the eve of St. Matthew, 20th of September. The earls 
Edwia and Morcar had engaged the enemy five days before at Fulford 
Gate, and were defeated, the invaders retaining possession of the city of 
York and the neighbouring country. 

^ St. Valeri-sur-Somme. According to Guy of Amiens, the fleet was 



A.D. 1066.] THE NOEMAN INVASION OF ENGLAND. 481 

While it lay there innumerable vows and prayers were 
offered for the safety of themselves and their friends, and 
floods of tears were shed. For the intimate friends and 
relations of those who were to remain at home, witnessing 
the embarkation of fifty thousand knights and men-at-arms, 
with a large body of infantry, who had to brave the dangers 
of the sea, and to attack an unknown people on their own 
soil, were moved to tears and sighs, and full of anxiety both 
for themselves and their countrymen, their minds fluctuating 
between fear and hope. Duke William and the whole army 
committed themselves to God's protection, with prayers, and 
oflerings, and vows, and accompanied a procession from the 
chui'ch, carrying the relics of St. Valeri, confessor of Christ, 
to obtain a favourable wind. At last when by Grod's grace 
it suddenly came round to the quarter which was the object 
of so many prayers, the duke, full of ardour, lost no time in 
embarking the troops, and giving the signal for hastening 
the departure of the fleet. The Norman expedition, there- 
fore, crossed the sea on the night of the third of the calends 
of October [29th September], which the Catholic church 
observes as the feast of St. Michael the archangel, and, 
meeting with no resistance, and landing safely on the coast 
of England, took possession of Pevensey and Hastings, the 
defence of which was entrusted to a chosen body of soldiers, 
to cover a retreat and guard the fleet. 

Meanwhile the English usurper, after having put to the 
sword his brother Tostig, and his royal enemy, and 
slaughtered their immense army, returned in triumph to 
London. As however worldly prosperity soon vanishes like 
smoke before the wind, Harold's rejoicings for his bloody 
victory were soon darkened by the threatening clouds of a 
still heavier storm. Nor was he suftered long to enjoy the 
security procured by his brother's death; for a hasty 
messenger brought him the intelligence that the Normans 
had embarked.^ Learning soon afterwards that they had 

detained five days by contrary winds, and as it sailed on Michaelmas Day, 
2.9th of September, it probably assembled at St. Valeri on the 23rd oi 
that month. 

^ Henry of Huntinp;don informs us that Harold received the news of 
the disembarcation of the Norman expedition at Hastings on the same day 
on which the battle of Stamford Bridge was fought, while he was at dinner 

TOL. I. II 



482 OEDEEICUS YITALISv [b.I.I. CH.XIY. 

actually landed, he made preparations for a fresh conflict. 
Tor his intrepidity was dauntless, and his conduct of aflairs 
admirable, while' his personal strength was great, his 
presence commanding, and he had the arts of a persuasive 
eloquence, and of a courtesy which endeared him to his 
supporters. Still his mother Githa, who was much afflicted 
by the death of her son Tostig, and his other faithful 
friends, dissuaded him from engaging in battle with the 
]N"ormans; his brother, Earl Gurth, thus addressing him: 
"It is best, dearest brother and lord, that your courage 
should be tempered by discretion. You are worn by the 
conflict with the Norwegians from which you are only just 
come, and you are in eager haste to give battle to the 
Normans. 'Allow yourself, I pray you, some time for rest. 
Eeflect also, in your wisdom, on the oath you have taken to 
the duke of Normandy. Beware of incurring the guilt of 
perjury, lest by so great a crime you di-aw ruin on yourself 
and the forces of this nation, and stain for ever the honour 
of our own race. For myself, I am bound by no oaths, I 
am under no obUgations to Count "William. I am therefore 
in a position to fight with him undauntedly in defence of 
our native soil. But do you, my brother, rest awhile in 
peace, and wait the issue of the contest, that so the liberty 
which is the glory of England, may not be ruined by your 

fall" . . 

Harold was very indignant at this speech. Holding m 

contempt the wholesome advice of his friends, he loaded his 

brother with reproaches for his faithful counsel, and even 

forgot himself so far as to kick his mother when she hung 

about him in her too great anxiety to detain him with her.^ 

Eor six days Harold sent forth the summons to call the 

people to arms from all quarters, and, having assembled vast 

numbers of the Enghsh, he led them by forced marches 

against the enemy. It was his design to take them unawares, 

and crush them at once by a night attack, or, at least, by a 

at York, which was impossible, as the landing was not eifected until nine 
davs afterwards. Guy of Amiens says the news was brought by an eye- 
witness. William of Jumieges agrees with Ordericus Vitalis in stating that 
Harold received it in London. 

' This anecdote is copied almost literally from William de Jumieges, b. 

vii. ch, 35. 



A.D. 1066.] BATTLE OF HASTINGS. 483 

sudden onset, and, that they might not escape by sea, he 
caused a fleet of seventy ships, full of soldiers, to guard the 
coast. Duke William, having intelligence of Harold's 
approach, ordered his troops to take to their arms on the 
morning of Saturday.^ He then heard mass, strengthening 
both body and soul by partaking of the consecrated host ; 
he also reverently suspended from his neck the holy relics on 
which Harold had sworn. Many of the clergy had followed 
the Norman army, among whom were two bishops, Odo, of 
Bayeux, and Geoffrey, of Coutances, with attendant clerks 
and monks, whose duty it was to aid the war with their 
prayers and counsels. The battle commenced at the third 
hour of the ides [14th] of October, and was fought despe- 
rately the whole day, with the loss of many thousand men 
on both sides. The Norman duke drew up his light troops, 
consisting of archers and men armed with cross-bows, in the 
first line ; the infantry in armour formed the second rank ; 
and in the third were placed the cavalry, in the centre of 
which the duke stationed himself with the flower of his 
troops, so as to be able to issue his commands, and give 
support to every part of the army. 

On the other side, the English troops, assembled from all 
parts of the neighbourhood, took post at a place which was 
anciently called Senlac,^ many of them personally devoted 
to the cause of Harold, and all to that of their country, 
which they were resolved to defend against the foreigners. 
Dismounting from their horses, on which it was determined 
not to rely, they formed a solid column of infantry, and thus 
stood firm in the position they had taken. 

Turstin, son of E-ollo, bore the standard of Normandy.* 
The sound of the trumpets in both armies was the terrible 
signal for beginning the battle. The Normans made the 
first attack with ardour and gallantry, their infantry rushing 
forward to provoke the English, and spreading wounds and 
death through their ranks by showers of arrows and bolts. 
The English, on their side, made a stout resistance, each 

^ Saturday, 1 4th of October, the day of the feast of St. Calistus. 

^ About nine miles from Hastings. 

^ See in tlie Roman de Ron, t. ii. p. 195, &c., the circumstances which 
led to this person having the honour of bearing William's standard. 
According to W'ace, it was the consecrated standard sent by the pope, 

I I 2 



484 OEDEEICUS YITALIS. [b.III. CH.XIT. 

man straining his powers to the utmost. The battle raged 
for some time with the utmost violence between both parties. 
At length the indomitable bravery of the English threw the 
Bretons, both horse and foot, and the other auxiliary troops 
composing the left wing, into confusion, and, in their rout, 
they drew with them almost all the rest of the duke's army, 
who, in their panic, believed that he was slain. The duke, 
perceiving that large bodies from the enemy had broken their 
ranks in pursuit of his flying troops, rode up to the fugitives 
and checked their retreat, loudly threatening thera, and 
striking with his lance. Taking off his helmet, and exposing 
his naked head, he shouted : " See, I am here ; I am still 
living, and, by God's help, shall yet have the victory." Sud- 
denly the courage of the fugitives was restored by these bold 
words of the duke ; and, intercepting some thousands of 
their pursuers, they cut them down in a moment. In this 
manner, the Normans, twice again pretending to retreat, 
and when they were followed by the English, suddenly 
wheeling their horses, cut their pursuers off from the main 
body, surrounded and slew them. The ranks of the English 
were much thinned by these dangerous feints, through which 
they fell separated from each other ; so that, when thousands 
were thus slaughtered, the Normans attacked the survivors 
with still greater vigour. They were charged home by the 
troops of Maine, Erance, Brittany, and Aquitaine, and great 
numbers of them miserably perished. 

Among others present at this battle, were Eustace, Count 
de Boulogne, AYilliam, son of Eichard, Count d'Evreux, 
Geoffrey, son of Kobert, Count de Mortagne, William Eitz- 
Osbern, Bobert, son of Eobert de Beaumont, a novice in 
arms. Aimer, Yiscount de Thenars, Earl Hugh, the constable, 
Walter Giffard, and Ealph Toni,^ Hugh de Grant-mesnil, 
and William de AYarenne, with many other knights illustrious 
for their military achievements, and whose names merit a 
record in the annals of history amongst the most famous 
warriors. Duke William surpassed them all in courage and 
conduct; for he nobly performed the duties of a general, 

1 Hugh de Montfort, the constable ; Walter GifFard, count de Longue- 
ville; Rollo, or Ralph, lord of Toni and Conches, standard bearer of 
Normandy. 



I 



A.D. 10G6.] KING HAROLD SLAIN. 485 

staying the fliglifc of his troops, re-animating tlicir courage, 
their comrade in the greatest dangers, and more frequently 
calling on them to follow where he led, than commanding 
them to advance before him. He had three horses killed 
under him in t'le battle ; thrice he re-mounted, and did not 
suffer his steeds to be long unavenged. Shields, helmets, 
and coats of mail were shivered by the furious and impatient 
thrusts of his sword ; some he dashed to the earth with his 
shield, and was at all times as ready to cover and protect his 
friends, as to deal death among his foes. 

Although the battle was fought with the greatest fury 
from nine o'clock in the morning, King Harold was slain in 
the first onset, ^ and his brother Earl Leofwin fell some time 
afterwards, with many thousands of the royal army. Towards 
evening, the English finding that their king and the chief 
nobles of the realm, with a great part of their army, had 
fallen, while the Normans still showed a bold front, and 
made desperate attacks on all who made any resistance, 
they had recourse to flight as expeditiously as they could. 
Various were the fortunes which attended their retreat ; 
some recovering their horses, some on foot, attempted to 
escape by the highways ; more sought to save themselves by 
striking across the country. The Normans, finding the 
English completely routed, pursued them vigorously all 
Sunday night, but not without suffering a great loss ; for, 
galloping onward in hot pursuit, they fell unawares, horses 
and armour, into an ancient trench, overgrown and concealed 
by rank grass,^ and men in their armour and horses rolling 
over each other, were crushed and smothered. This acci- 
dent restored confidence to the routed English, for, perceiving 
the advantage given them by the mouldering rampart and a 

^ William de Jumieges says that Harold made''a night attack on the 
enemy, having hastened by forced marches to take them by surprise. Our 
author's statement, that Harold was slain at the first onset, is a gross 
mistake, it being universally agreed that he fell pierced by an arrow 
in the eye after sunset. On the whole, this account of the battle is very 
unsatisfactory, and far inferior to the picture of it drawn by William of 
Poitiers, as well as deficient in the circumstantial details given by other 
historians. 

2 According to the History of Battle Abbey, it was a ravine or natural 
hollow, which long preserved the name of Malfoased in memory of thi&. 
event. 



486 ORDEEICTJS YITALIS. [b.TII. Cn.XIY. 

succession of ditches, tliej rallied in a body, and, making a 
sudden stand, caused the Normans severe loss. At this 
place Eugenulf, lord of Laigle, and many others fell, the 
number of the Normans who perished being, as reported by 
some who were present, nearly fifteen thousand. Thus did 
Almighty Grod, on the eve of the ides [14th] of October, 
punish in various ways the innumerable sinners in both 
armies. Tor, on this Saturday, the Normans butchered 
with remorseless cruelty thousands of the English, who long 
before had murdered the innocent prince Alfred and his 
attendants ; ^ and, on the Saturday before the present battle," 
had massacred without pity King Harold and Earl Tostig, 
with multitudes of Norwegians. The righteous Judge 
avenged the English on Sunday night, when the furious 
Normans were precipitated into the concealed trench ; for 
they had broken the divine law by their boundless covetous- 
ness ; and, as the Psalmist says : " Their feet were swift to 
shed blood," whereupon, "sorrow and unhappiness was in 
their wavs." ^ 

Duke "William, perceiving the English troops suddenly 
rally, did not halt ; and when he found Count Eustace with 
fifty men-at-arms retreating, and the count wished him to 
have the signal sounded for recalling the pursuers, he com- 
manded him with a loud voice to stand firm. The count, 
however, familiarly approaching the duke, whispered in his ear 
that it would be safer to retreat, predicting his sudden death 
if he persisted in the pursuit. While he was saying this, 
Eustace received a blow between the shoulders, so violent 
that the iioise of the stroke was plainly heard, and it caused 
blood to flow from his mouth and nostrils, and he was borne 
off by his comrades in a dying state. 

The victory being secured, the duke returned to the field 
of battle, where he viewed the dreadful carnage, wliich could 
not be seen without commiseration. There the flower of 
the youth and nobility of England covered the ground far 

1 This frightful massacre was made in 1036, during the reign of Harold 
Harefoot. 

2 Our author continues his error about the date of the battle of Stamford 
Bridge, which, as before remarked, occurred on the 20th of St ptember, 
nearly a month before. 

^ Psalm xiii. 3. 



A.D. 1066.] Harold's body ixteered. 487 

and near stained with blood. Harold could not be dis- 
covered by his features, but was recognized by other tokens, 
and his corpse, being borne to the duke's camp, was, by 
order of the conqueror, delivered to AVilliam Mallet for 
interment near the sea-shore, which had long been guarded 
by his arms.^ 

Inconstant fortune frequently causes adverse and unex- 
pected changes in human affairs ; some persons being lifted 
from the dust to the height of great power, while others, 
suddenly falling from their high estate, groan in extreme dis- 
tress. Thus Edith, Earl Godwin's relict, who once enjoyed 
wealth and influence, was now overwhelmed with grief and a 
prey to the deepest misfortunes. She had borne seven sons 
to her husband : Sweyn, Tostig, Harold, Gurth, Alfgar, and 
Wulnoth. They were all earls, and distinguished for their 
handsome persons, as well as what the world calls excellence ; 
but each of them underwent a different and disastrous fate. 
Alfgar and Wulnoth, indeed, feared God and lived according 
to his laws, and both died in the odour of sanctity confessing 
the true faith, the one a pilgrim and monk at E-heims, the 
other at Salisbury.^ Eor the other five, following the career 
of arms, they met their death in a variety of ways, and on 
different occasions. 

^ There are various accounts of the circumstances attending the findhig 
of the body of Harold, and the treatment of his remains. Guy of Amiens 
says that it was mutilated, but the fragments were collected after the battle 
by the duke's order, and conveyed to his camp, wrapped in a purple 
winding-sheet. Some of these details are evidently inventions of a later 
period, but the rest of his story agrees with that of Ordericus and William 
de Poitiers, and the coincidence of two writers so near the time leaves little 
reason to doubt that our author was right in adopting their account. It 
appears from Guy's narrative, that William Mallet was "half Norman, half 
English," probably one of tlie Normans already settled in England, and 
thus better qualified for his melancholy office. A legend entitled The Life 
of Harold, represents that king as having been found on the field of battle 
among the dead and dying by a Saracen woman, who concealed him at 
Winchester for two years. It then sends him on a pilgrimage to Jerusa- 
lem, and brings him back to England to spend a long life in retirement 
and austere penitence. 

^ Our author has omitted to tell us that Wulnoth passed his whole life in 
confinement, from the time he was sent to Normandy as a hostage by 
Edward the Confessor, in 1502, except the short interval between his release 
by the Conqueror, when on his death-bed, and his being again condemned 
to imprisonment by one of the first acts of William Rufus. 



488 OEDEEICUS VITALTS. [b.III. CH.XIV. 

The sorrowing mother now offered to Duke William, for 
the body of Harold, its weight in gold ; but the great cpu- 
queran refused such a barter, thinking it was not right that 
a mother should pay the last honours to one by whose 
insatiable ambition, vast numbers lay unburied. He issued 
orders that the bodies of his own soldiers should be juried 
with the greatest care; and also gave all the English who 
applied for leave free liberty to bury those of their friends, 
xlfter providing for the decent interment of the dead the 
duke marched to Eomney, and taking it by assault, re- 
venged the slaughter of a party of his troops, who, having 
landed there by mistake, were fiercely attacked by the in- 
habitants and cruelly butchered, after great loss on both 
sides. 

The duke then continued his march to Dover, where 
there was a large body of people collected, because they 
thought the position impregnable, the castle standing on 
the summit of a steep rock, overhanging the sea. The 
garrison, however, struck with panic at the duke's ap- 
proach, were preparing to surrender, when some Norman 
squires, greedy for spoil, set the place on fire, and the 
devouring flames spreading around, many parts were ruined 
and burnt. The duke, compassionating those who were 
willing to render him their submission, ordered them to be 
paid the cost of rebuilding their houses, and their other 
losses. The castle being taken, eight days were spent in 
strengthening the fortifications. "While he lay there a great 
number of soldiers, who devoured flesh-meat half raw and 
drank too much water, died of dysentery, and many more 
felt the effects to the end of their days. The duke, leaving 
a garrison in the castle, with those who were suffering from 
dysentery, marched onward to complete the subjugation of 
those he had vanquished. The Kentish men, of their own 
accord, met him not far from Dover and swore fealty to 
him, delivering hostages for their allegiance.^ 

After that Harold was slain, Stigand, archbishop of Can- 
terbury, and the great earls Edwin and Morcar, with the 
other English nobles, who were not engaged in the battle of 

^ According to Guy of Amiens, William remained no less than five 
days after the battle in his camp at Hastinjjs, and half way to Dover met 
a deputation of the inhabitants, who offered him the keys of the place. 



A.D. 106G.] EDOAE ETUELING ELECTED KING. 480 

8eulac, declared Edgar Etlieling, son of Edward king of 
Hungary/ son of Edmund Ironside, king, and gave out that 
they were resolved to fight bravely under that prince, for 
their country and their nation against foreign enemies.^ 
Meanwhile duke William, having intelligence that they 
were assembling in increasing numbers, marched with a 
strong force, and encamping near London, detached fifty 
knights and men-at-arms in advance, who compelled the 
troops which issued from the city to oppose them to retreat 
within the walls, after losing many of their number, to the 
great sorrow of the citizens, who lamented their sons and 
friends. Eire also was added to the calamities inflicted on 
them, all the buildings on that side of the river being burnt. 
"Whereupon the duke crossed the Thames and marched to 
Wallingford. 

Stigand the archbishop, and other English nobles, met 
him there,^ and, abandoning the cause of Edgar, came to 
terms wdth William, to whom they did homage, and being 
received with favour were secured in all their honours and 
estates. The Londoners, also, being better advised, now 
transferred their allegiance to the duke, and delivered to 
him such and so many hostages as he required. Edgar 
Etheling, therefore, who had been declared king by the 
English, having no means of resistance, humbly surrendered 

' The pretensions advanced by our author to Edward having been king 
of Hungary, have been already refuted, book i. p. 148. 

2 Ordericus Vitalis omits to mention among the Engh'sh nobles one of 
them who, according to Guy of Amiens, played a distinguished part on 
this occasion. His name was Ansgard, or Asgar, stallarius, constable or 
master of the horse, who had the command of London, although he was 
afflicted with an infirmity in the loins which obliged him to use a litter. 
He it was who conducted the negotiations, the duke having sent him a 
secret message, endeavouring to deceive him by empty promises, and 
Ansgard receiving his overtures with intentions quite as insincere. How- 
ever, the treaty was concluded, and the chiefs of the English party went in 
procession to William, who embraced the young Edgar. Domesday book, 
and a MS. of Waltham Abbey, show that Ansgard was a person of great 
importance, and that the great number of manors which he held in right 
of his office were conferred on Geoffrey de Mandeville, although William 
Fitz-Osborn succeeded him as constable. These domains were in Berk- 
shire, Middlesex, Hertfordshire, Oxfordshire, Northamptonshire, Warwick- 
shire, and Essex. 

' It was not at Wallingford, but at Berkhampstead, that William 
received the submission of the Londoners and English lords. 



490 OEDEEICUS VITALIS. [b.ITI. CH.XIV, 

Ms person and his kingdom to "William. This young prince 
was of a mild and ingenuous disposition, and being a kins- 
man of king Edward the Grreat, as his nephew's son/ the 
duke affectionately embraced him, and treated him all his 
life with the regard due to a son.^ 

In the course of three months, by Grod's providence, tran- 
quillity was restored throughout England, and the bishops 
and barons of the realm having made their peace with 
William, entreated him to be crowned, according to the 
custom of the English kings. This was the great aim of 
the Normans, who had encountered great perils by land and 
sea, to procure for their prince the ensigns of royalty ; and 
this, by divine influence, was the desire also of the native 
inhabitants, who, up to that time, had only given their 
allegiance to crowned kings. 

At that time Aldred was metropolitan and archbishop of 
Tork.^ He was a great lover of justice, of mature age, 
wise, eloquent, and good, and distinguished by many vir- 
tues, and following in the footsteps of the fathers, strove 
earnestly to be received with favour by the King of kings. 
But Stigand, archbishop of Canterbury, was too much en- 
gaged in secular affairs, and had been suspended by Pope 
Alexander for certain crimes. 

At length, in the year of our Lord 1067,* the fifth indic- 
tion, on Christmas day, the English assembled at London 
for "William's coronation, and a guard of Norman troops 
was posted round the abbey, mounted and fully armed, to 
prevent any treasonable and seditious attempt. Then, in 
the presence of the bishops, abbots, and nobles, of the 
whole realm of Albion, Aldred the archbishop consecrated 

^ Edgar Atheling was great nephew to Edward the Confessor, as grandson 
of his brother Edmond Ironsides. It would appear that he was very 
young at this time; Guy of An:\iens speaks of him as " the boy raised to 
the rank of king." 

2 This was hardly the case, as we find Edgar frequently in arms against 
William, and that he had often reason to complain of his parsimonious 
conduct towards him. 

^ Aldred was appointed archbishop of York in 1060, This prelate had 
not always been so irreproachable as our author represents, and it was with 
some difficulty the pope was prevailed on to send him the pallium. 

* This date should be 1066; Ordericus has made it 1077, reckoning the 
year as commencing at Christmas. 



DEC. 25, 1066.] CORO^s-ATION OF WILLIAM I. 491 

William, duke of Normaiicly, king of England, and placed 
the roval crown ^ on his head in the church of St. Peter the 
apostle, called Westminster Abbey, where the venerable 
kins: Edward lies interred. 

Meanwhile, at the instigation of the devil, the enemy of 
all good, an unforeseen occurrence, pregnant with miscliief 
to both nations, and an omen of future calamities, suddenly 
happened. For when Aldred the archbishop was demand- 
ing of the English, and Greoffrey, bishop of Coutances, of 
the jSTormans, whether they consented to have William for 
their king, and the whole assembly loudly gave their willing 
assent, with one voice though not in one language, the men- 
at-arms, who formed the guard outside the abbey, upon 
hearing the shouts of joyful acclamation raised by the 
people in the church in a language tbey did not under- 
stand, suspected some treachery and imprudently set fire to 
the neighbouring houses. The flames quickly spreading, 
the people in the church were seized with panic in the 
midst of their rejoicings, and crowds of men and women, of 
all ranks and conditions, eagerly struggled to make their 
escape from the church, as if they were threatened with 
immediate danger. The bishops only, with some few of the 
clergy and monks, maintained their post before the altar, 
and trembling with fear completed the coronation oflice 
with some difiiculty, the king himself being much alarmed. 
Almost all the rest hastened to the scene of conflagration, 
some to make vigorous eflbrts to extinguish the flames, and 
more in the prospect of committing robberies in the con- 
fusion that prevailed. The English were greatly enraged 
when they understood the origin of this unfortunate aftair, 
which leading them to suspect the Normans and consider 
them faithless, they waited for some future opportunity oi' 
revenge. 

* Guy of Amiens, who gives a minute description of William's crown, 
says that it was the work of a Byzantine goldsmith. 



492 OKDEEICrS yitalis. [b.iii. cii.xv. 

Ch. Xy. Notices of autliors who have given accounts of the 
life and times of king William I. — William of Poitiers 
— Guy, lishop of Amiens — Florence of Worcester, the con- 
tinuer of Marianus Scotiis — Sigehert of Gemblours. 

KiXG AViLLiAM governed firmly and prudently, both in 
prosperity and adversity, the kingdom he gained, reigning 
over it with great honour twenty years, eight months, and 
sixteen days.^ "William of Poitiers, archdeacon of Lisieux, 
has given a full account of his merits, his excellent institu- 
tions, his great successes and brave and wonderful achieve- 
ments, in a valuable work distinguished for the elegance of 
its style and its depth of thought. Having for a long pe- 
riod been chaplain to this king, he made it his business to 
retrace at length, with unquestionable truth and ample details 
all that he had himself witnessed or been party to ; but 
unfortunately he was prevented by adverse events from 
continuing his narrative to the king's death.'^ 

Gu}'", bishop of Amiens,^ also wrote an epic poem, which, 
in imitation of Virgil and Papinius, describes the battle of 

^ Thia calculation is right, reckoning as our author does, William's reign 
from the day of his coronation, Christmas, 1066, to the day of his death, 
September 9, 1087. 

^ William of Poitiers' work is entitled: Gesta Gulielmi ducis Norman- 
norum et regis Anglorum. It is published in Duchesne's Receidl des His- 
toriens Normands, but unfortunately from a very imperfect manuscript. 

' Guy, bishop of Amiens, appears to have been the son or grandson of 
AValter II., count of Amiens and the Vexin, and consequently brother or 
nephew of Fulk I., his predecessor, to whom he succeeded before May 
29th, 1059. He attended Queen Matilda to England as her almoner in 
1068, and died about the year 1076. William de Jumieges refers to this 
poem, which he says was written in hexameters, and he calls it a respect- 
able work, " opus non contemnendum." Dr. Pertz, the learned editor of 
the Monumenta Germanica, discovered in the Royal Library at Brussels, 
formerly that of the dukes of Burgundy, a manuscript (of the twelfth 
century) of an anonymous poem, which from the initials W. . . L. . . in the 
second line (Wuido or Guido to Lanfranc ?) and its general character, is 
supposed to be the work of Guy, bishop of Amiens, referred to by 
Ordericus. The narrative embraces a period of about four months, 
and if written by Guy was composed before his journey to England in 
1068. The author's official position and proximity to the events described, 
and the highest personages engaged in them stamp the details with the 
character of great authenticity; but unfortunately they are very scanty as 
far as regards the duke's invasion of Enoiland. The poem in the Brussels' 
MS. was published by M. Petrie in the Jlonumenla Historica Britannica^ 
pp. 856, &c. 



A.D. ]OGG — 10S7.] COTEMPOEAET niSTOEIA>TS. 493 

Senlac, blamincr and accusing Harold, and liiglily praising 
and exalting "William. 

John of Worcester/ a native of England and a monk from 
his childhood, of venerable character and great learning, in 
his continuation of the chronicles of Marianus Scotus, gives 
a faithful account of King William and of the events which 
took place during his reign, and those of his sons "William 
Rufus and King Henry to the present day. Marianus 
was a monk of the abbey of St. Alban the martyr, near 
Mayence, where, following to the best of his means, Eusebius 
of C?esarea, St. Jerome, and other historians, he kindly em- 
ployed himself in the charitable office of presenting to such 
sons of the church as were unable themselves to develop 
such important results, the happy fruits of his long studies 
and of the vast labours he underwent in his foreign travels. 
After carefully consulting both ancient and modern writers, 
he published his ChronocjrapJiy, in which, beginning with 
the creation, when God formed Adam out of the dust of 
the earth, and pursuing his inquiries through the books of 
the Old and New Testament, and the Greek and Boman 
histories, he collected all that was important ; and fixing the 
chronology through the series of kings and consuls, which 
he continued to the day of his death, his historical annals are 
deservedly esteemed. John of "Worcester who followed, re- 

1 Florence of Worcester, not John, continued the chronicle of Marianus 
Scotus, not for almost a century, but from 1083 to 1117, as the French 
editor of Ordericus justly observes. But our learned felloAV labourer has 
omitted to explain how Ordericus Vitalis, who tells us at the conclusion of 
the present paragraph that he inspected the original MS. when he was at 
Worcester, fell into this error. It appears, however, that the continuation 
of Marianus was carried on contemporaneously by one or more monks of 
Worcester, and that one of these continuators was named John; so that, 
probably, Ordericus, finding this John employed on the work, or that his 
portion of it followed on the labours of Marianus and Florence without 
interruption in the MS. he examined, hence supposed that the whole of 
the additions were made by him. In corroboration of this supposition it 
may be observed that a person named John appears in the MS. of C.C. 
Coll. Library at Oxford, at least as a contemporary interpolator, if not a 
contimmtor, and this copy seems to have belonged to the church of 
Worcester. The Chronicle of Florence of Worcester was first published 
in London in 1592 from manuscripts then in the possession of Lord Wil- 
liam Howard, and afterwards reprinted at Frankfort very faultily in the 
year 1601. See M. Petrie's Preface to the Monumenta IJistorica Britan- 
nica. Marianus Scotus flourished between 1028 — 108G. 



494j oedeeicus yitalis. [b.iii. ch.xt. 

corded tlie events of nearly a century, and by the order of the 
venerable Wulstan, bishop and monk, appended his continua- 
tion^ to the Chronicle of Mariaaus ; succinctly relating many 
things worthy of observation in the histories of the E-omans, 
Franks, Grermans, and other nations. Accordingly these 
chronicles include the whole series of the Hebrew judges, 
kings, and high priests, from Moses to the destruction of 
Jerusalem in the reigns of Titus and Vespasian, when the 
kingdom of the Jews was justly overthrown on account 
of the death and passion of our Lord. The Chronicles also 
give the names of all the E-oman consuls and dictators, 
emperors and pontiffs, as well as of all the kings of England, 
who reigned from the time that Hengist and Horsa made 
war on Vortigern, king of Britain, to the great injury of 
the Britons. To these the Chronicle adds the bishops who 
governed the English church from the time when Pope 
Gregory commissioned Augustine and Mellitus and other 
monks to preach the word of God in England, by whom 
Ethelbert, king of Kent, Edwin, king of the JN^orthumbrians, 
and other princes of the English nation, were converted to 
the true faith. Sigebert, a monk of Gemblours,^ has extract- 
ed many important passages from these Chronicles, omitting 
however several relating to the insular nations, and adding 
much valuable information respecting the Goths, the Huns, 
the Persians, and other barbarous races. I have been an- 
xious to direct attention to these works, in order that 
inquiring readers may consult them for themselves, offering 
as they do a rich harvest of instruction, though they are 
difficult to meet with. Eor being written by modern authors, 
they are not as yet got into general circulation. One of these 
Chronicles I met with at AV^orcester in England, the other 
at Cambray in Lorraine. It was kindly shown me by 
Eulbert, the learned abbot of the monastery of St. Sepulchre, 
built on the north side of Cambray by the exertions and at 

^ John of Worcester. See the preceding note. St. Wulfstan, bishop 
of Worcester, from September 8, 1062 — January 18, 1095. 

^ Sigebert de Gemblours, born about 1030, died October 5, 1112. He 
composed, among other works, Chronicon ab anno ^^\ , quo Ensebius finit, 
usque, ad annum Chriati 1112, with the additions and continuation to the 
year 1206 of Robert de Torigni. 



A.D. 1066 — 1087.] COTEMPOEAET HISTOEIANS. 495 

the expense of Liutbert, bishop of that citj, where his re- 
mains were honourably interred.^ 

And now, exhausted by my long labours, I sigh for repose 
and am ready to close this I'irst Book^ of the Ecclesiastical 
History which my faithful pen has compiled relative to con- 
temporary and neighbouring princes and doctors of the 
church. In the books which follow I shall speak more fully 
of King William, and describe the untoward changes in 
the state of affairs, both in England and Normandy, looking 
for honour or reward neither from the conquerors nor the 
conquered. 

^ Liutbert, bishop of Cambray, who founded the abbey of St. Sepulchre 
in 10G4. 

- This Avas originally the first book of our author's history, books i. and 
ii. in the present arrangement having been afterwards composed. 



Ejs^d of YOL. I. 



J. HADOON AND SON, PKINTERb, CASTLK STRKET, FINSBURY. 



f 



BOHN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



Longfellow's Poetical Works, com- 
plete, including The Wayside inn. 
Tuenty-four page Engravings, by Birket 
Foster and others, and a new Portrait. 

; or, without the illustrations. 



3s. 6(2. 



Prose "Works, complete. Six- 
teen page Engravings by Birket Foster 
and ethers. 

Marry at' s Masterman Ready; or. 

The Wreck of the I'acitic. 93 Juigiaoings. 

Mission ; or, Scenes in Af- 
rica. (Written tor Young People.) Illus- 
trated by Gilbert and Dalziel. 

Pirate and Three Cutters. 



New Edition, with a Memoir of the 
Author. With 20 Steel Engravings, from 
■Draivings by Clarkson Stansfield, R.A. 

' Privateer' s-Man One Hun- 
dred Years Ago. Eight Engravings on 
Steel, after Stothard. 

Settlers in Canada. New 

Edition. Ten fine Engravings by Gilbert 
and Dalziel. 

Maxwell's Victories of "Wellington 

and the British Armies. Illustrations on 
Sted. 

Micliael Angelo and Raphael, their 

Lives and Worlcs. By Ddppa and C^ua- 
TKKMERE DE QuiNCY. With 13 highfy- 
ftnished Engravings on Steel. 

Miller's History of the Anglo-Sax- 
ons. Written in a popular style, on the 
basis of Sharon Turner. Fortrait of 
Alfred, Map of Saxon Britain, and 12 
elaborate Engravings on Steel. 

Milton's Poetical "\^orks. With a 
Memoir by James Montgomery, Todd's 
Verbal Index to all the Poems, and Ex- 
planatory Notes. With 120 Engravings 
by Thompson and others, from Dravvings 
by W. Harvey. 2 vols. 

Vol. 1. Paradise Lost, complete, with 

Memoir, Notes, and Index. 
Vol. 2. Paradise Regained, and other 
Poems, with Verbal Index to all the 
Poems. 

Mndie's British Birds. Revised by 
W. C. L. Martin. Fifty-tiw Figures and 
7 Elates of Eggs. In 2 vols. 

; or, xjcith the plates coloured. 

Is. 6d. per vol. 

Naval and Military Heroes of Great 

Briuiin ; or, Calendar of Victory. Being a 
Kecord of British Valour and Conquest 
by Sea and Land, on every day in the 
year, from the time of William the 
Conqueror to the Battle of Inkermann. 
By Major John.s, R.M., and Lieutenant 
P. H. Nicolas, ILM. Twenty-four For- 
traits. &i. 



Nicolini's History of the Jesuits: 

their Origin. Progress, Doctrines, and De- 
signs. Fine Portraits of Loyola, Laiines, 
^iavier, Borgia, Acquaviva, Fere la Chaise;, 
and Pope Ganganelli. 

Norway and its Scenery. CompriA^ 

ing Price's Journal, with large Additions, 
and a Road-Book. Edited by T. FoRUSTua. 
Twenty-two Illustrations. 

Paris and its Environs, including 

Versailles, St. CU)ud, and Excursions into 
the Champagne Districts. An illustrated 
Handbook for Travellers. Edited by T. 
Forester. Twenty-tight beautiful En- 
gravings. 

Petrarch's Sonnets, and other Poems, 

Translated into English Verse. By various 
hands. Wiih a Life of the Poet, by 
Thomas Campbell. With 16 Engravings, 

Pickering's History of the Races of 

Man, with an Analytical Synopsis of the 
Natural History of Man. By Dr. Hall. 
Illustrated by numerous Portraits. 

; or, with the plates coloured. 

Is. 6d, 
%• An excellent Edition of a work ori- 
ginally published at 3i. 3s. by the 
American Government. 

Pictorial Handbook of London. Com- 
prising its Antiquities, Architecture, Arts, 
Manufactures, Trade, Institutions, Ex- 
hibitions, Suburbs, &c. Two hundred 
and five Engravings, and a large Map, by 
Loivry. 
This volume contains above 900 pages, 
and is undoubtedly the cheapest five- 
shilling volume ever produced. 

Pictorial Handbook of Modem Geo- 
graphy, on a Popular Plan. Illustrakd 
by 150 Engravings and 51 Maps. 6s. 

; or, with the maps coloured^ 

Is. 6d. 
Two large Editions of this volume have 
been sold. The present New Edition 
is corrected and improved ; and, beside* 
Introducing the recent Censuses of 
England and other countries, records 
the changes which have taken place 
in Italy and America. 

Pope's Poetical "Works. Edited by 
Robert Carkutheks. Numerous En- 
gravings. 2 vols. 

Homer's Iliad. With Intro- 
duction and Notes by J. S. Watson, M.A. 
Illustrated by the entire Series of Flax- 
man's Designs, beautifully engraved by 
Moses (in the full Svo, size). 

Homer's Odyssey, Hymns, 



&c., by other translators, including Chap- 
man, and Introduction and 2s'otos by J. S. 
Watson, M.A. Flaxman's Designs, {)ea«- 
tifully emraved by Moses. 

» 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Pope's Life. Including many of his 
Letters. By Robert Carrutheks. New 
Edition, revised and enlarged. Illustra- 
tions, 

The preceding 5 voh. make a complete 
and elegant edition of Pope's Poetical 
Works and Translations for 25s. 

Pottery and Porcelain, and other Ob- 
jects of Vertn (a Guide to the Knowledge 
of). To which is added an Kngrmved List 
of all the known Marks and Monograms. 
By Hknby G. Boiin. JVumerous Engrav- 
ings. 

; or, coloured. 10s. Qid. 

Pront's (Father) Reliques. New- 
Edition, revised and largely augmented. 
Twent]i-one spirited Etchings by Maclise. 
Two volumes in one. 7s. 6d. 

Eecreations in Shooting. By 

" Craven." 62 Engravings im Wood, 
aft>'.r Harvey, and 9 Engravings on Steel, 
chitjiy after A. Cooper, R.A. 

Redding's Histoiy and Descriptions 

of Wines, Ancient and Modern. Twenty 
beautiful Wooilcuts. 

Eobinson Crusoe. With Illustrations 
by SroTUAKD and Harvey. Twelve beau- 
tiful Engravings on Steel, and 7-4 on 
Wood. 

• ; or, without the Steel illustra- . 

tions. 3s. 6(i. 

The prettiest Edition extant. 

Rome in the Nineteenth Century. 

New Edition. Ruvised by the Author. 
Illustrated by 34 fine Steel Engravings. 
2 vols. 

Southey's Life of Nelson. With 

Additional Notes. Illustrated with 64 
Engravings. 

Starling's ('Miss) Noble Doeds of 

Women ; or, Kxampk's of Female Couraj^e, 
Fortitude, and Yiiiue. Eourteen beautiful 
Illustrations. 



Stuart and Revett's Antiquities of 

Athens, and other Monuments of Greece. 
Illustrated in 71 Steel Plates, and nu- 
merous Woodcuts. 

Tales of the Genii ; or, the Delightful 

Lessons of Horam. Numerous Woodcuts, 
and 8 Sted Engravings, after Stothard. 

Tasso's Jerusalem Delivered. Trans- 
lated into English Spenserian Verse, with 
a Life of the Author. By J. H. Wiffex. 
Eight Engravings on Steel, and 24 on 
Wood, by Tfiurston. 

Walker's Manly Exercises. Con- 
taining Skating, Riding, Driving, Hunting, 
Shooting, Sailing, Rowing, Swimming, &G. 
New Edition, revised by " Craven." 
Forty-four Steel Plates, and numerous 
Woodcuts. 

"Walton's Complete Angler. Edited 
by Knv.'AKU Jijssi:, Ksq. To which is 
added an Account of Fishing Stations, Ac 
by H. G. Bohn. Upwards of 203 En- 
gravings. 

; or, icith 26 additional page 

Ilf ustrations on Steel. Is. Gd. 

Wellington, Life of. By An Olo 
SoLDiKR, from the materials of Maxwell. 
Eighteen Engravings. 

White's Natural History of Sel- 
bome. With Notes by Sir William Jar- 
dine and Edward Jesse, Esq. Illustrated 
by 40 highly-finished Engravings. 

; or, with the plates coloured, 

7s. 6'Z. 

Young, The, Lady's Book. A Ma- 
nual of Elegant Recreations, Arts, Sciences, 
and Accomplishments; including Geology, 
Mineralogy, Conchology, Botany, Ento- 
mology, Ornithology, Costume, Embroi- 
dery, the Escritoire, Archery, Riding, 
Music (instrumental and vocal). Dancing, 
Exercises, Painting, Photography, &c. kc. 
Edi ted by distinguished Professors. Twelve 
Hundred Woodcut Illustrations, and seve- 
ral fine Engravings on Steel. 7s. 6cJ. 

; or, cloth gilt, gilt edges, 9s. 



XI. 



Bohn's Classical Library. 

uniform with the standard library, at 5s. per volume 
(excepting those marked otherwise). 



iEschylus. Literally Translated into 
f^igllsh Prose by an Oxonian. 3s. 

-, Appendix to. Containing 

the New Readings given in Hermann's 
postliumous Mition of -Eschylus. By 
George Burges, M.A, 3s. 6d. 



Ammianus Marcellinus. History of 
liome from Constantius to Valens. Trans- 
lated by C. D. YoNGE, B.A. Double 
volume, 7s. 6d. 
%* This is a very circumstantial and 
amusing history. Giblxtn expresses 
himself largely indebted to it. 



I 



BOHNS VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



Apnleius, the Golden Ass ; Death, of 

Socrates; Florida; aiv.i rHscourse on Magic. 
'Jo which is added a Metrical Version of 
Cupid and Psyche ; and Mrs. Tighe's 
I'sj'che. Frontupitce. 

Aristophanes' Comedies. Literally 

Translated, with Notes and Extracts from 
Frere's and other Metrical Verbions, by 
■\V. J. Hick IE. 2 vols. 
Vol. 1. .t\charnians, Knights, Clouds, 

Wasps, Peace, and Birds. 
Vol. 2. Lysistrata, Thesniophoriazusje, 
Frogs, Ecclesiazuste, and Plutus. 

Aristotle's Ethics. Literally Trans- 
lated by Arclideacon Browne, late Classical 
Professor of King's College. 

Politics and Economics. 

Translated by E. Wauord, M.A. 

Metaphysics. Literally Tians- 



lated, with ISotes, Analysis, Examination 
Questions, and Index, by the Rev. John 
if. M'Mahon, M a., and Gold Medallist in 
Metaphysics, T.C.D. 

History of Animals. In Ten 



Books. Translated, with Notes and Index, 
by Richard Cresswell, M.A. 

Organon ; or, logical Treat- 



ises. With Notes. <tec. By 0. F. Owen, M.A. 
2 vols., 3s. 6d. each. 

Rhetoric and Poetics. Lite- 



rally Translated, with Examination Ques- 
tions and Notes, by an Oxonian. 

Athenaens. The Deipnosophists; or, 
the Banquet of the Learned. Translated 
by C. D. YoNGE, B.A: 3 vols. 

Caesar. Complete, with the Alexan- 
drian, African, and Spanish Wars. Lite- 
rally Translated, with Notes. 

Catnllus, Tihullus, and the Vigil of 

Venus. A Literal Prose Translation. To 
v,hich are added Metrical Versions by 
Laub, Gkaingee, and others. Froidis- 
pier.e, 

Cicero's Orations. Literally Trans- 
lated by 0. 1). YoNGE, B.A. In 4 vols. 

Vol. 1. Contains the Orations against 
Verres, &c. Fwtrait. 

Vol. 2. Catiline, Archias, Agrarian 
Law, Rabirius, Murena, Sylla, &c. 

Vol. 3. Orations for his House, Plancius, 
Sextius, Coelius, Milo, Ligarius, &c. 

Vol. 4. Miscellaneous Orations, and 
Rhetorical Works ; with General In- 
dex to the four volumes. 

on Oratory and Orators. By 



J. S. Watson, M.A, 

on the Nature of the Gods, 



Divination, Fate, Laws, a Republic, &,c. 
Translated by C. L». Yokge, B.A., and 
F. Babham. 



Cicero's Academics, De Finibus, and 

Tusculan Questions. By C. D. Yokgk, 
B.A. With Sketch of the Greek Philo- 
sophy, 

Offices, Old Age, Friendship, 

Sclpio's Dream, Paradoxes, &c. Literally 
Translated, by R. Esmonds. 3s. 6d. 

Demosthenes' Orations. Translated, 
with Notes, by C. Rank Kennedy. In 5 
volumes. 
Vol. 1. The Olynthiac, Philippic, and 

other Public Oratif)n8, 3s. Hd. 
Vol. 2. On the Crown and on the Em- 
bassy. 
Vol. 3. Against I^ptlnes- Midias, An- 

drotrion, and Aristocrates. 
Vol. 4. Private and other Orations. 
Vol. 5. Miscellaneous Orations. 

Dictionary of Latin Quotations. In- 
cluding Proverbs, Maxims, Mottoes, Law 
Terms and Phrases; and a Collection of 
above 500 Greek Quotations. With all the 
quantities marked, & English Translations. 

, with Index Verborum. 65. 

Index Verborum only. Is. 

Diogenes Laertius. Lives and Opin- 
ions of the Ancient Philosophers. Trans- 
lated, with Notes, by C. D. Yonge. 

Euripides. Literally Translated. 2 vols. 

Vol. 1. Hecuba, Orestes, Medea, Hippo- 
lytns, Alcestis, Bacchfe, Heraclidfe, 
Iphigenia in Aulide, and Iphigenia iu 
Tauris. 

Vol. 2. Hercules Furens, Troades, Ion, 
Andromache, Suppliants, Helen, 
Electra, Cyclops, Rhesus. 

Greek Anthology. Literally Trans- 
lated. With Metrical Versions by various 
Authors. 

Greek Romances of Heliodorus, 

Longus, and Achilles Tatius. 

Herodotus. A New and Literal 
Translation, by Henrt Cary, M.A., of 
Worcester College, Oxford. 

Hesiod, Callimachus, and Theognis. 

Literally Translated, with Notes, bj' J. 
Banks, M.A. 

Homer's Iliad. Literally Translated, 

by an Oxonian. 
Odyssey, Hymns, &c. Lit^ 

rally Translated, by an Oxonian. 
Horace. Literally Translated, by 

Smart. Carefully revised by an Oxonian. 
Justin, Cornelius Nepos, and Eutro- 

pius. Literally Translated, with Notes 
and Index, by J. S. Watson, M.A. 

Juvenal, Persius, Sulpicia, and Lu- 

cilius. By L. Evans, M.A. With the 
Metrical Version by Gifford. Frontispiece. 

U 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Livy. A new and Literal Translation. 
By Dr. Spillan and others. In 4 vols. 
Vol. 1. Contains Books 1—8. 
Vol. 2. Books 9—26. 
Vol. 3. Books 27—36. 
Vol. 4. Books 37 to the end ; and Index. 

Lucan's Pharsalia. Translated, with 

Notes, by H, T. Riley. 
Lucretius. Literally Translated, with 

Notes, by the Rev. J. S. Watson, M.A. 

And the Metrical Version by J. M. Good. 

Martial's Epigrams, complete. Lite- 
rally Translated. Each accompanied by 
one or more Verse Translations selected 
from the Works of English Poets, and 
other sources. With a copious Index. 
Double volume (660 pages), 7s. 6i. 

Ovid's "Works, complete. Literally 
Translated. 3 vols. 
Vol. 1. Fasti, Tristla, Epistles, &c. 
Vol. 2. Metamorphoses. 
Vol. 3. Heroides, Art of I^ve, &c. 

Pindar. Literally Translated, by Daw- 
son W. Turner, and the Metrical Version 
by Abraham Moobe. 

Plato's Works. Translated by the 
Kev. H. Cai:y and others. In 6 vols. 

Vol. 1. The Apology of Socrates, Crlto, 
Pha>do, Gorgias, Protagoras, Pha?drus, 
Theffitetus, Euthyphron, Lysis. 

VoL 2. The Republic, Timiv>us, &Critias. 

Vol. 3. Meno, Euthydenius, The So- 
phist, Statesman, Ciatylus, Parme- 
nides, and the Banquet. 

Vol. 4. Phllebus, Charmides, Laches, 
The Two Alcibiades, and Ten other 
Dialogues. 

Vol. 5. The Laws. 

Vol. 6. The Doubtful Works. With 
General Index. 

Plautus's Comedies. Literally Trans- 
lated, with Notes, by H. T. Riley, B.A. 
In 2 vols. 

Pliny's Natural History. Translated, 
with Copious Notes, bv the late John 
BosTOCK, M.D., F.R.S., and H. T. Riley, 
B.A. In 6 vols. 

Propertius, Petronius, and Johannes 

SiKundns. 1 literally Translated, and ac- 
companied by Poetical Versions, from 
various sources. 



Quintilian's Institutes of Oratory. 

Literally Translated, with Notes, &c., by 
J. S. Watson, M.A. In 2 vols. 

Sallust, Florus, and Velleius Pater- 

culus. With Copious Notes, Biographical 
Notices, and Index, by J. S. Watson. 

Sophocles. The Oxford Translation 

revised. 

Standard Library Atlas of Classical 

Geography. Twenty-tun large colouri:d 
Maps acarrdivg to the latest authorities. 
^Vith a complete Index (accentuated), 
givifig the latitude and longitude of every 
place named in the Maps. Imp. 8vo. 7s. 6'i. 

Strabo's Geography. Translated, 
with Copious Notes, by W. Falconer, 
M.A., and H. C. Hamilton, Esq. With 
Index, giving the Ancient and Modern 
Names. In 3 vols. 

Suetonius' Lives of the Twelve 

CiKsars, and other Works. Thomson's 
'J'ranslation, revised, with Notes, by T. 
Fori:steb. 

Tacitus. Literally Translated, with 
Notes. In 2 vols. 
Vol. 1. The Armals. 

Vol. 2. The History, Germanla, Agri- 
cola, kc. With Index. 

Terence and Phaedrus. By H. T. 

Milky, B.A. 

Theocritus, Bion, Moschus, and 

TyrtRMis. By J. Banks, M.A. With the 
Metrical Versions of Chapman. 

Thucydides. Literally Tran.slated by 
Uev. li. Dale. In 2 vols. 3s. 6d. each. 

Virgil. Literally Translated by Da- 
vidson. New Edition, carefully revised. 
3s. 6(i. 

Xenophon's Works. In 3 Vols. 

Vol. 1. The Anabasis and Memorabilia. 
Translated, with Notes, by J. S. Wat- 
son, M.A. And a Geographical Com- 
mentary, by W. F. Ainsworth, F.S.A., 
F.R.G.S., &c. 

Vol. 2. Cyropa?dla and Hellenics. By 
J. S. Watson, M.A., and the Rev. H. 
Dale. 

Vol. 3. The Minor Works. By J. S. 
Watson, M.A. 



XII. 



Bohn's Scientific Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME 
(excepting THOSE MARKED OTHERWISE). 



Agassiz and Gould's Comparative 

Physiology. Enlarged by Dr Wbigut. 
Upicards of ■iOO Engravings. 
12 



Bacon's Novum Organum and Ad- 
vancement of Li-arning. Complete, with 
Notes, by J. Devey, M.A. 



lOHN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



Blair's Chronological Tables, Revised 

and Enlarged. Coniprelu'ndiiig the Cliro- 
nology and History of the World, from 
the earliest times. By J. Willoughhy 
RossE, Double Volume. 10*.; or, half- 
bound, 10s. 6^:^. 
Index of Dates. Comprehending the 
principal Facts in the Chronology and 
History of the World, from the earliest to 
the present time, alphabetically arranged. 
By J. W. RossE. Double volume, 10s.; 
or, half-bound, 10s. 6d. 

Bolley's Manual of Technical Analy- 
sis. A Gu'de lor the Testing of JS'aiural 
and Artificial Substances. By B. H. Paul. 

KJO Wood Evgrarings. 

BRIDGEWATEK TREATISES. — 
Bell on the Hand. Its Mecha- 
nism and Vital Endowments as evincing 
Design. Seventh Edition Revised. 

{Recently rublished. 

Kirby on the History, Habits, 

and Iiistincts of Animals. Edited, with 
Notes, by T. Rtmer Jones. Numerous 
Engravings,wt.any of which are additional. 
In 2 vols. 

Kidd on the Adaptation of 

External Nature to the Physical Condition 
of Man. 3s. 6ti. 

Whewell's Astronomy and 



General Physics, considered with ret'er- 
esnce to Natural Theology. 3s. 6d. 

Chalmers on the Adaptation 

of External Nature to the Moral and In- 
tellectual Constitution of Man. 5s. 

Prout's Treatise on Chemis- 
try, Meteorology, and Digestion. Edited 
by Dr. J. W. Griffith. 

Carpenter's (Dr. W. B.) Zoology. A 

Systematic View of the Structure, Habits, 
Instincts, and Uses, of the principal Fami- 
lies of the Animal Kingdom, atid of the 
cliief forms of Fossil Remains. New edition, 
revised to the present time, under arrange- 
ment with the Author, by W. S. Dallas, 
F.L.S. Illustrated with many hundred 
jine Wood Engravings. In 2 vols. 6s. each. 

' Mechanical Philosophy, As- 
tronomy, and Horology. A Popular Ex- 
position. 183 Illustrations. 

Vegetable Physiology and 

Systematic Botany. A complete Intro- 
duction to the Knowledge of Plants. New 
Edition, revised, under arrangement with 
the Author, by E. Lankesteb, M.D., &c. 
Several hundred Illustrations on Wood. 6s. 

Animal Physiology. New 

Edition, thoroughly revised, and in part 
re-written by the Author. Upwards of 
300 capital Illustrations. 6s. 

Chess Congress of 1862. A Collec- 

uou of the Games played, and a Selection 
of the Problems sent in for the Competi- 



tion. Edited by J. Lowenthal, Manager. 
With an Account of the Proceedings, and 
a Memoir of the British Chess Association, 
by J. W. Medley, Hon. Sec. Is. 

Chevreul on Colour. Containing the 

Principles of Harmony and Contrast of 
Colours, and their application to the Arts. 
'J'ranslated from the French by Charles 
Mautkl. Only complete Edition. Several 
Elates. 

; or, with an additional series 

of 1 6 Plates in Colours. 7s. 6d. 

Comte's Philosophy of the Sciences. 

Edited by G. H. Lewes. 

Ennemoser's History of Magic. 

Translated by William Howitt. With 
an Appendix of the most remarkable and 
best authenticated Stories of Apparitions, 
Dreams, Table-Turning, and Spirit-Rap- 
ping, &c. In 2 vols. 

Handbook of Domestic Medicine. Po- 
pularly arranged. By Dr. Henut Da vies. 
700 pages. With complete Index. 

Handbook of Games. By various 

Amateurs and Professors. Comprising 
treatises on all the principal Games of 
chance, skill, and manual dexterity. In 
all, above 40 games (the Whist, Draughts, 
and Billiards being especially comprehen- 
sive). Edited by H. G. Bohn. Illus- 
trated hy numerous Diagrams. 

Hogg's (Jabez) Elements of Experi- 
mental and Natural Philosophy. Con- 
taining Mechanics, Pneumatics, Hydro- 
statics, Hydraulics, Acoustics, Optics, 
Caloric, Electricity, Voltaism, and Mag- 
netism. New Edition, enlarged. Up- 
wards of 400 Woodcuts. 

Hind's Introduction to Astronomy. 

With a Vocabulary, containing an Expla- 
nation of all the Terms in present use. 
New Edition, enlarged. JVumerous En- 
gravings. 3s. 6d. 

Humboldt's Cosmos ; or Sketch of a 

Physical Description of the Universe. 
Translated by K C. OttS and W. S. 
Dallas, F.L.S. Eine Portrait. In five 
vols. 3s. 6d. each ; excepting Vol. V., 5s. 
*** In this edition the notes are placed 
beneath the text, Humboldt's analytical 
Summaries and the passages hitherto sup- 
pressed are included, and new and com- 
prehensive Indices are added. 

Travels in America. In 3 vols. 

"Views of Nature ; or, Con- 
templations of the Sublime Phenomena of 
Creation. Translated by E. C. Ott« and 
H. G. Bohn. A fac-simile letter from the 
Author to the Publisher; translations ot 
the quotations, and a complete Index. 

Humphrey's Coin Collector's Ma- 
nual. A popular Introduction to the 
Study of Coins. Highly finished Engrav- 
ings. In 2 vols. 

13 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Hunt's (Robert) Poetry of Science ; 

or, Studies of the Physical Phenomena of 
Nature. By Professor Hunt. New Edi- 
tion, enlarged. 

Indefe of Dates. See Blair's Tables. 

Joyce's Scieiitiiic Dia''ogues. Conn- 

pleted to the present state of Knowledge, 
by Dr. Griffith. Numerous Woodcuts. 

Lectures on Painting. By the Royal 
Academicians. With Introductory Essay, 
and Notes by R. Wobnum, Esq. Fortraits. 

Mantell's (Dr.) Geological Excur- 
sions through the Isle of Wight and Dor- 
setshire. New Edition, by T. Rupert 

. Joxi^s, Esq. Numerous beautifulli/ exe- 
cuted Woodcuts, and a (geological Map. 

' Medals of Creation ; or, 

First Lessons in Geology and the Study 
of Organic Remains ; including Geological 
Excureions. New Edition, revised. CO' 
loured Plates, and several hundred heau' 
tiful Woodcuts. In 2 vols., 7s. 6<i. each. 

" Petrifactions and their 



Teachings. An Illustrated Handbook to 
the Organic Remains In the British Mu- 
seum. Numerous Engravings. 6s. 

Wonders of Geology; or, a 



Familiar Exposition of Geological Phe- 
nomena. New Edition, augmented by T. 
Rupert Jon'es, F.G.S. Coloured Geological 
Map of England, Plates, and nearly 200 
beautiful Woodcuts. In 2 vols., 7s. 6d. each. 

Morphy's Games of Chess. Being 

the ^Matches and best Games played by 
the American Champion, with Explana- 
tory and Analytical Notes, by J. Lowen- 
THAL. Portrait and Memoir. 

It contains by far the largest collection 
of games played by Mr. Morphy extant in 
any form, and has received his endorse- 
ment and co-operation. 

Oersted's Soul in Nature, &c. Portrait. 
Kichardson's Geology, including 

Mineralogy and Palaeontology. Revised 
and enlarged, by Dr. T. Wright. U^pwurds 
of 400 Illustrations. 



SchouVs Earth, Plants, and Man ; and 

Kobell's Sketches from the Mineral King- 
dom. Translated by A. Henfket, F.R.S.1 
Coloured Map of the Oeograph;/ of Plants. 

Smith's (Pye) Geology and Scrip- 
ture ; or. The Relation between the Holy ] 
Scriptures and Geological Science. 

Stanley's Classified Synopsis of the j 

Principal Painters of the Dutch and Fle- 
mish Schools. 

Staunton's Chess-player's Handbook.! 

Numerous Diagrams. 

Chess Praxis. A Supplement j 

to the Chess-plaj'ers Handbook. Con- 
taining all the most important modern 
improvements in the Openings, i'.lustratedj 
by actual Games ; a revised Code of Clies«J 
laws; and a Selection of Mr, Morphy's j 
Games in England and France. 6s. 

Chess-player's Companioi 

Comprising a new Treatise on Odds, Col 
lection of Match Games, and a Selectioi 
of Original Problems. 

Chess Tournament of 1851.1 



Numerous Illustrations. 

Stockhardt's Principles of Chemis- 

trj', exemplified in a series of simple expe-j 
rlments. Upwards of 270 Illustrations. 

Agricultural Chemistry ; or,] 

Chemical Field Ijectures. Addressed to] 
Farmers. Translated, with Notes, byl 
Professor Henfret, F.R.S. To which igl 
added, a Paper on Liquid Manure, byj 
J. J. Mechi, Esq. 

Ure's (Dr. A.) Cotton Manufacture! 

o-f Great Britain, systematically investi-j 
gated; with an introductory view of itfi 
comparative state in Foreign Countries.! 
New Edition, revised and completed to 
the present time, by P. L. SnnioxDS. Or, 
hundred and fft;/ Illustrations. In 2 vols.l 

Philosophy of Manufactures ;j 

or. An Exposition of the Factory System| 
of Great Britain. New Edition, continued 
to the present time, by P. L. Sqimoki 
7 s. 6d. 



XIII. 



Bohn's Cheap Series. 



Berber, The; or. The Mountaineer 

of the Atlas. A Tale of Morocco, by W. S. 
Mayo. M.D. Is. 6d. 

Boswell's Life of Johnson. Includ- 
ing his Tour to the Hebrides, Tour in 
Wales, &c. Edited, with large additions 
and Notes, by the Right Hon. John Wilson 
Crokek. The second and most complete 
Copyright Edition, re-arranged and re- 
vised according to the suggestions of 
Lord Macaulay, by the late John- 
Wright, Esq., with further additions by 
14 



Mr. Choker. Upwards of 40 fne En' 
graving s on Steel. In 4 vols. 4s. each, 
8 parts 2s. each. 
%* The public has now for 16s. what 
was formerly published at 2l. 

Boswell's Johnsoniana. A Collectior 

of Miscellaneous Anecdotes and Sayins 
of Dr. Samuel Johnson, gathered froin' 
nearly a hundred publications. A Sequel 
to the preceding, of which it forms vol. 5, 
or parts 9 and 10. Engravings on SteeL 
In 1 vol. 4s., or in 2 parts, 2s. each. 






I 



DATE DUE 



NOV 1 i 


I97£ 






AKG X ^ 1; 


m 








1 '• 














XF ^^ 


e)9 














































































































GAYLORD 






PRINTED IN U.S A. 




AUG 1971 

WESBY 




274.20r2: 



„, 3 5002 00234 9160 

Ordericus Vitalis "-v^-r yj \ \jyj 

The ecclesiastical history of England an 



CLAPP 



BR 252 r 07 1S53 1 

Orde-ricus Vlt.alle, 1075- 
1143? 

The* e-ccle'Slast.ical history 
of Encyland and Normandy 



vf.l 



