HANDBOUND 
AT THE 



BONN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



sihe's Works, translated into Eng- 

a. In 5 vols. 

Vols. 1. and 2. Autobiography, 13 Books ; 
and Travels in Italy, France, and 
Switzerland. 2'ortrait. 

Vol. 3. Faust, Iphigenla, Torquato 
Tasso, Egmont, &c., by Miss SWAN- 
WICK ; and Gb'tz von Berlichingen, by 
Sir WALTER SCOTT. Frontispiece. 

Vol. 4. Novels and Tales. 

Vol. 5. Wilhelm Meister's Apprentice- 
ship. 

pry's (Dr.) Evidences, Doctrines, 

1 Duties of the Christian Religion. 

loot's Representative Government. 

: anslated 'by A. K. SCOBLE. 

History of the English Revo- 
;ion of 1640. Translated by WILLIAM 
A.ZLITT. Portrait. 

History of Civilization. Trans- 
red by WILLIAM HAZLTTT. In 3 vols. 
/rtrait. 

ll's (Rev. Robert) Miscellaneous 

,'orks and Remains, with Memoir by 
i . GREGORY, and an Essay on his Cha- 
icter by JOHN FOSTKK. Portrait. 
xae's Poems, from the German, by 
. A. Bo WRING. 
agary: its History and Revolu- 

< >ns ; with a Memoir of Kossuth from 
w and authentic sources. Portrait. 

tchinson (Colonel), Memoirs of, 
id an Account of the Siege of Lathom 
ouse. Portrait. 

aes' s (G. P. R.) Eichard Coeur-de- 

ion, King of England. Portraits. In 

vols. 

Louis XIV. Portraits. In 

vols. 
uus's Letters, with Notes, Ad- 

tions, and an Index. In 2 vols. 

niartine's History of the Girond- 

ts. Portraits. In 3 vola. 

Restoration of the Monarchy, 

ith Index. Portraits. In 4 vols. 

French Revolution of 1848, 

;'th a fine Frontispiece. 
izi's History of Painting. Trans- 
ted by ROSCOE. Portraits. In 3 vols. 

ke's Philosophical "Works, con- 

iniiig an Essay on the Human Under- 
unding, &c., with Notes and Index by 
A. St. JOHN. Portrait. In 2 vols. 

Life and Letters, with Ex- 

\cts from his Common-Place Books, by 
>rd KING. 

ther's Table Talk. Translated by 
iLLiAsi HAZLITT. Portrait. 



Machiavelli's History of Florencs, 

The Prince, and other Works. Portrait. 

Menzel's History of Germany. Por- 
traits. In 3 vols. 

Michelet's Life of Luther. Translated 

by WILLIAM HAZLITT. 
Roman Republic. Translated 

by WILLIAM HAZLITT. 

French Revolution, with In- 
dex. Frontispiece. 

Mignet's French Revolution from 

1789 to 1814. Portrait. 

Milton's Prose Works, with Index. 
Portraits. In 5 vols. 

Mitford's (Miss) Our Village. Im- 
proved Ed., complete. Illustrated. 2 vols. 

Neander's Church History. Trans- 
lated : with General Index. In 10 vols. 
Life Of Christ, Translated. 

First Planting of Christi- 
anity, and Antignostikus. Translated. In 
2 vols. 

History of Christian Dogmas. 

Translated. In 2 vols. 

Christian Life in the Early 

and Middle Ages, including his ' Light in 
Dark Places.' Translated. 

Ockley's History of the Saracens. 

Revised and completed. Portrait. 
Pearson on the Creed. New Edition. 

With Analysis and Notes. [Sliortly. 

Ranke's History of the Popes. Trans- 
lated by E. FOSTER. In 3 vols. 

Servia and the Servian Re- 
volution. 
Reynolds' (Sir Joshua) Literary 

Works. Portrait. In 2 vols. 

Roscoe's Life and Pontificate of 

Leo X., with the Copyright Notes, and an 
Index. Portraits. In 2 vols. 

Life of Lorenzo de Medici, 

with the Copyright Notes, &c. Portrait. 

Russia, History of, by WALTER K. 
KELLY. Portraits. In 2 vols. 

Schiller's Works. Translated into 
English. In 4 vols. 

Vol. 1. Thirty Years' War, and Revolt 
of the Netherlands. 

Vol. 2. Continuation of the Revolt 
of the Netherlands; Wallenstein's 
Camp; the Piccolomini; the Death 
of Wallenstein ; and William TelL 

Vol. 3. Don Carlos, Mary Stuart, Maid 
of Orleans, and Bride of Messina. 

Vol. 4. The Robbers, Fiesco, Love and 
Intrigue, and the Ghost-Seer. 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Sehlegel's Philosophy of Life and 
of Language, translated by A. J. W. MOR- 
RISON. 

History of Literature, An- 
cient and Modern. Now first completely 
translated, with General Index. 

Philosophy of History. 

Translated by J. B. ROBERTSON. Por- 
trait. 

Dramatic Literature. Trans- 
lated. Portrait. 

Modern History. 

.Esthetic and Miscellaneous 



Works. 

Sheridan's Dramatic Works and 

Life. Pwtrait. 

Sismondi's Literature of the South 

of Europe. Translated by Roscoe. Por- 
traits. In 2 vols. 

Smith's (Adam) Theory of the Moral 

Sentiments ; with his Essay on the First 
Formation of Languages. 



Smyth's (Professor) Lectures on 

Modern History. In 2 vols. 

Lectures on the French Re- 
volution. In 2 vols. 
I Sturm's Morning Communings with 

God, or Devotional Meditations lor Every 
Day in the Year. 

Taylor's (Bishop Jeremy) Holy Living 

and Dying. Portrait. 
I Thierry's Conquest of England by 

the Normans. Translated by WILLIAM 
HAZLITT. Portrait. In 2 vols. 
i Thierry's Tiers Etat, or Third Estate, 
in France. Translated by F. B. WELLS. 
2 vols. In one. 5s. 

| Vasari's Lives of the Painters, 

Sculptors, and Architects. Translated by 
Mrs. FOSTER. 5 vols. 

Wesley's (John) Life. By ROBERT 
SODTHET. New and Complete Edition. 
Double volume. 5s. 

i Wheatley on the Book of Common 

i Prayer. Frontispiece. 



II. 



Uniform with Bohn's Standard Library. 



Bailey's (P. J.) Festus. A Poem. 
Seventh Edition, revised and enlarged. 
5s. 

British Poets, from Milton to Kirke 

WHITE. Cabinet Edition. In 4 vols. 
14s. 

Gary's Translation of Dante's Hea- 
ven, Hell, and Purgatory. 7s. 6d. 

Chillingworth's Religion of Pro- i 

testants. 3s. Get. 

Classic Tales. Comprising in One 
volume the most esteemed works of the 
imagination. 3s. 6d. 

Demosthenes and JEscliines, the 
Orations of. Translated by LELAND. 3s. 

Dickson and Mowbray on Poultry. 

Edited by Mrs. LOUDON. Illustrations by 
Ifarvey. 5s. 

Henry's (Matthew) Commentary on 
the Psalms. Numerous Illustrations. 
4s. 6d. 

Holland's British Angler's Manual. 

Improved and enlarged, by EDWARD JESSE, 
Esq. Illustrated with 60 Engravings. 
Is. Gd. 

Horace's Odes and Epodes. Trans- 
lated by the Rev. W. SEWELL. 3a. 6& I 



Irving's (Washington) Complete 

Works. In 10 vols. 3s. 6rf. each. 

Vol. 1. Salmagundi and Knickerbocker. 
Portrait of the Author. 

Vol. 2. Sketch Book and Life of Gold- 
smith. 

Vol. 3. Bracebridge Hall and Abbots- 
ford and Newstead. 

Vol. 4. Tales of a Traveller and the 
Alhambra. 

Vol. 5. Conquest of Granada and Con- 
quest of Spain. 

Vols. 6 and 7. Life of Columbus and 
Companions of Columbus, with a new 
Index. Fine Portrait. 

Vol. 8. Astoria and Tour in the Prairies. 

Vol. 9. Mahomet and his Successors. 

Vol. 10. Conquest of Florida and Ad- 
ventures of Captain Bonneville. 

(Washington) Life of Wash- 
ington. Portrait. In 4 vols. 3s. 6d. each, 

(Washington) Life and Let- 
ters. By his Nephew, PIERRE E. IRVING, 
In 2 vols. 3s. 6d. each. 
For separate Works, see Cheap Series, 
p. 15. 

Joyce's Introduction to the Arts and 

Sciences. With Examination Questions. 
3s. Qd. 



BOHN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



Lawrence's lectures on Compara- 
tive Anatomy, Physiology, Zoology, and the 
Natural History of Man. Illustrated. 5s. 

Lilly's Introduction to Astrology. 

With numerous Emendations, by ZADKIEL. 
5s. 

Miller's (Professor) History, Philoso- 
phically considered. In 4 vols. 3s. 6d. 
each. 

Parkes's Elementary Chemistry. 

3s. 6d. 

Political (The) Cyclopaedia. In 4 
vols. 3s. Gd. each. 



Political (The) Cyclopaedia. Also 
bound in 2 vols. with leather backs. 
15s. 

Shakespeare's Works, with Life, 

by CHALMERS. In diamond type. 3s. 6<Z. 
or, with 40 Engravings. 5s. 

Uncle Tom's Cabin. With Introduc- 
tory Remarks, by the Rev. J. SHERMAN. 
Printed in a large clear type. Illustra- 
tions. 3s. 6d. 

Wide, Wide World. By ELIZABETH 
WETHERALL. Illustrated with 10 highly- 
finished Steel Engravings. 3s. Qd. 



III. 



Bohn's Historical Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME. 



Evelyn's Diary and Correspondence. 

Illustrated ivith numerous Portraits, &c. 
In 4 vols. 

Pepys' Diary and Correspondence. 

Edited by Lord Braybrooke. With im- 
portant Additions, including numerous 
Letters. Illustrated with many Portraits. 
In 4 vols. 

Jesse's Memoirs of the Reign of the 

Stuarts, including the Protectorate. With 
General Index. Upwards of 40 Portraits. 
In 3 vols. 



Jesse's Memoirs of the Pretenders 

and their Adherents. 6 Portraits. 

Nugent's (Lord) Memorials of 

Hampden, his Party, and Times. 12 
Portraits. 

Strickland's (Agnes) Lives of the 

Queens of England, from the Norman 
Conquest. From official records and 
authentic documents, private and public. 
Revised Edition. In 6 vols. 

[Just completed. 



IV. 



Bohn's Library of French Memoirs. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 3s. Qd. PER VOLUME. 



Memoirs of Philip de Commines, 

containing the Histories of Louis XI. and 
Charles VIII., and of Charles the Bold, 
Duke of Burgundy. To which is added, 
The Scandalous Chronicle, or Secret 



History of Louis XI. Portraits. In 
2 vols. 

Memoirs of the Duke of Sully, Prime 
Minister to Henry the Great. Portraits 
In 4 vols. 



V. 



Bohn's School and College Series. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY. 



Eass's Complete Greek and English 

Lexicon to the New Testament. 2s. 6d. 

New Testament (The) in Greek. 

Griesbach's Text, with the various read- 
ings of Mill and Scholz at foot of page, and 



Parallel References in the margin ; also a 
Critical Introduction and Chronological 
Tables. Tim fac-similes of Greek Manu- 
scripts. (650 pages.) 3s. 6d; or with the 
Lexicon. 5s. 



A CATALOGUE OF 



VI. 



Bohn's Philological and Philosophical Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME 
(EXCEPTING THOSE MARKED OTHERWISE). 



Hegel's Lectures on the Philosophy 

of History. Translated by J. SIBEEE, M.A. 

Herodotus, Turner's (Bawson W.) 

Notes to. With Map, &c. 

Wheeler's Analysis and 

Summary of. 

Kant's Critique of Pure Keason. 

Translated by J. M. 1). MEIKLEJOHN. 

Logic ; or, the Science of Inference. 

A Popular Manual. By J. DEVET. 

Lowndes' Bibliographer's Manual of 

English Literature. New Edition, en- 
larged, by H. G. BOHN. Parts 1. to X. (A 
to Z). 3s. 6d. each. Part XI. (the Ap- 



pendix Volume). 5s. Or the 11 parts in 
4 vols., half morocco, 21. 2s. 

Smith's (Archdeacon) Complete Col- 
lection of Synonyms and Antonyms. 

[Jh the Press. 

Tennemann's Manual of the History 
of Philosophy. Continued by J. R. MOREL&. 

Thucydides, Wheeler's Analysis of. 
Wheeler's (M.A.) W. A., Dictionary 

of Names of Fictitious Persons and Places. 
[Just published. 

Wright's (T.) Dictionary of Obsolete 

and Provincial English. In 2 vols. 5s. 
each. ; or half-bound in 1 vol., 10s. Qd. 



VII. 



Bohn's British Classics. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 3s. Qd. PER VOLUME. 



Addison's Works. With the Notes 
of Bishop HUBD, much additional matter, 
and upwards of 100 Unpublished Letters. 
Edited by H. G. BOHN. Portrait and 8 
Engravings on Steel. In 6 vols. 
Burke's Works. In 6 Volumes. 

Vol. 1. Vindication of Natural Society, 
On the Sublime and Beautiful, and 
Political Miscellanies. 
Vol. 2. French Revolution, &c. 
Vol. 3. Appeal from the New to the 
Old Whigs ; the Catholic Claims, &c. 
Vol. 4. On the Affairs of India, and 

Charge against Warren Hastings. 
Vol. 5. Conclusion of Charge against 

Hastings ; on a Regicide Peace, &c. 
Vol. 6. Miscellaneous Speeches, &c. 
With a General Index. 



Burke's Speeches on Warren Hast- 
ings; and Letters. With Index. In 
2 vols. (forming vols. 7 and 8 of the 
works). 

Life. By PRIOR. New and 

revised Edition. Portrait. 

Defoe's Works. Edited by Sir WAL- 
TEB SCOTT. In 7 vols. 

Gibbon's Eoman Empire. Complete 

and Unabridged, with Notes; including, 
in addition to the Author's own, those of 
Guizot, Wenck, Niebuhr, Hugo, Neander, 
and other foreign scholars; and an ela- 
borate Index. Edited by au English 
Churchman. In 7 vols. 



VIII. 



Bohn's Ecclesiastical Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME. 



Eusebius' Ecclesiastical History. 

With Notes. 

Philo Judaeus, Works Of ; the con- 
temporary of Josephus. Translated by 
C. 1). Yonge. In 4 vols. 

Socrates' Ecclesiastical History, in 

continuation of Eusebius. With the Notes 
of Valesius. 
6 



Sozomen's Ecclesiastical History, 

from A.D. 324-440 : and the Ecclesiastical 
History of Philostorgius. 

Theodoret and Evagrius. Ecclesias- 
tical Histories, from A.D. 332 to A.D. 427 ; 
and from A.D. 431 to A.D. 544. 



BOHN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



IX. 



Bohn's Antiquarian Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDAED LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME. 



Bede's Ecclesiastical History, and 

Ajiglo-Saxon Chronicle. 

Boethius's Consolation of Philoso- 
phy. In Anglo-Saxon, with the A. S. 
Metres, and an English Translation, by 
the Rev. S. Fox. 

Brand's Popular Antiquities of Eng- 
land, Scotland, and Ireland. By Sir HKNIIY 
ELLIS. In 3 vols. 

Browne's (Sir Thomas) "Works. 

Edited by SIMON WILKIN. In 3 vols. 

Vol. 1. The Vulgar Errors. 

Vol. 2. Religlo Medici, and Garden of 
Cyrus. 

Vol. 3. Urn-Burial, Tracts, and Corre- 
spondence. 

Chronicles of the Crusaders. Richard 
of Devizes, Geoffrey de Vinsauf, Lord de 
joinville. 

Cftronicles of the Tombs. A Collec- 
tion of Eemarkable Epitaphs. By T. J. 
PETTIGREW, F.R.S., F.S.A. 

Early Travels in Palestine. Willi- 

bald, Saewulf, Benjamin of Tudela, Man- 
deville, La Brocquiere, and Maundrell; 
all unabridged. Edited by THOMAS 
WRIGHT. 

Ellis's Early English Metrical Ro- 
mances. Revised by J. 0. HALUWELL. 

Florence of Worcester's Chronicle, 

with the Two Continuations : comprising 
Annals of English History to the lleign of 
Edward I. 

Giraldus Cambrensis* Historical 

Works: Topography of Ireland ; History 
f the Conquest of Ireland; Itinerary 
through Wales; and Description of Wales. 
With Index. Edited by THOS. WRIGHT. 

Handbook of Proverbs. Comprising 
all Ray's English Proverbs, with additions'"; 
his Foreign Proverbs ; and an Alphabetical 
Index. 

Henry of Huntingdon's History of 

the English, from the Roman Invasion to 
Henry II. ; with the Acts of King Stephen, 

Ingulph's Chronicle of the Abbey of 

Croyland, with the Continuations by Peter 
of Blois and other Writers. By H. T. 

RttKT. 



Keightley's Fairy Mythology. Fron- 
tispiece by Cruikskanlc. 

Lamb's Dramatic Poets of the Time 

of Elizabeth ; including his Selections from 
the Garrick Plays. 

lepsius's Letters from Egypt, Ethio- 
pia, and the Peninsula of Sinai. 

Mallet's Northern Antiquities. By 
Bishop PERCY. With an Abstract of the 
Eyrbiggia Saga, by Sir WALTEB SCOTT. 
Edited by J. A. BLACKWELL. 

Marco Polo's Travels. The Trans- 
lation of Marsden. Edited by THOMAS 
WRIGHT. 

Matthew Paris's Chronicle. In 5 

vols. 

FIRST SECTION : Roger of Wendover's 
Flowers of English History, from the 
Descent of the Saxons to A.D. 1235. 
Translated by Dr. GILES. In 2 vols. 
SECOND SECTION: From 1235 to 1273. 
With Index to the entire Work, In 
3 vols. 

Matthew of Westminster's Flowers 

of History, especially such as relate to the 
affairs of Britain ; to A.D. 1307. Translated 
by C. D. YONGE. In 2 vols. 

Crdericus Vitalis' Ecclesiastical His- 
tory of England and Normandy. Trans- 
lated with Notes, by T. FORESTER, M.A. 
In 4 vols. 

Pauli's (Dr. E.) Life of Alfred the 

Great. Translated from the German. 

Polyglot of Foreign Proverbs. With 
English Translations, and a General Index, 
bringing the whole into parallels, by H. G. 
BOHN. 

Eoger De Hoveden's Annals of Eng- 
lish History ; from A.D. 732 to A.D. 1201. 
Edited by H. T. RILEY. In 2 vols. 

Six Old English Chronicles, viz. : 

Asser's Life of Alfred, and the Chronicles 
of Ethelwerd, Gildas, Nennius, Geoffrey 
of Monmouth, and Richard of Circn- 
cester. 

William of Malmesbury's Chronicle 

of the Kings of England. Translated by 
SHARPS. 

Yule-Tide Stories. A Collection of 
Scandinavian Tales and Traditions. Edited 
by B. THORPE. 



A CATALOGUE OF 



x. 



Bohn's Illustrated Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME 
(EXCEPTING THOSE MARKED OTHERWISE). 



Allen's Battles of the British Navy. \ 

Revised and enlarged. Numerous fine \ 
Portraits. In 2 vols. 

Andersen's Danish Legends and 

Fairy Tales. With many Tales not in any j 
other edition. Translated by CAROLINE j 
PEACHEY. 120 Wood Engravings. 
Ariosto's Orlando Furioso. In Eng- | 
lish Verse. By W. S. ROSE. Tivdve fine 
Engravings. In 2 vols. 

Bechstein's Cage and Chamber Birds. 

Including Sweet's Warblers. Enlarged 
edition. Numerous plates. 

%* All other editions are abridged. 
With the plates coloured. 7s. Qd. 
Bonomi's Nineveh and its Palaces. 

New Edition, revised and considerably 
enlarged, both in matter and Plates, in- 
cluding a Full Account of the Assyrian 
Sculptures recently added to the National 
Collection. Upwards of 300 Engravings. 

Butler's Hudibras. With Variorum 
Notes, a Biography, and a General Index. 
Edited by HENRY G. BOHN. Thirty beau- 
tiful Illustrations. 

; or, further illustrated with 

62 Outline Portraits. In 2 vols. 10s. 

Cattermole's Evenings at Eaddon 
Hall. 24 exquisite Engravings on Steel, 
from de.signs by himself, the Letterpress 
by the BARONESS DE CARABELLA. 

China, Pictorial, Descriptive, and 

Historical, with some Account of Ava and 
the Burmese, Siam, and Anam. Nearly 
100 Illustrations. 

Craik's (G. L.) Pursuit of Knowledge 

under Difficulties, illustrated by Anec- 
dotes and Memoirs. Revised Edition. 
With numerous Portraits. 

[Just Published. 

Cruikshank's Three Courses and a 

Dessert. A Series of Tales, -with 50 hu- 
morous Illustrations by Cruiksliank. 

Dante. Translated by I. C. WRIGHT, 
M.A. New Edition, carefully revised. 
Portrait and 34 Illustrations on Steel, 
after Flaxmam. 

Didron's History of Christian Art ; 
or, Christian Iconography. From the 
French. Upwards of 150 beautiful out- 
line Engravings. Vol. I. (Mons. Didron 
has not yet written the second volume.) 



Flaxman's Lectures on Sculpture. 

Numerous Illustrations. 6s. {Now ready. 

Gil Bias, The Adventures of. 24 

Engravings on Steel, after Smirke, and 
10 Etddngs by George Cruikshank. (612 
pages.) 6s. 

Grimm's Gammer Grethel ; or, Ger- 
man Fairy Tales and Popular Stories. 
Translated by EDGAR TAYLOR. Numerous 
Woodcuts by Cruikshank. 3s. 6d. 

Holbein's Dance of Death, and Bible 

Cuts. Upwards of 150 subjects, beauti- 
fully engraved in fac-simile, with Intro- 
duction and Descriptions by the late 
FRANCES DOUCE and Dr. T. F. DIBDIN. 
2 vols. in 1. 7s. 6d. 
Howitt's (Mary) Pictorial Calendar 

of the Seasons. Embodying the whole of 
Aiken's Calendar of Nature. Upwards of 
100 Engravings. 
(Mary and William) Stories 

of English and Foreign Life. Tuenty beau- 
tiful Engravings. 

Hunt's (Leigh) Book for a Corner. 

Eighty extremely beautiful Engravings. 

India, Pictorial, Descriptive, and 

Historical, from the Earliest Times to the 
Present. Upwards of IQQ fine Engravings f 
on Wood, and a Map. 

Jesse's Anecdotes of Dogs. New Edi- 
tion, with large additions. Numerous fine 
Woodcuts after Harvey, Bewick, and others. 

; or, with the addition of 34 

highly-finished Steel Engravings after 
Cooper, Landseer, &c. Is. 6d. 

Kitto's Scripture Lands and Biblical 

Atlas. 24 Maps, beautifully engraved on 

Steel, with a Consulting Index. 
; or, with the maps coloured, 

Is. Qd. 
Krummacher's Parables. Translated 

from the German. Forty Illustrations by 
Clayton, engraved by Datziel. 

i Lindsay's (Lord) Letters on Egypt, 

Edom, and the Holy Land. New Edition, 
enlarged. Thirty-six beautiful Engrav- 
ings, and 2 Maps. 
Lodge's Portraits of Illustrious Pe: 

sonages of Great Britain, with Memoii 
Two Hundred and Forty Portraits, beau 
tifully engraved on Steel. 8 vols. 



THE 



ANNALS 



OF 



ROGER DE HOVEDEN, 

COMPRISING 

THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND 

AND OF 

OTHER COUNTRIES OF EUROPE 

PROM A.D. 732 TO A.D. 1201. 



TRANSLATED FROM THE LATIN WITH NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS 

BY HENRY T. RILEY, ESQ., B.A. 

BAEBISTEE-AT-LAW. 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 

VOL. II. 

' 



A.D. 1181 TO A.D. 1201. 



LONDON: 

H. G. BOHN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN. 

MDCCCLm. 



/LOO 



THE ANNALS 



OF 



ROGER DE HOVEDEN. 

THE SECOND PAET CONTINUED. 



IN the year of grace 1181, being the twenty-seventh year of the 
reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said king 
was at Le Mans, on the day of the Nativity of our Lord. After 
this festival, he enacted throughout all his territories, heyond 
sea, that every man who had a hundred pounds of money An- 
jouin, in chattel property, should keep a horse and a complete 
set of military accoutrements ; that every man who had chattel 
property to the amount of forty, thirty, or twenty-five pounds 
Anjouin, at the least should have a hauberk, an iron head-piece, 
a lance and a sword ; while all other persons were to have a 
gambeson, 1 an iron head-piece, a lance and a sword, or a bow 
and arrows ; and he forbade any person to sell or pledge his 
arms ; but on his death he was to leave the same to his next 
heir. When Philip, king of France, and Philip, earl of Flan- 
ders, came to hear of this, they ordered that their men should 
arm themselves in a similar manner. 

In the same year, after the Purification of Saint Mary, Lau- 
rence, archbishop of Dublin, came into Normandy, bringing 
with him the son of Roderic, king of Connaught, and delivered 
him to the king of England as a hostage for the performance of 
the treaty made between him and the king of Connaught, as to the 
payment of tribute by Ireland ; shortly after which the said 
archbishop of Dublin died at Auc, in Normandy, and was buried 
there. After his decease, the king of England sent to Ireland 

1 The gambeson, or wambais, or subarmale, was made of quilted stuff, 
and formed the body armour of the burgesses. 

VOL. II. B 



2 ANNALS OP ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1181. 

Geoffrey de Haye, his own secretary, and the secretary of 
Alexis, the legate in Ireland, to take possession of the arch- 
bishopric of Dublin, and also sent with them John, the constable 
of Chester, and Richard of the Peak, to take charge of the city 
of Dublin, of which Hugh de Lacy had had the keeping. 
For our lord the king was unwilling that he should any longer 
have charge of it, because he had, without his permission, mar- 
ried the daughter of the king of Connaught, according to the 
usage of that country. 

In the same year, our lord the pope most strictly commanded 
Richard, the archbishop of Canterbury, all pretexts and excuses 
laid aside, under pain of ecclesiastical censure, to compel Geof- 
frey, the bishop elect of the church of Lincoln, and son 2 of our 
lord the king of England, either to renounce his election, or 
without delay to take priest's orders, and assume the dignity of 
the pontifical office. On this, Geoffrey being placed in a di- 
lemma, sensible of his own insufficiency, and considering that 
he was not competent to perform the duties of so arduous an 
office, preferred to renounce the episcopal office, rather than 
undertake to bear a burden which he could not support. Ac- 
cordingly, he wrote to Richard, the archbishop of Canterbury, 
to the following effect. 

Tlw Letter of Geoffrey, bishop of Lincoln elect, on his resignation 
of that bishopric. 

1 ' To the venerable father and lord Richard, by the grace of God, 
archbishop of Canterbury, and legate of the Apostolic See, Geof- 
frey, son and chancellor of our lord the king of England, health 
and all due and duteous respect. It has pleased his Apostolic 
Majesty to instruct your holiness to call upon me within a cer- 
tain time to take priest's orders and to assume the dignity of the 
pontifical office. Now upon considering how many bishops of 
more mature years, and more advanced in wisdom, are still 
hardly of an age to prove themselves equal to the requirements 
of such a weighty office, and are scarcely able to fulfil the duties 
of their pontificate without danger to souls, I have been alarmed 
at myself, who am so much younger, assuming a burden, which 
those more advanced in years are unable to bear, not doing so 
from any levity of feeling, but from a feeling of respect for my 
vows. Having therefore had an interview hereon, with our 
lord the king, my father, and my lords and brothers the king 
2 Illegitimate son. He was Afterwards archbishop of York. 



A.D. 1181. LETTER OF POPE ALEXANDER. 3 

and the earls of Poitou and Brittany, and Henry, bishop of 
Bayeux, Eroger, bishop of Seez, Keginald, bishop of Bath, 
Sigfred, bishop of Chichester, who were present, I have come 
to a different determination as to my mode of life and profession, 
wishing for a time to serve in a military capacity under the 
orders of the king, my father, and to refrain from interfering 
in episcopal matters. Accordingly, most holy father, I do 
spontaneously, freely, and entirely, resign into your hands all 
rights consequent upon my election, as also the see of Lincoln ; 
requesting of you as being my metropolitan, and for this pur- 
pose especially delegated by the Apostolic See, absolution both 
from the said election and from holding the said bishopric. 
Farewell." 

In like manner, the said bishop elect of Lincoln wrote to 
the canons of the church of Lincoln, asking of them absolu- 
tion both from the said election and from holding the said 
bishopric. After this, our lord, the king, by whose advice his 
son Geoffrey had resigned his election into the hands of the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, gave him his chancellorship and a yearly 
revenue of five hundred marks in England, and the same in 
Normandy. 

In this year, Saladin, the king of Babylon, seeing that Bald- 
win, king of Jerusalem, being smitten with leprosy, had not 
strength to resist him, raising a great force, came into the land 
of Jerusalem, and laid it waste, and there was no person to make 
any resistance to him. In the same year, the king of England 
was at Chinon during the festival of Easter ; and after Easter 
returned into Normandy, and held a conference with Philip, king 
of Prance, at Ve Saint llemy, on the fifth day before the calends 
of May, being the second day of the week ; at which the Tem- 
plars and Hospitallers of Jerusalem presented to the before- 
named Idngs letters from Alexander, the Supreme Pontiff, to 
the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Alexander on the necessity of giving aid to the 
land of Jerusalem. 

" Alexander, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his dearly beloved sons, those noble men, the dukes and princes, 
earls, barons, and all the faithful servants of God, to whom 
these letters shall come, health and the Apostolic benediction. 
The sinister rumours which, according to the universal report 
of those passing this way, have reached us from the land of 

B 2 



ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1181. 

Jerusalem, have afflicted our heart and those of all our brethren 
with excessive grief ; inasmuch as any one who has the name 
of Christian can hardly even hear, without tears and sighs, the 
recitals that are given as to the wretched state of that country. 
For it is (and with grief we own it) trodden down under the 
inroads of the infidels, and so utterly bereft of the prowess of men 
of might, and the prudent counsel of men of probity, that un- 
less the people receive from the Christian kings and princes of 
the earth speedy and powerful succour, we fear, which may 
God forbid, the speedy desolation thereof, thus working to 
the disgrace of the Lord, and to the contempt of the Christian 
faith. For there is no king to rule that land, inasmuch as Bald- 
win, who now holds the helm of state, has been (as we believe 
you are aware) so grievously scourged under the righteous 
judgments of God, that he is hardly able to endure the inces- 
sant torments of his body. Indeed, the heavy losses and the 
shocking misfortunes, both in men and property, which that 
land (for which our fathers and ancestors shed their blood in the 
battles which they formerly waged with the heathens) has, in 
consequence of its sins so requiring it, endured, we can neither 
without great sorrowing at heart call to our recollection, nor 
can any who are zealous for the law of the Lord, endure with 
feelings of patience calamities of the faithful so mighty ; and 
the more especially so, as this most abominable nation of the 
pagans, in consequence of the losses and dangers which they 
have inflicted upon the nation of the Christians, are said to be 
inspired with such audacity as impudently to boast that they 
will, which God forbid, gain possession of that land. There- 
fore let the zeal of the Lord move you, and let not the Christian 
religion sleep in its sorrow over such mighty evils as are threat- 
ening that land ; but, on the contrary, manfully defend all those 
places which our Saviour and Redeemer has sanctified by His 
bodily presence, and despise the nations which reject the Lord, 
and strive to sweep away the Christian name from off the earth. 
For indeed, there is no Christian who is not moved at the mis- 
fortunes of the before-named land, and who does not prepare for 
the purpose of defending it from the attacks of the infidels, 
while they are striving to possess it, and, which God forbid, 
to profane it by their abominations. Therefore, those among 
you who are valiant and fit for waging war, ought, as a matter of 
duty, to undertake a work as pious as it is necessary and the la- 
bours of this pilgrimage, clothed no less with the shield of faith 



A. D. 1181. LETTEK OF POPE ALEXANDEB. 5 

and the breastplate of justice than with worldly arms, and 
to defend those places in which the Eedeemer of mankind has 
been willing to die for us and has undergone a temporal death, 
with powerful might, so that in our times Christianity may 
suffer no detriment in those parts. For inasmuch as Christ for 
our salvation endured many insults, and, last of all, suspension 
on the cross, that He might make an offering of us to God, 
mortified in the flesh and justified in the spirit, it is most 
conducive to the salvation of the faithful that on His behalf 
we should expose our bodies to perils and to labours, that so 
we may not seem to be forgetful of the price of His blood 
which He shed for us. Give heed therefore, my beloved sons 
in Christ, and consider how disgraceful it would be, and how 
deserving of the grief of all Christians, if at last the enemies 
of the cross of Christ should prevail against the dwellers in 
that land ; and that they will prevail we have no small dread, 
unless assistance is brought in all haste from the different parts 
of Christendom to those who dwell there. Therefore, take 
precaution and exert all your endeavours that Christianity 
may not succumb to heathenism, inasmuch as it is better to 
meet an impending evil before it comes, than to seek a remedy 
after the cause has been injured. To those also, who in behalf 
of Christ shall undertake the labours of this expedition, we 
do, by the Apostolic authority, grant and confirm that re- 
mission of sins, which the fathers, our predecessors, Urban 
and Eugenius, the Eoman Pontiffs, gave by their enactments. 
The wives also, and children of such persons, and their goods 
and possessions, we do decree, to be under the protection of 
Saint Peter and of ourselves, as also of the archbishops and 
bishops and other prelates of the Church ; strictly forbidding, 
that after the assumption of the cross, any claim shall be 
entertained with reference to the things of which they are in 
peaceable possession, until such time as they shall return, or 
certain information shall have been brought of their death. Let 
it also be lawful for them, after their relations, or even their 
superior lords, to whom the fee belongs, have shown them- 
selves unwilling or unable to lend them money thereon, to 
pledge their lands or other possessions to churches or to eccle- 
siastics or others of the faithful, freely and without any challenge 
thereof, in order to defray the expenses of the said expedition. 
Moreover, such men, accustomed to arms and fitted for the de- 
fence of that land, as shall, in the fervour of their devotion, 



6 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1181. 

repair to those holy places, and serve there for a period of two 
years against the Saracens, in defence of the Christian name, 
trusting in the merits of Jesus Christ and in the authority 
of the Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, we do give them 
absolution for all those sins of which with a contrite and hum- 
ble heart they shall make confession, unless they shall happen to 
have taken property that belongs to another, or to have extorted 
usurious interest, or to have committed thefts ; for all which 
Offences due reparation ought to be made. But if those who 
are guilty thereof have not the means of making such repara- 
tion, nevertheless they shall obtain pardon for their offences, 
as we have already mentioned. And those who shall have re- 
mained there but one year, as we have previously mentioned, 
shall obtain an indulgence for one half the penance enjoined 
them and remission of their sins. And, further, to all, who, by 
reason of urgent necessity, are wishful to visit the sepulchre of 
our Lord, whether they die on the road, or whether they arrive 
at that place, we do enjoin that the labour of the said journey 
shall be in place of penance, and obedience, and for the remission 
of all their sins, that so by the bounty of God, they may arrive 
from the turmoils of this life at that state of blessedness, 
1 Which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath en- 
tered into the heart of man/ 15 and which the Lord hath promised 
to those who love Him. Given at Tusculanum, on the seven- 
teenth day before the calends of February." 

The said pope also wrote to the archbishops, bishops, and 
other prelates of churches with reference to the same subject, 
to the following effect : 

Another Letter of pope Alexander on the same subject. 

" Alexander the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his venerable brethren the archbishops and bishops, and to his 
dearly beloved sons the abbats and other prelates of churches 
to whom these letters shall come, health and the Apostolic 
benediction. Inasmuch as the eastern lands, by reason of 
the attacks and assaults of the infidels, have been deprived of 
the prowess of men of valour and the counsel of men of pro- 
bity, and are stricken with exceeding dismay, the archbishops, 
bishops, and other chief men of the land, have thought proper 
to send to your parts our dearly beloved sons, the knights of the 
Temple, the bearers of these presents, religious men, and who 
15 1 Cor. ii. 9. 



A.D. 1181. LETTEB OF POPE ALEXANDEE. 4 

fear God, in order to implore your aid ; wherefore we, whom 
the calamities of that land afflict with intense sorrow, after the 
example of our fathers and predecessors, being anxious for the 
preservation thereof, do by this healthful warning exhort the 
Christian kings and princes of the world to the defence of 
those places in which the feet of the Lord have stood ; and for 
that purpose, we do proclaim to all sinners, who, in the cause 
of Christ, shall undertake the labour of aiding Jerusalem, and 
shall with faithful duteousness make it their care to fight against 
the Saracens, that remission and forgiveness of sins, which 
the fathers, our predecessors, Urban and Eugenius, the Roman 
Pontiffs, gave by their enactments. We do therefore advise 
and strictly enjoin the whole of you, to receive with kindly 
feelings the brethren who have been sent for this purpose, and 
after learning through them the state of the countries of the 
east, and the necessities thereof, to labour by frequent and 
anxious exhortations to induce the princes, earls, and others 
of the faithful in Christ in your respective dioceses, to repair 
with all haste to these lands, for the delivery of which their 
fathers and ancestors have shed their own blood, and to fight with 
might and valour against the enemies of the cross of Christ. 
The letters which for this purpose we send, addressed to all 
generally, you will cause to be publicly read in all churches and 
will explain the tenor thereof, and will announce the remission 
of sins which we grant to those who shall engage in a work so 
pious and so necessary, and so advise all persons to do that 
which we suggest. And may, through your anxiety and your 
exhortations, that land speedily be sensible of the aid and suc- 
cour of the faithful, and may you yourselves in return for it, 
gain from Almighty God an everlasting reward. Given at 
Tusculanum, 16 on the sixteenth day of January." 

On hearing of this, Philip, king of France, and Henry, king 
of England, greatly lamenting the adversities and the de- 
solation of the land of Jerusalem, promised that they would, 
with the aid of the Lord, give speedy succour thereto ; upon 
which, the interview was brought to a close. 

In the meantime, William, king of Scotland, by the com- 
mand of our lord the king of England, came into Normandy, 
and by his counsel and advice the said king of Scotland gave 
liberty to return to Matthew, bishop of Aberdeen, and John, 
bishop of Saint Andrew's, whom he had banished from Soot- 
16 The modern Frascati. 



ANNALS OF ROGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1131. 

land. An agreement was entered into between them, in 
presence of the king of England, to the following effect : 
That Matthew, bishop of Aberdeen, should freely and without 
any opposition, under the safe conduct of the king of Scotland, 
return to his own see, and if anything should have been taken 
from him, the same should be restored ; and John, who had 
been consecrated bishop of Saint Andrew's, in order to regain 
the favour of his lord the king of Scotland, agreed that he 
would give up to him the said bishopric, if he should be allowed 
to choose whatever bishopric he might please in the kingdom 
of Scotland, and if in addition thereto, the king of Scotland 
should give him his chancellorship and all the revenues which 
he had held before his consecration, together with forty marks 
of yearly revenue from the church of Saint Andrew's. Upon 
this the king of Scotland sent his envoys to pope Alexander, to 
request that for the sake of peace, he would allow this change 
of episcopal sees to take place ; this, however, our lord, the 
pope, would not allow. 

After these transactions, the king of England gave to John 
Fitz-Luke, his clerk, the bishopric of Exeter, and to Ralph de 
"Warnville, who was his chancellor and treasurer of the church of 
York, the bishopric of Lisieux, which Arnulph, bishop of Lisieux, 
had vacated in consequence of the dislike which the king had 
taken to him ; for when he found that he could at no price 
obtain the royal favour, he preferred resigning the bishopric, 
to enduring the king's hatred any longer. Accordingly, after 
getting in his gold and silver from every quarter, of which he 
was said to have a large quantity, and having received from 
the king of England a large sum of money for vacating his 
bishopric, he went to Paris, and remained at the church of 
Saint Victor there until the day of his death. After this, 
while the king of England was making a stay at Barbeflet, 17 
with the intention of passing over to England, a dispute arose 
between Philip, king of France, and Philip, earl of Flanders, 
concerning the count of Claremont, whom the earl of Flanders 
greatly disliked. The king of England, therefore, at the request 
of the king of France, attended a conference between them at 
Gisors, and made peace between the king of France and the 
earl of Flanders. After this, the king of England came to 
Cherbourg, and, passing over to England, landed at Ports- 
mouth, on the seventh day before the calends of August, being 
17 Harfleur. 



A.n. 1181. ASSIZE AS TO KEEPING ARMS. 

the Lord's day, with "William, king of the Scots, who accom- 
panied him. 

Shortly after this, the king of England made the follow- 
ing assize as to keeping arms throughout England : 

" Whoever has a single knight's fee must keep a cuirass, a 
helmet, a shield, and a lance, and every knight must keep as 
many cuirasses, helmets, shields, and lances as he has knights' 
fees in his demesne. Every free layman, who shall have in 
chattels or in rental to the amount of sixteen marks, must have 
a hauberk, an iron head-piece, and a lance ; and all burgesses, 
and all companies of freemen must keep a gambeson, an iron 
head-piece, and a lance; and every person may make oath 
that before the feast of Saint Hilary he will provide such arms, 
and will do fealty to our lord the king, namely, Henry, the son 
of the empress Matilda, and will hold the said arms at his ser- 
vice in obedience to his command, and in fealty to his lord the 
king and to his realm. And no person, after he shall have 
provided the said arms, is to sell the same, or to make a pledge 
thereof, or to lend them, or in any way to part with them ; nor 
is the lord in any way to take them from his homager, either 
by way of fine, gift, or pledge, or in any other way whatso- 
ever. And if any person having the said arms shall die, his 
arms shall remain with his heir ; and if his heir be not of 
such an age that he can use arms, if required, then the person 
who shall have the guardianship of him, shall in like manner 
have the guardianship of such arms, and shall find a man to 
use the said arms in the service of our lord the king, if 
needs be, until the heir shall be of such an age as to be able to 
bear arms, and then he is to have them. And further, what- 
ever burgess shall have more arms than according to this assize 
he ought to have, he is to sell the same, or give them away, or 
part with them to some person who shall wield them in Eng- 
land in the service of our lord the king. And no one of them 
is to retain more arms than in conformity with this assize he 
ought to have. Also, no Jew is to keep in his possession a 
cuirass or hauberk ; but he is to sell the same or give them 
away, or in some other manner dispose thereof, but so that they 
continue to be used in the service of our lord the king of Eng- 
land. Also, no person is to carry arms out of England except 
with the leave of our lord the king, and no one is to sell arms 
to any person for him to carry them out of England, and no 
merchant or other person is to carry them out of England. Also, 



10 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1181- 

the justices are to cause oath to be made by lawful knights, or 
by other free and lawful men of hundreds, visnets, 18 and burghs, 
as may seem most expedient to them, that those who have the 
value in chattels to the amount above stated, shall provide, as 
they ought, a cuirass, helmet, lance, and shield, according to 
what has been mentioned above ; and that for the said purpose 
they will name all those of their hundreds, visnets, and boroughs, 
who have sixteen marks' value either in chattels or yearly ren- 
tal ; and after that, the justices are to cause all of them to be 
registered, both jurors and the others, both who they are 
and what chattels or rental they have, and what arms each 
ought to provide, according to the value of the chattels or 
rental ; and after that, in their presence and in the hearing of 
them all, they are to cause this assize to be read as to keeping 
arms, and to cause them to make oath that they will provide 
such arms according to the aforesaid value of the chattels or 
rental, and will hold the same at the service of our lord the 
king in conformity with the aforesaid assize, in obedience to 
the command of and in fealty to their lord, king Henry, son of 
the empress Matilda, and to his realm. And if it shall so 
happen that any one of those persons who ought to provide 
such arms shall not be in the county at the time when the jus- 
tices shall be in that county, then the justices are to appoint a 
time for him to appear before them in another county. And 
if the said persons shall not come to them in any county 
through which they shall pass, and shall not be in those dis- 
tricts, then they are to name a time at Westminster, on the 
octave of Saint Michael, that each may then be there for the 
purpose of making oath, as he loves himself and all that belongs 
to him ; and orders are to be given to him before the feast of 
Saint Hilary before-named, to provide arms according as he 
is bound to provide the same. And further, the justices are 
to cause proclamation to be made throughout all counties 
through which they shall pass, that those persons who shall 
not provide the said arms as herein commanded, the king will 
lay hands on their bodies, and will on no account take from 
them their lands or chattels. Also, no person is to be sworn 
as of the free and lawful men who has not sixteen marks or 
ten marks in chattels. Also, the justices are to give orders 
throughout all the counties through which they shall pass, that 

is Neighbourhoods ;" from the Norman " vesine ;" probably, small 
communities not unlike the " frith-borgs" of the Anglo-Saxons. 



A.D. 1181. THE KING OF SCOTLAND EXCOMMUNICATED. 11 

no person, 'as lie loves himself and all that belongs to him, 
shall buy or sell any ship for the purpose of transport from 
England ; and that no person shall carry timber, or cause it to 
be carried, out of England. The king has also ordered that 
no person shall be admitted to the oath of arms unless he is a 
free man." 

In the same year, Henry, king of England, son of the em- 
press Matilda, gave to John Cumin, his clerk, the archbishopric 
of Dublin, in Ireland, at Evesham, on the eighth day before 
the ides of September. In the same year William, arch- 
bishop of Rheims, came to England on a pilgrimage to the 
Martyr Saint Thomas of Canterbury. In the same year Dufe- 
nald, the son of William, the son of Dunecan, who had often 
laid claim to the kingdom of Scotland, entered Scotland with a 
large army, and laid waste the parts near the sea-coast. In this 
year also, John, bishop of Saint Andrew's, pronounced sentence 
of excommunication against Eichard de Morville, the constable, 
and Richard de Prebenda, and others of the household of the king 
of Scotland, who had caused a breach of the peace between 
himself and the king. In addition to this, Roger, archbishop 
of York, the legate in Scotland, and Hugh, bishop of Durham, 
by the authority of our lord the pope, commanded the prior of 
Saint Andrew's and the ecclesiastical personages throughout 
the bishopric of Saint Andrew's, to go to John, their bishop, and 
pay him the respect of their duteous submission, declaring that 
if they refused, they would pronounce upon them, as being 
contumacious and rebellious, sentence of suspension. On this, 
some of the ecclesiastics of the bishopric of Saint Andrew's, 
through fear of suspension, came to the before-named bishop 
John ; on which William, the king of Scotland, expelled them 
from his kingdom, with their sons and kinsmen, and even those 
who, hanging at their mother's breasts, were yet crying in the 
cradle. Roger, archbishop of York, and Hugh, bishop of 
Durham, seeing the shocking proscription of these persons, 
acted in obedience to the mandate of our lord the pope ; for 
Roger, archbishop of York, excommunicated William, king of 
Scotland, and both he and Hugh, bishop of Durham, pronounced 
sentence of interdict on all the territories of the king of Scot- 
land, ordering the bishops, abbats, priors, and other ecclesi- 
astical persons strictly and inviolably to observe the said sen- 
tence of interdict, and carefully to avoid the king himself as an 
excommunicated person. 



12 ANXALS OF KOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1181. 

In the same year died pope Alexander the Third, in the 
twenty-second year of his papacy, and on the twelfth day before 
the calends of October, being succeeded in the papacy by Imbald, 
cardinal bishop of Ostia, who took the name of pope Lucius the 
Third. In the same year, Eoger, archbishop of York, being 
attacked with a severe illness, on perceiving the last day of his 
life at hand, called together the abbats, priors, and other ecclesi- 
astical persons of his diocese, and with becoming considerateness 
distributed his property for the use of the poor, and among other 
wondrous deeds of his power, 19 to perpetuate his praises, he sent 
to William, archbishop of Rheims, and the other bishops of the 
kingdom of France, more than five hundred pounds of silver 
to be distributed among the poor. In like manner he left a 
similar sum to the archbishop of Rouen and the other bishops of 
Normandy ; and the same to the archbishop of Canterbury and 
the other bishops of England. Having thus made distribution 
of all his property, he removed from Gowda, where he was taken 
ill, to York, the metropolitan see of his archiepiscopate, where 
on the tenth day before the calends of December, being Satur- 
day, at twilight, he departed this life, full of days, after having 
happily ruled his archbishopric twenty-seven years and six 
weeks. His body was buried by Hugh, bishop of Durham, 
in the choir of the canons secular of the metropolitan church 
at York ; William, the king of Scotland, still remaining under 
the sentence of excommunication which the before-named arch- 
bishop of York had pronounced against him. 

Upon hearing of the death of the archbishop of York, Wil- 
liam, king of Scotland, was greatly delighted ; and holding a 
council with the bishops, earls, and elders of his territories, sent 
Jocelyn, bishop of Glasgow, and Arnulph, abbat of Melrose, 
and other wise and discreet ecclesiastics of his kingdom to 
Rome, to Lucius, the Supreme Pontiff, in order that he might 
be absolved from the said sentence of excommunication, and 
that his lands might be released from the interdict, and in 
order that, if in any way it could be brought about, John, 
bishop of Saint Andrew's, might be deposed. 

When word was brought to the king of England that the be- 
fore-named archbishop had gone the way of all flesh, he sent his 
servants throughout all the archbishopric of York, giving orders 
that all of which the said archbishop in his illness had made 
distribution should be confiscated ; which was accordingly 
19 Charity rather, one would think. 



A..T). 1182. THE BISHOP OF DURHAM DISPLEASES THE K.I1TG. 13 

done. For the entire devise, which in his illness he had made, 
was, by the king's command, rendered null and void ; as our 
lord the king asserted that the before-named archbishop of 
York had pronounced an opinion in his lifetime that it was not 
lawful for any ecclesiastical person to make a devise except at a 
time before he was taken ill. 

In the same ear, count Stephen, the uncle of Philip, king of 
Prance, seized the lands of a certain person his neighbour, 
and withheld them by force, and did homage for them to 
Philip, earl of Flanders ; on doing which, the king of France 
laid hands on them, and the earl of Flanders claimed restitu- 
tution thereof to be made to himself and earl Theobald ; and 
the king of France, refusing to accede thereto, the earl of 
Flanders entered the territories of the king of France with a 
hostile hand, and ravaged them. In the same year, Hugh, 
earl of Chester, departed this life, and was succeeded in the 
earldom by his son Ranulph. 

After the death of Eoger, archbishop of York, our lord the 
king gave orders to his justices in England to make diligent 
inquisition as to the monies left by the before-named arch- 
bishop, and wherever such were discovered, in his name, to 
make demand thereof. In consequence of this, the said 
justices demanded of Hugh, bishop of Durham, three hundred 
marks of silver, which the said bishop had received out of 
the monies of the archbishop, for the purpose of distribution 
among the poor; on which he made answer to them: "I 
distributed the three hundred marks of silver which you de- 
mand of me, during the lifetime of the archbishop who 
gave them to me, among the lepers, the blind, the lame, the 
dumb, and the rest of the necessitous, and in the repair of 
churches and bridges, for the salvation of his soul, according 
as he himself had ordered ; therefore let him who wants them 
collect them, for by me they will never be collected." Accord- 
ingly, an answer of this nature exasperated the feelings of our 
lord the king beyond measure, so much so, that he ordered 
the castle of Durham to be seized in his name, in order that 
the bishop might be harassed by every kind of persecution. 

In the year of grace 1182, being the twenty-eighth year of 
the reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said 
king was at Winchester, in England, on the day of the Nativity 
of our Lord, which took place on the sixth day of the week. 
In the same year died the count of Zelders, who had married 



14 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1182, 

the eldest daughter of Matthew, earl of Boulogne ; also the 
countess of Flanders, daughter of Ralph de Peronne, and 
wife of Philip, earl of Flanders. In the same year, Henry, 
king of England, the father, crossed over from England to 
Normandy, in consequence of the annoyances and vexations 
which his son king Henry was causing him. For, having gone 
with his wife to Philip, king of France, he was devising all 
the evils he possibly could to the detriment of the king, his 
father, contrary to good faith and the oaths of fealty which 
he had often taken to him ; demanding of him, in conformity 
with the advice of Philip, king of France, his wife's brother, the 
whole of Normandy, or else some other part of his territories, in 
which he and his wife might take up their abode, and from 
which he might pay his knights and servants for their services. 
However, the Divine grace inspiring him so to do, he returned 
to his father, and swore that for the future he would not op- 
pose his wishes or designs, or demand anything more of him 
than a hundred pounds of money Anjouin per day for his ex- 
penses, and ten pounds per day of the same money for his 
wife's expenses ; in addition to which the king, the father, 
agreed with the king, his son, that in the same year he would 
give him the services of a hundred of his knights. 

After this, the king, the father, held a conference, at which 
were present the king of France and the earl of Flanders ; 
on which occasion an arrangement was made between them 
to the following effect ; that the lands of which the earl of 
Flanders demanded restitution to be made to himself, should be 
restored to the knight who had lost them, and that the earl of 
Flanders should make good for the king of France the injuries 
that he and his people had done in France, with reference to 
the destruction by fire, and the booty that had been carried off. In 
addition to this, the said earl quitted claim to the king of France 
of the services of the count of Claremont, and delivered up to 
the king of France the city of Amiens with its appurtenances, 
and all the lands extending thence to the waters of the Lys 
after his own decease, together with his niece, the daughter of 
the earl of Hainault ; and the said earl made confession that 
lawfully Peronne with its appurtenances was only in pledge 
to himself, and agreed that the king of France should have pos- 
session thereof for sixty thousand pounds of silver. At the same 
conference, the said earl of Flanders delivered into the possession 
of the king of England, the father, the agreement entered into 



A.D. 1182. LETTER OP POPE LTTCTUS. 15 

in writing by the king his son, and released him and his brothers 
from all covenants made between them in the time of the war. 
In the same year, pope Lucius the Third ordained John 
Cumin priest, on the third day before the ides of March, at 
Veletri ; and afterwards consecrated him archbishop of Dublin 
at the same place, on the sixth day before the calends of April, 
being Palm Sunday. In the same year, at the urgent request of 
the envoys of the king of Scotland, namely, Jocelyn, bishop of 
Glasgow, Arnold, abbat of Melrose, Osbert, abbat of Kelso, 21 
and Walter, prior of Saint Columba of the Isle, pope 
Lucius the Third absolved William king of Scotland from 
the sentence of excommunication,, and his kingdom from the 
interdict, at the palace of the Lateran, at Eome, in pre- 
sence of his cardinals, namely, Peter de Pavia, bishop of 
Tusculanum, the bishop of Prseneste, Albert, his chancellor, 
Jacinto, Hugesun, Peter de Bova, master Yivianus, Reiner 
the Great, Chinchechapel, Reiner the Little, Hardesrun, Har- 
dewin, and Matthew of Anjou. After having so done, he 
delivered letters of absolution to the before-mentioned envoys 
of the king of Scotland, to the following effect : 

The letter of pope Lucius on the absolution of William, king of 
Scotland, 

" Lucius, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his 
venerable brethren the bishops, and the abbats, clergy, and people 
throughout Scotland, health and the Apostolic benediction. 
Inasmuch as the Apostle has directed that deference shall be 
paid to kings as being of exalted station, it is worthy and 
consistent with reason that we should pay them the highest 
honor as our most dearly beloved sons, and, in performance 
of our duty to Saint Peter and the holy Church of Home, give 
all attention to their just desires. And whereas we have 
heard that because our dearly beloved son in Christ, William, 
the illustrious king of the Scots, was inexorably opposed to the 
election and consecration of our venerable brother bishop 
John, by virtue of letters of pope Alexander, our predecessor, of 
holy memory, Roger, archbishop of York, of happy memory, 
and the before-named bishop pronounced sentence of excom- 
munication against him and his realm, and certain persons in 
his kingdom. And whereas our venerable brother Jocelyn, 

21 Called " Kelron" in tlie text. The abbat is called " Kalkoensis" 
shortly after. 



16 jLNNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1182 

bishop of Glasgow, and our dearly beloved sons, Arnold, abbat 
of Melrose, Osbert, abbat of Kelso, and Walter, prior of 
Saint Columba of the Isle, after coming for the said pur- 
pose to the Apostolic See, have, by their declarations, made 
proof and shewn before us and our brethren that the sentence 
of excommunication pronounced by the said archbishop upon 
the king, and that of interdict upon his kingdom, and the sen- 
tence of excommunication pronounced by the said bishop upon 
certain persons of his kingdom, ought reasonably and upon 
numerous grounds to be set aside. Wherefore, paying due 
deference to the before-named king as our most dearly beloved 
son in Christ, we have, by the common consent of our brethren 
and with the Apostolic authority, remitted all the sentence which 
was pronounced by the before-named bishop 22 for the cause 
before-mentioned, against him or his people, or his kingdom, 
and have enacted that he and his people shall not be held to 
be excommunicated, nor his kingdom to be under interdict, in 
consequence of our sentence above-written. Wherefore, we do 
by our precept, by these Apostolic writings, command the whole 
of you that you will in no way hesitate to treat with him as a 
Catholic king and as holding communion with the Apostolic See, 
but will rather in all things pay him the honor that is his due. 
For the more assured we feel of the sincerity of his duteousness 
to the churches and ecclesiastical persons of his realm, the more 
abundantly do we wish him to be honored in all things in 
which, with due respect TO God, we can be honored. Given at 
Velletri, this sixteenth day before the calends of April." 

In the same year, the king of England sent his envoys, 
namely, William de Mandeville, earl of Aumarle, and some other 
persons of his household, to Frederic, the emperor of the Ro- 
mans, in order that, if possible, they might avert his anger and 
displeasure from Henry, duke of Saxony. Although this could 
not be fully brought about, the emperor granted to all 
who had chosen to depart with him, leave to return to their 
country. In addition to this, the said emperor granted to 
Matilda, duchess of Saxony, in consideration of the love he 
bore to the king of England, her father, permission to remain 
at perfect liberty and under his protection, and to enjoy all 
her dowry freely and quietly ; and the emperor further agreed 
that, if she should prefer to go into exile with her lord, he 

22 Rather " bishops," although the bishop elect alone was now sur- 
viving. It is singular that the bishop of Durham is not mentioned. 



A.D. 1182. THE BISHOP OF ST ANDREW'S APPEALS TO THE POPE. 17 

would place keepers for the purpose of protecting her dowry. 
The time therefore drawing nigh at which the before-named 
duke was to withdraw from his country and kindred, he and 
his wife, with their sons and daughters, and his counts and 
barons, and the richest men of his territories, departed from 
their country and kindred, and came to Normandy, to Henry, 
king of England, the father of the before-named duchess, who 
joyfully received them. Shortly after, the before-named duke 
gave to his counts and barons, and the richer men of his territo- 
ries, permission to return home, and the king of England, the 
father of the duchess, bestowed on them many presents and then 
dismissed them. The duke himself set out on a pilgrimage to 
Saint Jago, 23 and the duchess his wife being pregnant, re- 
mained with the king, her father, at Argenton in Normandy, 
where she was shortly after delivered of a son. 

In the same year, the Welch slew Ranulph Poer, the king's 
sheriff of Gloucestershire. In this year also, Roland, the 
bishop-elect of Dol and subdeacon of the Roman Church, came 
into England on behalf of pope Lucius, for the purpose of 
making peace between the king of Scotland and John, bishop 
of Saint Andrew's ; and proceeded to the court of the king of 
the Scots, together with Silvanus, the abbat of Rievaulx, his 
colleague, where, after having for a long time negotiated upon 
making peace between them, at their request the follow- 
ing terms were made between the king and the before-named 
bishop : Hugh was to abjure the bishopric of Saint Andrew's, 
and bishop John was to release the said bishopric from all 
claims whatever on his part and, instead thereof, he was to 
have the bishopric of Dunkeld, and all the yearly revenues 
which he had had before his election, as also the chancellorship 
to the king, and forty marks of yearly revenue arising from the 
bishopric of Saint Andrew's, during his life. Hugh, however, 
when called upon by his lord the king of Scotland to abjure the 
bishopric of Saint Andrew's, made answer that he would rather 
receive judgment thereon at the Roman court, than in this way 
abjure a bishopric to which he had been consecrated : and im- 
mediately charged the letters which bishop John had obtained 
against him from the Roman Pontiff with being forged, and ap- 
pealed to the Roman Pontiff : upon which the before-named 
Roland and the abbat Silvanus, being unable to proceed as they 
ought, wrote to the Supreme Pontiff to the following effect : 
23 Of Compostella. 

VOL. n. c 



18 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1182. 

TJie Letter of Roland, lishop-elect of Dol, and Silvanus, ablat 
of Rievaulx, to pope Lucius. 

"To the reverend father and lord, Lucius, by the grace of 
God, supreme and universal Pontiff, Roland, by the like grace, 
bishop-elect of Dol, servant of his Holiness, the foster-child of 
the Apostolic See, and the least of the sub-deacons, and Sil- 
vanus, appointed abbat of Bievaulx, the respect of duteous 
obedience. After we had presented to bishop Hugh the letters 
which that bishop charges with being forged, and those in 
which the case is stated at length, and proposed, on receiving 
leave of our lord the king of the Scots, to return home with all 
haste, our lord the king entreated me, the bishop-elect of Dol, 
with earnestness and anxiety, to pass by the way of the lord 
bishop John, and, as a mark of his favour, to make him an 
offer on his behalf of the bishopric of Dunkeld, with the 
yearly revenues which he had before received in the bishopric 
of Saint Andrew's, together with an increase of forty marks to 
be received yearly, as also the office of chancellor to the king ; 
and he further added that he would restore to him and his 
every thing he had taken away, with the exception only of 
what he knew to have already come to his hands, and would 
restore them to the fulness of his favour, in the same manner 
as had been previously offered him. He also desired that the 
said bishop John would burn all documents that had been ob- 
tained upon the matter of Saint Andrew's from your prede- 
cessor Alexander, of pious memory. He also gave his sanction 
that bishop Hugh should be transferred to the bishopric of 
Glasgow, if bishop John should refuse to consent on other 
terms, and if that could not be brought about, still he would 
agree to what he had offered. On making offer of all these 
things in presence of Hugh, the lord bishop of Durham, to 
our lord John, he courteously acceded thereto on these terms : 
namely, that he would never allow bishop Hugh to remain in 
the enjoyment of the bishopric of Saint Andrew's. He was 
also willing that the documents before-mentioned should be 
put aside in some place, so that he could never make use of 
them against the king's wishes. Upon this, we returned to the 
king's presence, while bishop John waited for us near Rokel- 
burg ; 24 on which the king informed us that it would give him 
great pleasure if bishop Hugh could remain in the bishopric 
84 Roxburgh. 



A.D. 1182. DEATH OF THE BISHOP OF HOCHESTEB. 19 

of Saint Andrew's, and requested me to use my best endea- 
vours to prevail upon bishop John to admit of this ; and when 
I made answer to him that I would never again make any 
request of him upon that point, because I had not been able to 
make any impression upon him on the subject, his answer was, 
' I am fully persuaded that since the lord John has returned to 
reconciliation and favour with me, he will, on consideration of 
my favour, and at the urgency of my entreaties, admit of this, 
and I would gladly confer with him thereon ;' and the king 
requested me to advise him to come and have a conference with 
him. The king's clerks being accordingly sent to bishop John, 
he made answer that he would not come, because he had heard 
from certain advisers of our lord the king, that the king was 
always endeavouring, in every possible way, to gain his point 
that Hugh should remain in the bishopric of Saint Andrew's, 
and asserted that, if he should be inclined to come, they were 
not able to give him a safe conduct. When this answer was re- 
turned him, our lord the king sent a bishop, and some abbats, 
earls, and barons to the said bishop, requesting that he would 
come to him for the purpose of an interview, and ordered them 
to guarantee to the said bishop entire security. These, on their 
return, stated that the lord John, inasmuch as he had a pre- 
sentiment that his lord the king wished bishop Hugh to re- 
main in the bishopric of Saint Andrew's, made answer that 
he would never come to the king unless they should first make 
oath that their lord the king would observe everything that 
through me he had offered to him ; this, however, they were 
unwilling to do, upon which, the lord John returned home. 
"We, however, have appointed a stated time, on the calends of 
October, for the before-named bishops, John and Hugh, to come 
to you, and to submit to your judgment. Farewell." 

In the same year died Walter, bishop of Rochester, and was 
succeeded in the bishopric by Waleran, archdeacon of Bayeux. 
In this year, while Walter, a servant of Eustace, the lord 
abbat of Maye, was one night asleep, he heard a voice from 
heaven, saying to him a first, second, and third time, "Go and 
say to Henry, king of England, 'In the name of Christ, annihi- 
late and destroy,' and say to him that so he must do, and, if he 
does not do so, both his sons and himself shall die." On this 
the before-named Walter made answer and said, " Who am I, 
that I should carry thy commands unto the king r " To which 
he received for answer, " Go to Hotrod, the archbishop of Rouen, 

c2 



20 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDE1T. A.D. 1183, 

and to his chaplain, and to Eustace, the abbat of Flaye, and they 
shall remove the thorns and briars from out of thy path, and, 
unless thou shalt make haste, thou shalt die." After the third 
warning, therefore, the said Walter came to the before-named 
archbishop of Rouen, and to his chaplain, and to abbat Eustace ; 
and whereas, the archbishop and his chaplain, being worn out 
with sickness and old age, could not attend to the matter, 
they deputed the abbat of Flaye to act in their behalves ; on 
which, he with his servant went to the king, and the servant 
related to the king his vision and the accompanying threats ; 
but the king, not being able to understand any part thereof, 
and there being no one to interpret the vision to him, paid no 
attention whatever to it ; and, shortly after, his son king Henry 
died, and then his son Geoffrey, earl of Brittany. About the 
time at which this vision took place many of the Manichaean 
heretics 25 were burned in many places throughout the king- 
dom of France, a thing that the king would in nowise allow 
in his territories, although there were great numbers of them. 

In the year of grace 1183, being the twenty-ninth year of 
the reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said 
king of England was at Caen, in Normandy, on the day 
of the Nativity of our Lord; the [young] king also, and 
Richard and Geoffrey, his sons, and Henry, duke of Saxony, 
and his wife, together with their sons and daughters, and a 
large retinue, together with Richard, archbishop of Canterbury, 
and John Cumin, archbishop of Dublin, and many bishops, earls, 
and barons were there with him. After the Nativity of our 
Lord, the king ordered the king, his son, to receive homage 
from Richard, earl of Poitou, and from Geoffrey, earl of Brit- 
tany, his brothers ; on which, in obedience to his father, he 
received the homage of his brother Geoffrey, and was willing 
to receive it from his brother Richard, but Richard refused to 
do homage to him ; and afterwards, when Richard offered to 
do homage to him, the king, the son, refused to receive it. 
Richard, feeling greatly indignant at this, withdrew from the 
court of the king, his father, and going to Poitou, his own 
territory, built there some new castles and fortified the old 
ones. 

At the request of such of the earls and barons of Poitou as 

25 " Publican!." Under this name the Albigenses, who were said to be 
Manichaeans, are alluded to. 



A>D. 118S. THE KINiJ QTJARKELS WITH HIS SONS. 21 

adhered to him, and who inflicted many losses on earl Richard, 
the king, his brother, pursued him. Geoffrey, earl of Brittany, 
also came to Poitou, with a large force, to assist the king, his 
brother. On Richard perceiving that he could not make head 
against his brothers, he sent for assistance to the king, his 
father, who, raising a great army, came in all haste, and laid 
siege to the castle of Limoges, which had been a short time 
before surrendered to the king, his son. 

The cause of the dissensions between the Icing and his sons. 

In order, however, that the cause may be known of these 
shocking dissensions that took place between the father and his 
sons, it ought to be stated that, on the holy day of the Circum- 
cision of our Lord, king Henry, son of our lord the king of 
England, of his own accord, and no one forcing him thereto, 
touching the Holy Gospels, and in presence of a large body of 
the clergy and laity, made oath that he would from that day 
forward all the days of his life maintain his fealty un- 
blemished to Henry, king of England, as being his father and 
his liege lord, and would show him all due honor and obe- 
dience. And because, as he asserted, the king wished to 
retain no rancour and malice in his mind, by reason of which 
his father might possibly be afterwards offended, he declared to 
Kim that he had entered into a compact with the barons of Aqui- 
"aine against his brother Richard, being influenced by the fact 
hat his said brother had fortified the castle of Clairvaulx, 
vhich was part of his own inheritance after his father's death, 
contrary to his own wishes. Wherefore he earnestly entreated 
his father to take the said castle from Richard, and keep it in 
his own charge. 

Richard, being admonished by our lord the king relative 
thereto, at first refused to do so, but afterwards freely delivered 
it to be disposed of at his father's pleasure. Accordingly, 
the three sons of our lord the king, namely, the [young] king, 
Richard, and Geoffrey, came to Anjou, with the king, their father, 
for the purpose of entering into a final treaty of peace between 
them ; and each of the three made oath that they would observe 
their fealty at all times towards the king, their father, against 
all men, and would pay him all honor and lasting obedience. 
They also made oath, in accordance with the directions of their 
father, that they would observe lasting peace between themselves. 
On a given day, therefore, for ratifying the peace made between 



22 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1183. 

them, at a place called Mirabel, under the direction of their 
father, because the barons of Aquitaine, to whom the king, 
the son, had engaged himself by oath, were not present, the 
king, the father, sent his son Geoffrey to them that they might 
come to the said conference for the establishment of peace and 
reconciliation, and in the meantime cease from all hostilities. 

But the said Geoffrey, utterly forgetful of God and of re- 
spect for his father, and unmindful of his commands, did not 
bring peace, but the sword, and, slighting his oath, his homage, 
and the fealty which he had so often sworn to his father, 
entered into a compact with the enemies of his father, for 
the purpose of harassing him, and induced a sacrilegious race, 
and one detested by the Church of Rome, 26 to ravage the ter- 
ritories of his father. The king, the son, on hearing of this, 
entreated his father to establish peace between his brother 
Richard and the barons of Aquitaine. In answer to the 
entreaties of his son, our lord the king promised that he would 
preserve peace, and that, for this purpose, in the manner that 
had been agreed upon in the preceding summer, reparation 
should be made for all excesses committed by either party, or 
else, if that should not please the barons, he would judge them 
in conformity with the opinions pronounced by his court. 
This offer was quite to the satisfaction of the king, the son ,* 
on condition, however, that the castle of Clairvaulx should 
remain safe in the hands of the king, his father. 

Upon this, the king, the son, having gained of his father all 
that he had requested, with his father's permission set out for 
Limoges, for the purpose of inviting both his brother Geoffrey 
and the barons of Aquitaine to come to terms, and in the 
meantime sent his wife to France, to her brother, the king of 
that country, for the purpose of being in safety. The king, 
the father, also, at the request and by the advice of the king, 
the son, came with a few followers by another road to Limoges, 
in safety from his sons and in safety from his subjects; but when 
he had come to this territory that was his own, his own subjects 
received him most shamefully, for they aimed their arrows 
against him, so much so that they even wantonly pierced his 
coat armour, wounded one of his knights before his eyes, and 
violently prevented the king from entering either the city or 

28 The hireling Brabanters mentioned below. They formed part of the 
" ruptuarii," or " Routiers," the employment of whom was forbidden by 
the Church of Rome. 



A. D. 1183. PEKFIDIOUS CONDUCT OF THE YOUNG KING. 23 

the castle ; in consequence of which, he and his son Richard 
were obliged to depart. 

After this, our lord the king effected an entrance into the city 
of Limoges ; but when he was departing therefrom, for the pur- 
pose of conversing with his sons in a fatherly manner, in pre- 
sence of his sons, the garrison of the castle before-mentioned 
aimed their deadly arrows; in consequence of which, they 
wounded the horse which bore the king, the father, in the head, 
and if the horse had not lifted its head just at the approach of 
the arrow, it would have pierced the king's breast to a consi- 
derable depth. This his sons Henry and Geoffrey thinking 
lightly of, took no pains to punish the offender ; and, notwith- 
standing, returned to the deadly foes of their lord and father. 

Shortly after, the king, the son, came to his father, and pro- 
mised him, that, if the barons of Aquitaine would not come to 
his feet to sue for peace, he would utterly abandon them, 
and return to obedience to him under all circumstances. On 
this, the king the father, being moved at the entreaties of his 
son, again made promise of the peace which he had previously 
promised to the barons. Wherefore, the king the son, as he 
said, went to his brother Geoffrey and the barons of Aqui- 
taine, and, returning from them to his father, asserted that 
they were utterly disobedient and rebellious, for which rea- 
son, he had returned to his duty and obedience to his father's 
will. This, however, as appeared in the sequel, was done 
fraudulently, in order that in the meantime the perfidious 
race of the Brabanters, and Geoffrey, that son of perdition, 
might with lawless violence the more easily ravage his fa- 
ther's territories, and nefariously lay them waste, carrying off 
the ornaments of the churches, burning towns and villages to 
the ground, emptying the fields and the sheepfolds by their 
ravages, so as to cause utter destruction in every quarter; 
sparing neither age, nor sex, nor rank, nor the religious pro- 
fession ; on the contrary, as it appeared, aiming at the perpe- 
tration of homicide, sacrilege, and rapine alone. 

Shortly after these things had taken place, the king, the 
son, on hearing what had been done by his brother Geoffrey, 
told his father, that whatever he had done in this matter 
had been done by the counsel of his brother Geoffrey, and 
giving his arms and his horse in his father's charge, remained 
with him some days. But after he had eaten at the same 
table with his father, and had dipped his hands into the same 



24 ANNALS OF ROGEK DE HOYEDEtT. A.D. 1183. 

dish, he withdrew from him, and again leagued himself by 
oath with his father's enemies, and then returning to his father, 
declared that he could in no way see how he was to inflict upon 
the men of the castle the punishment they had deserved ; after 
which, leaving his father, he set out for Dorat. 

But his father, thinking him peaceably inclined, recalled 
him ; on which, returning and entering the castle, and not being 
able to bring the wickedness which he contemplated to the 
wished-for result, he swore by the body of Saint Martial, that 
he would assume the cross. His father, however, thinking 
that he had done this more through indignation than religious 
feeling, in an affectionate manner used all his endeavours to re- 
call him from this rash vow, asking of him on his knees, and 
weeping, whether that vow had proceeded from rancour, in- 
dignation, poverty, or religious feelings. To this the son 
made answer, with all kinds of oaths, that he had made the 
vow solely for the remission of the sins which he had been 
guilty of towards his father ; and added, when he saw his 
father opposing it and shedding tears, that he would slay 
himself with his own hands, unless his father should cease to 
dissuade him from his purpose of assuming the cross, inas- 
much as the body of the Lord which he had that day beheld, 
consecrated before his eyes, testified that he ought a long time 
before that to have assumed the cross, but it had not till 
then been disclosed to him ; hoping and trusting that he 
should be in the more full enjoyment of his father's favour, 
as he was unwilling to go on the .pilgrimage without his 
favour. On this, his father learning his holy and fixed 
determination, replied ; " The will of God and your own 
be done. I will be your supporter and assistant in acquiring 
the earldom, and will provide you, by the help of God, with 
such plentiful supplies, that no one, of whom I have heard 
going to the land of Jerusalem, could at any time have done his 
service to God on a more bounteous scale." 

On this, the king the son returned many thanks to his 
father, and entreated him to deal mercifully with the men in 
the castle and the barons of Aquitaine ; to which his father, in 
tears, made answer, and promised that he would act in every 
one of those matters quite according to his pleasure. The king 
the son, again returning thanks, sent for the men of the castle, 
and, though against his father's will, threw himself with the 
burgesses at his father's feet, and asked for peace in their 



A.D. 1183. TREACHEROUS CONDUCT OF GEOFFREY. 25 

behalves, which request was granted, hostages however being 
required to ensure the peace being kept. The king the father 
sent some of his followers to receive the hostages, but they 
were nearly slain by those who were to give them. This was 
in nowise punished by the king the son, but, disregarding his 
oath to assume the cross, he became, together with them, the 
enemy and persecutor of his own father. 

Shortly after, the king the son, pretending that he wished 
for peace, requested his father to send to him Maurice de Crouy 
with a truce, and some other barons ; and while some of their 
followers were conversing with him, they were slain in the 
presence of the king the son, by the enemies of our lord the 
king. Some days after this, Geoffrey, that son of iniquity, 
with evil intent, entreated that he would send to him Oliver 
Fitz-Ernest and Jerome de Mustervol with a truce ; on which, 
one of them, Jerome namely, was pierced with a sword through 
his head-piece, his coat-armour, and his shirt, not without a 
considerable loss of blood ; while Oliver, the other, was thrown 
from a bridge into the water, in the presence of Geoffrey him- 
self, who took no pains to punish this misdeed. After this, 
the same son, being again desirous to hold a conference with his 
father, came in perfect security to his father, and, deceitfully 
treating about making peace, requested of his father leave to 
enter the castle in order that he might prevail upon the king 
his brother, and the other enemies of our lord the king, to 
comply with the wishes of the king. Permission was ac- 
cordingly given him, on which he entered the castle, spoiled 
the shrine of Saint Martial, and carried off the other vessels 
of that monastery, both gold and silver, and then, returning 
with the booty, requested his father to prolong the truce till 
the next day. The truce was accordingly granted him, and, 
passing over the bridge, he the same day renounced the truce 
with his father as being at an end, and out of the proceeds of 
the sacrilege and robbery, of which he had been guilty towards 
Saint Martial, paid their wages to his Brabanters. The 
amount of this theft was, according to the estimate made by 
worthy men, fifty-two marks of gold and twenty-seven marks 
of silver. 

In the meantime, Eichard, archbishop of Canterbury, Henry, 
bishop of Bayeux, John, bishop of Evreux, Ralph, bishop of 
Lisieux, Froger, bishop of Seez, and Waleran, bishop of Ro- 



26 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1183. 

Chester, together with the abbats and clergy of Normandy, 
and a great number of people, came to Caen, and there, in the 
monastery of Saint Stephen, solemnly, in the universal hear- 
ing of all the people, pronounced sentence of excommunica- 
tion against all who should prevent peace and reconciliation 
being made between our lord the king and his sons, the person 
of the king, the son, alone excepted. 

Money now failing him, the king, the son, proceeded to 
Saint Mary de Roche Andemar, stripped the tomb of Saint 
Andemar, and carried away the treasures of the church. In 
the course of a few days after this, the king, the son, seeing 
that he could not do any material injury to the king, his 
father, in consequence of indignation and rancour of mind, 
was attacked by a severe malady at a village called Martel, 
not far from the city of Limoges. He was first attacked with 
a fever, and then by a flux of the bowels, which reduced him to 
the point of death. On seeing that his death was impending, 
he sent for our lord the king, his father, who refused to come 
to him, as he dreaded his treachery. The king, the son, 
having, therefore, summoned the bishops and religious men 
who were there, into his presence, having first secretly, and 
afterwards before them all, made confession of his sins, re- 
ceived absolution and remission of his sins, and gave to Wil- 
liam Marshal, one of his household, his cross to bear to Jeru- 
salem [in his stead]. After this, laying aside his fine gar- 
ments, he placed upon him haircloth, and fastening a cord 
around his neck, said to the bishops and other religious men 
who stood around him : "By this cord do I deliver myself, an 
unworthy, culpable, and guilty sinner, unto you, the ministers 
of God, beseeching that our Lord Jesus Christ, who remitted 
his sins to the thief when confessing upon the cross, will, 
through your prayers and His ineffable mercy, have compassion 
upon my most wretched soul." To which all made answer, 
" Amen." He then said to them : " Drag me out of this bed 
by this cord, and place me on that bed strewed with ashes/' 
which he had caused to be prepared for himself; on which 
they did as he commanded them, and placed under his head 
and feet two large square stones ; and, all things being thus 
duly performed, he commanded his body to be taken to Rouen, 
in Normandy, and there buried. After saying this, being 
fortified with the viaticum of the holy body and blood of 



A.D. 1183. DEATH AND BURIAL OF THE KING, THE SON. 27 

our Lord, in the fear of the Lord, he breathed forth his 
spirit. 

When news was brought of his death to our lord the king, 
his father, bursting into tears, he threw himself upon the ground, 
and greatly bewailed his son. how dreadful a thing it is 
for sons to persecute a father ! for it is not the sword of the 
man who fights, not the hand of the foeman that avenges the 
injury of the father ; but it is fever that deals its retribution, 
flux of the bowels, with ulceration of the intestines, that ex- 
ercises vengeance. The son laid prostrate, all return to the 
father. All are overjoyed, all rejoice, the father alone bewails 
his son. Why, glorious father, dost thou bewail him ? He was no 
son of thine, who could commit such violence upon thy fatherly 
affection. This defence of thee has wrought security for 
fathers, and has checked the audacity of parricides. For it 
was his due to perish by a severe retribution, who wished to 
introduce parricide into the world ; because the Judge of all 
minds, in the same way that He avenges the tribulations of the 
righteous, so does he sometimes punish the persecutions of the 
wicked. 

The king's servants, after having extracted the brain and 
the entrails, and buried them at M artel, sprinkled the body 
of the dead king with large quantities of salt, and then 
wrapped it in bulls' hides and lead, that they might take it to 
Rouen for burial there, and accordingly set out on their way 
with the royal body ; but when they had come to the city 
of Le Mans, and had passed the night in the church of Saint 
Julian the Confessor and Pontiff, singing hymns and psalms 
in its vicinity, and wished in the morning to depart thence 
with the body, the bishop of the city and the clergy, together 
with the common people, would not allow them to carry it 
away, but buried it in an honorable manner in the church of 
Saint Julian. 

On this being told to the people of Rouen, they were indig- 
nant thereat, and resolutely demanded his body, swearing that 
they would take it by force, unless it was instantly given up 
to them ; upon which the king, the father, ordered that the 
body should be given up to the people of Rouen, as the king, 
his son, had, while living, commanded ; which was accord- 
ingly done; and they dug up the king's body from the spot 



28 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1183. 

where it had been buried, and, carrying it to Rouen, buried it 
in the church there of Saint Mary. 

The kingj the father, after the death of the king, his son, 
every day made more violent assaults upon the castle of Li- 
moges, to which he had laid siege, and at length both the 
castle and the city of Limoges were surrendered to him, be- 
sides all the castles of his enemies in that neighbourhood ; 
some of which he retained in his own hands, and some he 
levelled with the ground, not leaving one stone upon another. 
After the death of the king, the son, Philip, king of the Franks, 
demanded of our lord the king of England, the dowry which 
his son, the king, had given to his sister, and the whole of the 
land of the Vexin, together with the castles and fortresses which 
Louis, king of France, his father, had given them on their mar- 
riage. Whereupon, a conference being held between them, be- 
tween Gisors and Trie, an arrangement was made in the follow- 
ing manner : That Margaret, the sister of the king of France, 
who had been the wife of the king, the son, should receive, for 
quitting claim of all the above demands, one thousand seven 
hundred and fifty pounds of money Anjouin, each year at Paris 
from our lord the king of England and his heirs, so long as 
she should live. 

In the same year our lord the king gave the bishopric of 
Lincoln to Walter de Coutances, his clerk, whom Richard, 
archbishop of Canterbury, consecrated at Anjou, and sent to 
England to his see, which had now been vacant for a period of 
eighteen years, namely, from the time of Robert de Chennay, 
bishop of Lincoln, until now. Geoffrey, earl of Brittany, the 
king's son, now returned to his father and made peace with 
him and with his brother, Richard, earl of Poitou. 

In the same year, John and Hugh, the bishops, of whom we 
have previously made mention, came to Velletri to have an 
audience of Pope Lucius, and each of them stated, in pre- 
sence of our lord the pope and of all his cardinals, the 
claims that he asserted upon the bishopric of Saint Andrew's. 
After hearing them, our lord, the pope, by the common ad- 
vice of his brethren, took the bishopric from them both, and 
they freely and absolutely resigned the said bishopric of Saint 
Andrew's into the hands of the Supreme Pontiff, and then with- 
drew from the court, awaiting the mercy of the Supreme Pon- 
tiff ; and a few days after, by the advice of all his cardinals, 



A.D. 1183. DISSENSION BETWEEN THE EOMANS AND THE POPE. 29 

the Supreme Pontiff gave to bishop Hugh the bishopric of Saint 
Andrew's, and confirmed him in possession thereof ; and granted 
to bishop John the bishopric of Dunkeld, together with all the 
things before mentioned that had been offered him on part of 
the king of Scotland, and confirmed him therein. On this, 
Hugh returned home and received the bishopric of Saint An- 
drew's. Bishop John also received the bishopric of Dunkeld ; 
but as the king of Scotland declined to restore to him what he 
had taken away, he again put forward his claims against 
bishop Hugh as to the bishopric of Saint Andrew's, as stated in 
the sequel. 

In the same year, our lord the king commanded Eichard, his 
son and heir, to receive the homage of his brother John for 
Poitou, but he declined receiving it. In the same year a 
grievous dissension arose between the Romans and pope Lucius, 
relative to certain customs which his predecessors had been in 
the habit of following, but which the pope above-named swore 
he would never comply with. At this the Romans were indig- 
nant, and were frequently guilty of ravages and incendiarism 
in the territories of our lord the pope ; on which, the pope flying 
from place to place, took refuge in his castles and fortified cities. 
To defend him there came Christian, archbishop of Mentz, chan- 
cellor of the lord Frederick, emperor of the Romans, having 
levied a large army for that purpose. The Romans, being unable 
to oppose him, returned to Rome, on which the before-named 
chancellor, pursuing them, laid waste every thing that belonged 
to the Romans, and followed them even to the very gates of 
the city of Rome, setting fire to all the suburbs thereof. 

On this, the Romans, seeing that they were devoted to ruin, 
devised how they might slay the before-named chancellor by 
stratagem ; and, as all other modes were wanting to them, they 
determined to take him off by means of poison, and did so. 
For when the said chancellor and his army were at a distance 
of nearly ten miles from the city, the Romans sent envoys, clad 
in the garb of poor men, to learn the state of the court, who, 
after learning all particulars relating thereto, discovered, 
among other matters, one thing which they made choice of in 
order to effect his destruction. For there was near that spot a 
spring of water exceedingly limpid, the water of which, mixed 
with wine, the chancellor and his army were in the habit of 
drinking. Accordingly, these wicked traitors went to the spring, 



SO ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1183. 

and drugged it thoroughly with poison, so that the water 
flowing therefrom was corrupted. Consequently, on the chan- 
cellor drinking thereof, he died by a speedy death. There 
also died after him more than a thousand men who had drank 
of the said spring. When the death of the chancellor became 
publicly known, his army was dispersed and put to flight, on 
which the Romans rose in rebellion with still greater acrimony 
against our lord the pope. 

In the same year, Philip, earl of Flanders, married the 
sister of Sancho, king of Portugal. In this year, also, our lord 
the king of England gave the archbishopric of Eouen to Walter 
de Coutances, bishop of Lincoln, and Lucius, our lord the 
pope, sent him the pall. The said pope, not being able suc- 
cessfully to oppose the Romans, sent his ambassadors to the 
kings and chief men of the various countries, both secular and 
ecclesiastical, to gain assistance in the defence of Saint Peter 
against the Romans : upon which his envoys came to Henry, 
king of England, to ask him, and the clergy of England, to afford 
him assistance. Accordingly, the king consulted his bishops and 
the clergy of England, as to the prayer of the Supreme Pontiff; 
on which the bishops and clergy advised him, according to his 
own inclination and honor, to give assistance to our lord the 
pope, both on his own behalf as well as on theirs ; inasmuch 
as it would be more endurable to them, and would please them 
better, that their lord the king should, if he so pleased, receive 
from them a recompense for such assistance, than if he should 
allow the nuncios of our lord the pope to come to England to 
receive assistance from themselves ; as, if any other step than 
the one named were taken, it might possibly be turned into a 
precedent, to the detriment of the kingdom. The king acquiesced 
in their advice, and gave considerable assistance to the pope, in 
gold and silver. 

Accordingly, by means of this money, and other sums of 
money lent to him by other princes from all quarters, our lord 
the pope made peace with the Romans, which was necessary 
for him and the Church of Rome. 

In the same year, died Rotrod, archbishop of Rouen, and 
was succeeded by 27 Walter, bishop of Lincoln. In this year 
also died Richard Pecche, bishop of Chester, who was suc- 

37 This has been mentioned already. 



A.D. 1184. DEATH OF THE AKCHBISHOP OF CANTERBTTRY. 31 

ceeded by Gerard Lapucelle. 28 In the same year, Gilbert, stir- 
named Assaili, grand master of the house of the Hospital 
at Jerusalem, came into Normandy to king Henry, and was 
honorably entertained by him. Having obtained the king's per- 
mission to cross over to England, he came to Dieppe, and, be- 
fore the feast of Saint Michael, embarked on board of a ship 
which had been lying for nearly a year upon the sands of the 
sea-shore, shattered and dried up, and had lately been a little 
repaired and refitted, and launched again, together with many 
other persons, clergy as well as laity, who had become tired 
with waiting : but shortly after, when the vessel had got out 
of harbour into the open sea, the seams opening, it went 
down into the deep, just like a stone ; on which Gilbert, and all 
the rest who were on board of it, with the exception of eight 
only, who escaped by means of a boat, were drowned, on the 
thirteenth day before the calends of October. In the same 
year, Henry, king of England, a conference being held on 
the day of Saint Nicholas, between him and Philip, king of 
France, between Gisors and Trie, did homage to Philip, king 
of France, for all his lands beyond sea, whereas before this 
he had never been willing to do homage to him. 

In the year of grace 1184, being the thirtieth year of the 
reign of Henry, king of England, son of the empress Matilda, 
the said king was at Le Mans on the day of the Nativity of our 
Lord, which took place on the Lord's day. In the same year, 
Richard, archbishop of Canterbury, departed this life on the 
fourteenth day before the calends of March ; to whom, before 
he was taken ill, the Lord appeared in a vision, saying, "Thou 
hast wasted the property of my church, and I will root thee from 
out of the earth." Being greatly terrified at this vision, he 
immediately fell ill, and died on the eighth day after. In 
the same year, the king of England, having made peace be- 
tween Philip, king of France, and Philip, earl of Flanders, 
with reference to the disputes that existed between them con- 
cerning the land of Vermandois, passed through the middle of 
Flanders, and crossed over from Witsand to Dover, in Eng- 
land, where he landed on the fourth day before the ides of 
June; his daughter, the duchess of Saxony, crossing over 
with him. 

28 Roger of Wendover says, that he died within ten weeks of his con- 
secration. 



32 AtfNALS OF KOGEB. DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1184. 

In the same year, and the same week in which the king 
landed in England, a spring of running water, near the church 
of Saint Winin, in the western parts of the territories of 
the king of Scotland, below Tyningham, and not far from the 
castle of Irwine, 29 flowed with blood, without intermission, 
for eight days and as many nights. In the same year, the 
king's daughter, the duchess of Saxony, was delivered of a 
Bon at Winchester. In this year also, Theobald, count of Blois, 
uncle to Philip, king of France, came into England on a pilgrim- 
age to Saint Thomas, at Canterbury. In this year also, Henry, 
duke of Saxony, the king's son-in-law, came to England. In 
the same year died Simon, earl of Huntingdon, on whose de- 
cease the king gave the said earldom to William, king of the 
Scots ; immediately on which, in presence of the king, he con- 
ferred the earldom on his brother David. 

In the same year, Gilbert de Plumpton, a knight of noble 
birth, being led in chains to Worcester, and accused of rape 
before our lord, the king of England, by Kanulph de Glau- 
ville, justiciary of England, who wished to condemn him, he 
was by an unjust judgment condemned to be hanged on a 
gibbet ; and when he was led forth to the gibbet, there met 
him a multitude of men and women, crying aloud and saying, 
that a righteous and innocent man ought not thus to suffer. 
Upon this, Baldwin, the bishop of Worcester, a religious man and 
one who feared God, hearing the shouts of the people, and learn- 
ing the injustice that was being perpetrated against this wretched 
man, ran after him ; but the ministers of wickedness, hastening 
to perpetrate their crime, fastening a rope round his neck had 
suspended him aloft, when lo ! the bishop of Worcester came 
up in all haste, and said to the executioners ; " In behalf of 
Almighty God, and under pain of excommunication, I forbid 
you to put that man to death this day, for it is the Lord's day, 
and the feast of Saint Mary Magdalen." At these words 
the executioners stood astounded, hesitating what to do, for 
they feared the king's justice, and dreaded sentence of excom- 
munication. However, the Divine power prevailed, and 1'rom 
respect for the solemnity of the day, they loosed the rope and let 
him come to the ground, to be kept until the next morning ; 
when he was to undergo the same punishment. That same 
night, our lord the king, being moved with pity, and influenced 
29 Irving. 



A.D. 1184. ELECTION OF AN AECHBISHOP OF CANTEEBTJEY. 33 

by the counsels of his followers, commanded that he should re- 
main as he was, until he should give further orders what was 
to be done with him; for he was aware that Eanulph de 
Glanville had thus acted towards him from feelings of dislike, 
and wished to put him to death on account of his wife, the 
daughter of Eoger Gulewast, whom the said Eanulph wished 
to give in marriage, together with her inheritance, to his friend 
Eeiner, the sheriff of York. Accordingly, the knight, being 
rescued from death, was kept in prison by Eanulph de Glan- 
ville, until the king's death. 

After this, our lord the king came to Eeading, and holding 
a council there as to choosing a pastor for the Church of Can- 
terbury, a strife and contention arose between the monks of 
Canterbury and the bishops of England. For the monks 
claimed to have the first voice in the election, and produced a 
charter of our lord the king, by which he had granted and 
confirmed to them freedom of election. The bishops, on the 
other hand, used their best endeavours to prove that that charter 
ought not to be observed, both because it was made contrary 
to law, and tended to the injury of the Church of England, as 
also, because the election of their own metropolitan belonged to 
themselves. In consequence of this dispute, no terms could be 
come to between them on the present occasion. 

By command of our lord the king, the bishops of England 
and the monks of Canterbury met at London, in the king's 
presence, for the election of an archbishop of Canterbury ; and, 
the contention still continuing, Gilbert, bishop of London, 
who, according to the ancient right of his see, had the first 
voice in the election, made choice of Baldwin, the bishop of 
"Worcester, as archbishop of Canterbury, on the fourth day be- 
fore the nones of December ; upon which all the bishops gave 
their assent to that choice ; the monks of the Church of Can- 
terbury, being the only persons who made any opposition, de- 
parted for the purpose of appealing to our lord the pope, and 
the bishops of England presented to the king the person whom 
they had elected. On their presentation and election, our lord 
the king received him with the kiss of peace and love ; which 
example was followed by Eichard, Geoffrey, and John, the 
king's sons. 

After this, our lord the king came to Canterbury, for the 
purpose of putting an end to the angry feelings of the monks, 

VOL. II. D 



34 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1184. 

and, holding a conference with them, prevailed upon them to 
elect as their archbishop the before-named Baldwin, which 
they accordingly did ; for Alan, the prior of the church of the 
Holy Trinity at Canterbury, came to London with the less in- 
firm part of his chapter, and with letters of confirmation. On 
their meeting together in the Chapter house of the monks of 
Westminster, they elected for themselves and the Church of 
Canterbury, the before-named Baldwin as archbishop ; and then, 
that they might not appear to have assented to the election of 
the bishops, sang their own " Te Deum Laudamus" and led 
him to the altar, and, receiving him with the kiss of peace, 
presented him to the king, who again received him with the 
kiss of peace and love ; as did Richard, earl of Poitou, his son. 
After this, the king confirmed the treaty and final reconciliation 
by writing, and ratified the same, after its confirmation, by 
oath on part of his sons Richard, Geoffrey, and John, in presence 
of queen. Eleanor their mother, Henry, duke of Saxony, and 
many others. 

In the same year, the archbishop of Cologne came to Eng- 
land on a pilgrimage to Saint Thomas of Canterbury, on which 
the king of England met him with congratulations, and prevailed 
upon him to lay aside his anger and displeasure towards Henry, 
duke of Saxony, and receive him into the favour which he 
had formerly enjoyed when honored with his esteem. The 
before-named archbishop of Cologne also, at the entreaty of the 
king of England, agreed that the daughter of Frederic, emperor 
of the Romans, should be given in marriage to Richard, earl of 
Poitou, the king's son : for he knew that this was the especial 
wish and desire of the emperor. After this, the before-named 
archbishop, and Philip, earl of Flanders, who had come with 
him over to England, returned to Flanders, and, having levied 
a great army, invaded the territories of the earl of Hainault, 
and ravaged them, in revenge for the injuries which he had 
inflicted on the earl of Flanders. 

In the same year, died the empress of the Romans, the wife 
of the emperor Frederic. In this year also, died Gilbert de 
Ver, abbat of Selby, and Gerard, 30 sumamed La Pucelle, 
bishop of Chester. In the same year also, died "Waleran, bishop 
of Rochester, Clement, abbat of Saint Mary's at York, Simon, 
earl of Huntingdon, Jocelyn, bishop of Salisbury, Bartholomew, 
30 See the note at page 31. 



A.D. 1184. THE KING MARCHES TOWARDS WALES. 35 

bishop of Exeter, and the earl of Warwick. In this year 
also, died the daughter of Frederic, emperor of the Eomans, 
who, as above stated, was to have been married to Richard, 
earl of Poitou. In this year also, the church of Saint Julian, 
at the city of Le Mans, was destroyed by fire. The abbey of 
Glastonbury was also burnt in this year. 

In the same year, our lord the king of England, being 
anxious to make peace between the duke of Saxony and the 
emperor Frederic, by the advice of the archbishop of Cologne, 
sent his envoys, Hugh de Kunant, archdeacon of Lisieux, and 
some others of his clerks, and of the members of his household., 
to Lucius, the Supreme Pontiff, in order that through his aid the 
before-named emperor might receive the duke of Saxony into 
favour. Accordingly, the king's envoys, coming to the court of 
our lord the pope, found him at Verona in Italy ; and while they 
were staying there with him, Frederic, emperor of the Romans, 
came thither for the purpose of holding a conference with 
the pope ; at whose urgent request the before-named em- 
peror gave the duke of Saxony permission to return to his 
country, and released him from all the oaths which he had 
taken as to remaining in exile ; our lord the pope also absolved 
him from the oath which he had taken to the emperor. 

In the same year, Thomas Fitz-Bernard departed this life, 
who, after the decease of Alan de Neville, had been appointed 
by our lord the king chief justiciary of all the forests in 
England ; upon whose decease our lord the king divided his 
forests in England into different parts, and over each part ap- 
pointed four justices, namely, two clerks and two knights ; 
also two yeomen of his household to be guardians of vert and 
venison, over all the other foresters, both those of the king as 
well as of the knights and barons ; and he sent them to hold 
pleas of forestal matters, in conformity with the Assize of the 
Forests previously mentioned. 

In the same year, our lord the king came to Worcester, for 
the purpose of marching thence with a large army into Wales, 
to wage war against the Welch, who had ravaged his territories 
and slain his subjects. Rees, 31 the son of Griffin, however, dread- 
ing his attack, having obtained a safe-conduct from the king, 
came to Worcester, and there swore fealty to the king of Eng- 
land, and that he would give his son and nephews as hostages 
31 Rice, or Rhys ap Griflyd. 



36 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1184. 

to the king ; but, on his attempting to bring them, they refused 
to accompany him. 

In the same year, our lord the king gave to William, the 
prior of the church of Saint Augustin, at Bristol, the bishopric 
of Bangor. In the same year, the priest Swerre, who was 
also called Birkebain, slew Magnus, king of Norway. 

In this year also, the astrologers both of Spain and Sicily, as 
also the diviners throughout almost the whole world, both Greek 
and Latin, wrote and set forth nearly one and the same opinion 
as to the conjunction of the planets. On this occasion, a certain 
astrologer, Corumphira by name, wrote to the following effect : 

Auguries from the Conjunction of the Planets. 

" In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost. Amen. Almighty God hath known and the 
science of numbers hath disclosed, that the planets, both supe- 
rior as well as inferior, will come in conjunction in Libra, that 
is to say in September, in the year from the Incarnation of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the eternal and true God, one thousand one 
hundred and eighty-six; and in the year of the Arabians five 
hundred and eighty-two. 32 During the year this conjunction 
will be preceded by a partial eclipse of the sun, which will be 
of a fiery colour ; this, taking place on the first hour of the 
twenty-first day of the month of April, will be preceded by 
a total eclipse of the moon, in the said month of April ; that 
is to say, on the fifth day thereof, and at the first hour of 
the night that shall precede Wednesday ; this, if God shall so 
will, nay rather because He does so will, shall so will, hath so 
willed, 4 and will not cease so to will. Therefore, in the year 
before-named, the planets being, by the will of God, in Libra, 
that is to say, in an aerial and windy sign, the Dragon also 
contributing as a cause thereto, a wondrous earthquake will 
take place, and especially in those regions in which such 
things have been in the habit of taking place, and will 
destroy certain places that have been subject to earthquakes 
and liable to the mischances of utter ruin. For in the parts 
of the East there shall arise a mighty wind, and with its 
strong blasts it shall blacken the air and shall corrupt it with its 

82 If he alludes to the Hegira, he is wrong here ; A.D. 1186 would he 
the 564th year of the Hegira. 



A.D. 1184. ASTROLOGICAL PEEDICTTONS. 

poisonous stench. In consequence, a mortality and sickness 
will attack great numbers, and loud peals will be heard, and 
voices in the air that shall terrify the hearts of those who hear 
them, and the wind shall raise aloft the sands and the dust 
from the face of the earth, and shall utterly overwhelm the 
cities situate on the plain, and especially those in the sandy 
regions, those in the fifth climate, to wit ; as Mecca, Barsara, 
Baldac, 33 and Babylon ; nor shall any land be left otherwise than 
covered with the sand and dust, and be utterly ruined thereby ; 
so much so, that the regions of Egypt and Ethiopia shall 
become almost uninhabitable. And from the West this cala- 
mity will extend to all parts of the East. In the regions of 
the West also shall arise dissensions.; and seditions of the 
people shall take place, and there shall be one of them who 
shall levy armies innumerable, and shall wage war on the 
shore of the waters, on which a slaughter so vast will take 
place that the flow of the blood so shed will equal the surging 
waves. Let each person feel assured that the conjunction about 
to take place, whatever others may say, signifies to me, if God so 
wills, the mutation of kingdoms, the superiority of the Franks, 
the destruction of the Saracenic race, with the superior blessed- 
ness of the religion of Christ, and its especial exaltation, toge- 
ther with longer life to those who shall be born hereafter." 

In like manner, William the Astrologer, clerk to John, the 
constable of Chester, wrote concerning the before-mentioned 
conjunctions of the planets to the following effect : 

" In the year from the Incarnation of our Lord one thousand 
one hundred and eighty-six, in the month of August, on the 
completion of the thirtieth day thereof, and in the following 
night, at the ninth hour, in the twenty-ninth degree of Virgo, 
which is called the degree of periods and the period of woes, 
Leo being in the ascendant, this conjunction, which is called 
a minor conjunction, is most portentous. Evil is predominant 
in this figure. This is followed by a conjunction of Mars and 
Saturn, in the fourth degree of Libra, on the seventh day of 
September, at the fourth hour, being the first day of the week ; 
the Sun being the lord of the hour, and Sagittarius the horos- 
cope. This conjunction is called a mid-conjunction. In this 
conjunction good fortune is predominant ; and in this inclination 

33 Probably Bassora and Bagdad. 



38 ASTNA.LS OF B.OGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1184. 

evil is mitigated. Then follows a conjunction of Jupiter and 
Saturn, which is styled a major conjunction, in the eighth de- 
gree of Libra, on the tenth day of October, being the sixth day 
of the week, at the ninth hour. Mercury is then the lord of 
the hour, Capricorn the horoscope ; Mars being in conjunction 
in the fourteenth degree with the Tail of the Dragon. This con- 
junction portends wondrous events; thunder and lightning, with 
fiery flashes running to and fro in the air. But not regarding 
the conjunction of these, be it our part to record by figure what 
other persons have couched under an enigmatical form, as to 
the conjunction of all the planets in Libra, which will have an 
effect in our day before unknown, and not to be known in times 
to come. This conjunction will take place on the sixteenth 
day of September, being the third day of the week, at the 
first hour j Mars being the lord of the hour, and the Sun in 
the East, and the planets in their several places, as follows : 
Libra being the horoscope, 33 * and beginning in the first degree 
[of longitude] ; the Sun being in the thirtieth degree of Yirgo ; 
Jupiter in two degrees three minutes ; Venus in three degrees 
forty - nine minutes ; Saturn in eight degrees six minutes ; 
Mercury in four degrees ten minutes ; Mars in nine degrees 
eighteen minutes ; the Tail [of the Dragon] in eighteen degrees 
twenty- three minutes ; the Part of Warfare in fifteen degrees ; 
the Moon in seventeen degrees eight minutes ; the Part of For- 
tune in nineteen degrees. The second [horoscope] is Libra, 
beginning at its twenty-fifth degree. The third is Scorpio, be- 
ginning at its twenty-fourth degree. The fourth is Capricorn, 
beginning at its first degree. The fifth is Aquarius, beginning 
at its fifth degree. The sixth is Pisces, beginning at its seventh 
degree. The seventh is Aries, beginning at its first degree. 
Now, as Saturn is most elevated in orbit, let us first treat of 
him. He signifies the Pagans, and all who are opposed to the 
laws of Christianity. Now, inasmuch as in the figure of the 
sphere Saturn is in the mid-heaven governing the [airy] tri- 
plicity, from the triplicity of the figure the Saracen magi- 
cians 34 are auguring victory on their side, especially as the Sun 

33 * Also called " the house " by more recent astrologers. 

34 It is possible that this may be the meaning of the mystic letters 
which here occur; Tr. G. F. S. M. standing for " Triplicitate figurae 
gentis Saracenae magi." If not, those who are skilled in judicial astrology 
may, possibly, be able to give a better translation. 



A.D. 1184. ASTROLOGICAL PREDICTIONS. 39 

at his setting is seeking the superior conjunction of the planets. 
However, from an estimate of the figure we form a very dif- 
ferent opinion. For the Sun signifies the potentates of Chris- 
tendom, and in this figure is seeking conjunction with Jupiter ; 
but Jupiter, being powerless, seeks conjunction with Venus, 
and she with Saturn. Mercury then, by retrograding, cut- 
ting it off, 35 would naturally appear by his retrograde motion 
to indicate the elevation of their religion and the depression of 
our own. But as Mercury imparts this same disposition to 
Jupiter, and Jupiter imparts it to none, 36 this marks the lasting 
nature of our faith. Now since the Sun is of the greatest influ- 
ence in this figure, a man, a Christian, is arising among us, one 
of great fame, whose name will be exalted until the end of the 
world. 38 But because this conjunction takes place in a change- 
able sign, the career of this person will be closed before Saturn 
shall have passed through this sign; and inasmuch as Jupiter 
denotes power of prophecy, he will at last be enumerated among 
the prophets. In this figure, Mars being separated from Saturn, 
transfers the properties of Saturn to the Tail [of the Dragon] ; 
which not retaining this position, as though by a retrograde 
movement, carries back again towards Mars what has been so 
entrusted to it. But, inasmuch as Mars is being scorched by the 
orb of the Sun, being thus impeded and embarrassed between 
two evils, Saturn and the Tail [of the Dragon], he becomes in- 
fected with their nature, and signifies by his properties, sorrows, 
contentions, alarms, catastrophes, murders, and spoliation of 
property. The Tail also signifies separations, losses, dangers, 
and diminution of possessions ; and because Mars forms an evil 
conjunction with the Tail [of the Dragon] in the ascendant, 
I do therefore contradict the judgment pronounced by Albu- 
masar upon this figure in his Hundred Discourses. 39 Turn your 
eyes from the figure in which Mars is at the greatest angle 
when Scorpio is in the ascendant, or when he is with the 
Tail ; 40 and as it is evident to every astrologer that Saturn 
has an influence over this climate, the Moon participating with 
him, I am of opinion that he cannot be considered as exempt 

35 Conjunction with Saturn. 3s Being powerless, as stated above. 

38 In the text it is " usque ad finem arm." It is possible that the last 
word may have some cabalistic meaning, It hardly seems to belong to 
the European families of words. It is also very possible that it may be 
a misprint for, "sevi," "of time." 

39 Centiloquio." 40 Of the Dragon. 



40 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1184. 

from the evil before-mentioned. Wherefore, the only remedy 
remaining is, for princes to be on their guard, to serve God 
and eschew the devil, that so the Lord may avert their immi- 
nent punishments. Amen." 

Again, with reference to the before-mentioned conjunction 
of the planets, the following was written : 

" To all literate men, and especially to scholars, to whose 
presence this present page shall come, Anselm, the humble 
brother in the Lord, of the monastery at "Worcester, greeting. 
Marvellous is God in His Saints and in His works, who never 
ceases to work miracles in behalf of His people. And, inasmuch 
as no man places a light under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, 
that it may give light to all, a miracle, wondrous beyond mea- 
sure, took place in our house on the day before the calends of 
November ; which, in order that it might come to the knowledge 
of those not present, by writing at least, I have committed to 
writing. Be it known then unto your discreetness, that one of 
our lay brothers, falling into a trance, lay nine days and nine 
nights like one dead before a certain altar, prostrate there in the 
form of a cross ; 41 and as he was a religious man, and a brother 
of a holy mode of life, no one of us dared to remove Jrirn 
thence. On the tenth day, at the third hour, in a low voice, 
and with a wailing tone, still in a wondrous lament, he 
chaunted the following lines ten times or even more, in the 
same order in which they are here written : 

42 u < r^e f a j} mankind an( } the sudden ruin of this world, 
a pernicious fatality is hurrying on. Children of tender age 
one universal slaughter overwhelms ; by the same death young 
and old must die. The water shall be tainted by the cor- 
ruption of the substance of the air, and with deadly dew 
shall the whole ground be drenched. Hence shall a dread- 
ful mortality arise, and universal carnage. A universal cause 
is there of death, a universal cause of woe. For as soon 
as the Sun shall touch the back of the Lion slain by Her- 
cules, a two-fold heat shall parch the entrails dried-up. Then, 
though there shall be a thousand like Lachesis, and even 
hands as many to each, still, at the same instant will Atropos 
cut all their threads. For with the sword of death will the 
just vengeance of God visit the sins of the people. Ah wretched 

41 With his arms extended. 42 This pretended prophecy is couched 
in sixty-six hexameters and pentameters, of no merit whatever. 



A.D. 1184. PEOPHECIES BY A. MONK. 41 

me ! alas ! what will be my lot ? Behold ! the sword is gleam- 
ing, which will the whole world destroy. Behold the hand of 
the Lord ! Ah wretched me ! whither shall I fly ? Behold the 
wrath of the Lord ! shall I take to flight, or here conceal my- 
self? Whither shall I fly from God, for God is everywhere ? 
If the Divine will cannot be moved by prayer, then the seed 
with the chaff will the wrath of God beat down. That all 
things must return unto their ancient Chaos, the opinions of 
the philosophers prove. Still, thus it cannot be, as it is clear 
that whatever has been, and most things that now are, must 
remain as they are. 43 Now, above the stars am I borne, and 
though my eyes are closed, lifted up to the stars, either house 
of the Sun do I behold. There is night without the stars and 
Moon, and day without the Sun : but though so it is, why 
so it is I cannot tell. The stars of Mercury, of Venus, and 
of Jove, now lie concealed. They exist not, or if they do 
exist, they have forsaken the sky. Through the whole Zodiac 
they roam at large, both Mars and the noxious star of the 
scythe-bearing old man who wields the scythe. 44 Mars smites 
with his sword, Saturn smites with his hurtful scythe ; 45 he 
strives to inflict ruin on the interests of men. Hence am I 
now borne to the dubious realms of the Stygian tyrant, in which 
there is, and will be, everlasting gloom. Amid gloom so great, 
neither Sun, nor Moon, nor fire, in this place of wretchedness 
are able to direct the eyes. Here is toil, and grief, and anxiety 
inextricable : here for the wretched guilty are grievous punish- 
ments prepared. Here resounds everlastingly the direful dirge, 
woe ! woe ! The gloom how great ! woe, woe is me ! woe ! 
woe ! ** Cerberus is raging before the gates, and is yawning 
with his three throats ; three dreadful sounds from his mouth 
at the same instant does he send. Three Furies guard the 
portals, Alecto, Megaera, and Tisiphone, on whose features horror 
is impressed. Horrid is their aspect, and foul the breath of 

43 These lines are in their present state incapable of being reduced to 
sense perhaps, indeed, it was never intended they should have any. They 
are as follows ; 

" Sic taraen esse nequit, quia constat quaeque fuisse, 

Pluraque quae veluti sunt modo, semper erunt." 
41 Saturn. 45 "Falce;" more properly " sickle." 

46 This pentameter is worth preserving as a curiosity : 

" Quantae sunt tenebrae ! vae mihi, vae mini, vae !" 



42 ANNALS OF BOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1184. 

their mouths, and their hoarse voices sound like thunder in 
their throats. In all there is an innate propensity to wick- 
edness in their minds ; in all there is a disposition prone to 
every crime. In the midst of the water stands Tantalus, 
thirsting with it up to his throat ; while, that he may not 
drink thereof, it ever retreats from his mouth. Here is mighty 
Sisyphus rolling the stone that rolls everlastingly back ; so 
that his is a labour without an end. Continually does the de- 
vouring vulture gnaw at the liver of Tityus ; which, that it 
may be for ever perishing, is ever on the point of perishing. 
Some dreadful famine, some severe drought attacks, and labour 
without cessation fatigues. Some are frozen by cold, others 
are scorched by the heat of flames ; each as he has deserved 
is here visited with a punishment his own. An entrance is open 
to all, an exit to none ; all does that place devour, and to the 
Furies consign. Tisiphone, in conjunction with those dreadful 
sisters, awards the punishments which they have been found 
to deserve to endure. Now to the guilty do I leave Styx, now 
Lethe, now Acheron ; once again with much ado do I retrace 
my steps to those above.' 

" When he had recited this last line, at length returning 
to himself, and aroused, as it were, from sleep, he raised 
his head, and said to one of the brethren, who, for the pur- 
pose of seeing the miracle, had come with the rest, eye- 
ing him most intently : ' Wonder not at my features, for die 
thou shalt. A grievous and sudden end shall overtake thee.' 
After this, turning his eyes upon the assemblage of the bre- 
thren, not less elegantly than if he had been gifted from his 
infancy with the eloquence of Tully 47 did he foretell in the 
Latin tongue certain events which were then to come to pass. 
And, as these things afterwards did come to pass, just as he had 
foretold, being filled ourselves with the greatest astonishment, 
in order that others, as well as ourselves, may admire the lines 
which this lay brother composed, who was never in any de- 
gree acquainted with letters, we have determined, on account 
of the stories there interwoven, to send them from school to 
school, in order that, by their judgment, this assertion of ours 
may be thoroughly sifted. Some indeed there are, who, in 
consequence of the fables inserted, despise the rest ; while some 

47 At all events, he may be safely pronounced Tully's equal in demerit 
as a poet. 



A.D. 1184. PEOPHECY OF PHAfiAHELLA. 43 

endeavour to prove (since in many things it has fallen out as 
he predicted) that under a kind of veil, these fables bear the 
impress of truth ; and, as in no respect it fell out otherwise 
than he had predicted, the very same day, gnashing his teeth, 
that same brother whose death he had predicted, ended his life 
in the greatest agony. Upon this, the brother who had pro- 
nounced those prophetic lines, bursting into tears in the pre- 
sence of all, was not ashamed to confess, in the contrition of 
his heart, whatever during his life he had been guilty of; and, 
as befitted a religious man, received the communion with the 
greatest devoutness; after receiving which, he immediately 
breathed forth his spirit, saying, ' Lord, into thy hands I com- 
mend my spirit.' " 

Now when the public had heard of these things, and others 
of a similar nature, they were greatly alarmed, and the nearer 
that pestilential season, which the before-named astrologers 
had predicted, drew nigh, the more did exceeding terror 
come upon all, both clergy and laity, rich and poor, and drove 
great numbers of them to a state of desperation. A certain 
writing however, which Pharamella, the son of Abdallah of 
Cordova, sent to John, bishop of Toledo, gave them some com- 
fort ; it was to the following effect : 

" Pharamella, son of Abdallah of Cordova, an Arabian by 
parentage, and brought up in the palace of the great king 
Evenjacob, who is called ' El Emir Amimoli,' to John, bishop 
of Toledo, bishop of those persons who are called Christians, 
health, beyond all those who call upon God. They who fear 
God, the Creator of all things, shall be exalted, and they also 
who adore Him with pure hands and with a heart entirely 
cleansed. We have seen some men of your persuasion, dissimilar 
to ourselves in dress and in language, who were merchants, and 
had very good woollen cloths of various colours on sale. They 
stated that they had come from a far distant land, which is called 
the ' land of the Elders/ that is to say, the kingdom of the 
Franks. Among other matters, we learned from them through 
an interpreter, Ferdinand by name, a fellow-citizen of yours, 
and at present a captive with us, that certain false astrologers 
of the west, who were ignorant of the virtues of the heavenly 
bodies 48 and the effects produced by the five wandering ones, 48 
and the two lights 49 which move of themselves in epicycles 
and eccentric circuits, through their houses and dignities, have 

He probably alludes to the name of the planets. 49 The sun and moon. 






44 ANNALS OF KOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1184. 

alarmed the hearts of you believers in Christ, and not only 
of such as are simple-minded, but even of those among you who 
are believed to be wise. For they say that in the year which 
is the five hundred and seventy-second of the Alligera, 49 and 
the one thousand one hundred and eighty-sixth from the In- 
carnation of your Lord Christ, in the month which you call 
September, there is to be a very mighty wind, such as is not 
often experienced, which shall destroy cities and towns, and 
overthrow everything it meets on the earth in its course. 
This wind shall come, they say, from the West, and shall 
extend even unto the East ; and after the wind a most dreadful 
stench, that shall destroy human beings. Of this circum- 
stance they allege no further cause than that the planets will 
come in conjunction in Libra, which is an aerial sign, and 
therefore a cause of windy weather. Now, it may at once be 
answered these persons, by even our children, that not only is 
Libra an aerial sign, but so also are Gemini and Aquarius aerial 
signs ; in both of which, many planets have come in conjunc- 
tion, and still no danger of winds or of pestilential exhalations 
or of mortality has ensued. But while Saturn and Mars are two 
unfortunate stars, Jupiter and Venus are fortunate ones and 
propitious ; wherefore, if they shall happen to be in the same 
sign with the others, without any setting or attractions, 50 or 
shall keep themselves duly balanced, their beneficent effect 
will temper the evil effects of the former ones. But on the day 
of the month in which they say tha.t this will take place, 
Mars will not be in Libra, but in the thirteenth degree of 
Yirgo ; while Yenus in Scorpio, which is the house of Mars, 
will entirely do away with all the evil influence of Mars, both 
as regards his house in which she is reigning, as also in conse- 
quence of the respect due to her sex, by means of which she 
attracts Mars to feelings of courtesy towards her. Jupiter also, 
will assuage the disastrous influence of Saturn, Mercury being 
nearer to Jupiter than Saturn. Such persons ought also to re- 
collect, that inasmuch as Saturn performs his revolution once 
in thirty years, he remains two years and a half in each of the 
signs ; 5l whereas Mars accomplishes his course through each 

49 Clearly meaning the Hegira. See the note to page 36. so it may 
appear doubtful, except to those versed in astrological lore, what is meant 
by " Si in eodem signo fuerint cum eis sine respectu, aut applicatione." 

61 In each revolution. 



A.D. 1185. DEATH OF GILBERT. 45 

of the signs in little less than a year and a half. Since then, 
it is a matter of necessity, that in every thirty years Saturn 
must always make a stay of about two years and a half in 
Libra ; by the same necessity 52 it comes to pass, that before 
Saturn goes out of Libra, Mars must be in the same sign of 
Libra together with Saturn. If then, Mars and Saturn have 
already hitherto been every thirty years once together in Libra, 
and are so to be in future, either these pestilential winds have 
happened before, or will happen from their evil influence when 
in a windy sign, or the converse. But that they have happened 
at any previous time, we neither read in the writings of the 
masters, nor have we witnessed the fact in our own times. Con- 
sequently, we ought to feel assured that they will not happen, 
since upon similar combinations it has never fallen out that 
any thing of a like nature has happened. Therefore, let your 
astrologers peruse the tables of the Inner Persians, and of the 
Arabians, Hermes, Astalius, and Abidemonus, as well as of Albu- 
masar, of more modern date ; and let them compute proportion- 
ally the influences of the stars, their settings, attractions, sepa- 
rations, equalities, and other matters which it were tedious 
to recount to those even who have time to listen thereto ; 
and when they have found that from a like conjunction of 
the stars that is false which they are dreaming of, either 
let them relinquish opinions based upon such idle stories, or 
else be converted to the religion of Ishmael which we pro- 
fess. However, according to the judgment of Messehella and 
Alkandus, unless God shall ordain it otherwise, there will be a 
scanty vintage, crops of wheat of moderate average, much 
slaughter by the sword, and many shipwrecks." 

In the year of grace 1185, being the thirty-first year of the 
reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, that king 
was at Windsor in England, on the day of the Nativity of our 
Lord. In the same year, on the day of the Circumcision of 
our Lord, died Gilbert, the son of Fergus, who had taken his 
brother TJchtred, the father of the noble man Roland, and had 
caused him to be deprived of his eyes, tongue, and virility, by 
his own son Dunecan ; and who had also given up his son the 
before-named Dunecan, to the king of England as a hostage to 
ensure the preservation of the peace. After his death, Roland, 

52 This is the first attempt at reasoning, which has been met with in 
all this astrological parade. 



46 ANNALS OF SOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1185. 

the son of Uchtred, invaded all the lands of the before-named 
Gilbert, and gained possession of them. 

In the same year, Baldwin the Leper, king of Jerusalem, 
and the Templars and Hospitallers, sent to the king of England, 
the son of the empress Matilda, Heraclius, the Patriarch of the 
Holy City of Jerusalem, and the grand Masters of the Hospital 
and Temple, together with the royal standard, and the keys 
of the Sepulchre of our Lord, of the Tower of David, and of 
the city of Jerusalem, asking of him speedy succour, as being 
the heir and lord of the land of Jerusalem. 53 For it ought to 
be known, that Eulk, the brother of Geoffrey, earl of Anjou, 
the father of the said Henry, was king of Jerusalem, as we have 
previously mentioned. Wherefore, when the before-named Patri- 
arch and Master of the Hospital came to England, the king of 
England met them at the town of Eeading, and received them 
with great joyousness ; on which, immediately falling at the 
king's feet, with great weeping and sobbing, they uttered the 
words of salutation on behalf of the king, and principal men, 
and the whole of the people of the land of Jerusalem, and, ex- 
plaining the cause of their coming, delivered to him the royal 
standard, and the keys of the Sepulchre of our Lord, and those 
of the Tower of David and of the city of Jerusalem, in behalf 
of the king and the principal men of the city of Jerusalem, 
besides letters from pope Lucius, to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Lucius on giving aid to ike land of Jerusalem. 

"Lucius, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
Henry, the illustrious king of the English, health and the 
Apostolic benediction. Inasmuch as all your predecessors have 
been especially distinguished above all the other princes of the 
earth for glory in arms and nobleness of spirit, and the people 
of the faithful have been taught to look upon them in their 
adversity as their defenders ; deservedly is application made to 
you, the heir not only of your father's kingdom but of his vir- 
tues, a certain degree of security being assured therefrom, at a 

15 The true version of the story is, that Baldwin the Leper had recently 
died, and his son Baldwin, a child five years of age, had ascended the 
throne. Of course these political envoys would not let him stand in the 
way of their gaining their object by flattering Henry's ambition. Indeed, 
Roger of Wendover distinctly says, that they were despatched for the pur- 
pose of offering Henry the throne of Jerusalem. 



A.D. 1185. LETTEE OP POPE LUCIUS. 47 

time when peril or even extermination is dreaded as impending 
over the Christian people ; that by the arm of your royal mighti- 
ness, protection may be granted to the members of Him who 
has in His mercy allowed you to reach such a height of glory 
and pre-eminence, and has rendered you an invincible wall of 
defence against those who wished to impugn His name. In the 
first place, be it known to your serene highness how that the 
land of Jerusalem has been here buffeted by frequent and vex- 
atious disputes on these matters, the special inheritance of 
Him who was crucified, and the place in which the mysteries 
were foretold of our salvation, and brought to a completion by 
the carrying out of that event, and of which He who compre- 
hended all things in His death, by a peculiar privilege made it 
the scene ; and how being now trampled under foot, and hemmed 
in by the pressure of a perfidious and most abominable race, it 
stands nodding to its downfall ; and how, which God forbid, 
the Christian religion must thereby sustain irreparable loss. 
For Saladin, the most inhuman persecutor of that holy and 
fearful name, has now risen to such a pitch in the spirit of his 
fury, and is to such a degree putting forth all the might of his 
wickedness for the destruction of the people of the faithful, that, 
unless the vehement onset of his wickedness is checked as 
though by barriers placed in his path, he may entertain an as- 
sured hope and belief that Jordan will flow before his face, and 
that the land that was consecrated by the shedding of the vivi- 
fying blood, will be polluted by the contact of his most abo- 
minable superstitions, and the country which your glorious 
and noble predecessors, amid many labours and perils, rescued 
from the dominion of the unbelieving heathens, will once more 
be subjected to the accursed dominion of this most nefarious 
tyrant. In consequence, therefore, of the urgency of the 
necessity, and of the sorrows thus imminent, we have deemed 
it advisable, by these Apostolic letters, to entreat your mighti- 
ness, or rather with a palpitating heart to call upon you with 
the loudest voice, showing regard for the honor of Him who 
has set you upon high, and, in comparison with the name of 
the mighty ones who are on earth, has bestowed upon you a 
glorious name, in the earnestness of your pious zeal, to give 
your attention to the desolate state of the before-named land, 
and, to the end that, in those parts, the confusion of Him may 
be put an end to, who, in your behalf, submitted to be held in 



48 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1185. 

derision in that self-same land, to afford efficacious aid. Where- 
fore, following in the footsteps of your predecessors, by the aid 
of the Lord, let that land be preserved in the worship of the 
great God by means of your diligence, which they rescued from 
the jaws of the prince of darkness. In such straits of oppression 
it befits your highness to labour with the more earnest zeal, in- 
asmuch as you are aware that the land is deprived of the pro- 
tection of a king, and the powerful men have thought proper to 
centre all their hopes of defending it in the protection of your 
mightiness. And this your serene highness may be the better 
enabled to understand, from the fact that they have despatched 
to your excellency the chief men of that land and the mighty 
defenders thereof, namely, our venerable brother Heraclius, the 
Patriarch, and our dearly beloved son, the Master of the Hos- 
pital, that from their dignified presence you may be enabled 
to take under consideration the present state of affairs, and to see 
how great and extreme is the necessity, on account of which 
they have so long endured to be without protection ; to the end 
that in person they might the more easily incline your devoted- 
ness to comply with their desires. Eeceive, therefore, the per- 
sons before-named with all kindness, as though sent to you by 
the Lord Himself, treat them in all things with that brotherly 
love which is their due, and show yourself ready to acquiesce 
in their requests, according as, having regard to their weight 
and their probity, you shall think them deserving of your 
grace and favour. And further, let your prudence call to mind, 
and with anxious meditation thereon ponder over those pro- 
mises by which you have so often bound your highness as to 
undertaking the protection of the land so often named ; and 
show yourself in this respect so wary and so zealous, that, at the 
terrible day of judgment your conscience may not accuse you, 
and the question put to you by that searching Judge who is 
not to be deceived, may not lead to your condemnation." 

After hearing these requests, our lord the king made an- 
swer that, God willing, all things would yet be well, and ap- 
pointed a time for his answer, namely, the first Sunday in Lent, 
at London. Accordingly, on this day, 54 our lord the king, the 
Patriarch, the bishops, abbats, earls, and barons of the kingdom 
of England, "William, king of Scotland, and his brother David, 
together with the earls and barons of his kingdom, met at 
64 This council was held at Clerkenwell. 



A.D. 1 185. A MIRACULOUS EVENT. 49 

London, and after a conference had been held thereon with due 
deliberation, it pleased all that our lord the king should consult 
thereupon Philip, king of France, his liege lord ; upon which 
the council breaking up, our lord the king gave to all his subjects, 
both clergy and laity, permission to assume the cross. Ac- 
cordingly, Baldwin, archbishop of Canterbury, Kanulph, jus- 
ticiary of England, Walter, archbishop of Rouen, and Hugh, 
bishop of Durham, together with many others of the bishops 
from both sides of the sea, and nearly all the earls, barons, and 
knights of England, Normandy, Aquitaine, Brittany, Anjou, 
Maine, and Touraine, assumed the cross ; at the period of the 
assumption of which a certain miraculous event took place. 

For on a certain day, a woman who had secretly become 
pregnant, finding that the time of her labour was approach- 
ing, fled from the house of her father, in consequence of her 
wish to avoid being detected in her transgression ; when be- 
hold! a mighty tempest of wind and rain overtook her in 
her flight, as she was wandering alone in the fields and beg- 
ging the Lord for His assistance and a place of refuge. Upon 
finding 'that her prayers were not instantly listened to by the 
Lord, she fell into a fit of desperation, saying, " If thou, God, 
dost despise my prayers, then may the Devil succour me ;" 
immediately upon which the Devil made his appearance to her 
under the form of a young man, barefoot and girt up as though 
for a journey, and said to the woman, " Follow me." As they 
passed along the road they met with a sheepfold in a field, on 
which the Devil ran before and got ready a fire in the sheep- 
fold, and a seat made of fresh straw, upon which the woman 
followed him, and, entering the place, warmed herself before 
the fire. While so doing, she said, " I am thirsty, and am 
quite famished with hunger ;" to which the Devil made answer, 
" Wait a little, and I will bring you bread and drink." While 
he was gone [to fetch this], two men, who happened to be 
passing along the road, seeing a fire in the sheepfold, won- 
dered what it could be, and coming nearer, entered the sheep- 
fold ; where, finding the pregnant woman lying down near the 
fire, they asked her who it was that had made the fire for her, 
to which she made answer, " The Devil." On this they en- 
quired of her where he was, when she replied, "I was 
hungry and thirsty, and he has gone to find me some vic- 
tuals and drink." On hearing this, they said to her, " Hava 

VOL. II. B 



60 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1185. 

faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and in the glorious Virgin Mary, 
His mother, and they shall deliver you from the hand of the 
enemy ; and be sure to enquire of him what shall come to 
pass ;" after saying which, they went to a village that was near 
at hand, and related to the clergy and the people what they 
had seen and heard upon the road. 

In the meantime, the Devil returned, and bringing with 
him bread and water, refreshed the woman ; after which, stoop- 
ing down, she gave birth to a male child, which the Devil 
taking up, performed the duties of midwife, and was warm- 
ing it before the fire, when, lo ! the priest of the village 
before-mentioned came to the sheepfold, armed with the Catho- 
lic faith, the cross, and holy water, and attended by the clergy 
and a great number of people. Finding that she was delivered, 
he was sprinkling the child, which the Devil was holding in 
his arms, with holy water, in the name of the holy and un- 
divided Trinity, when the Devil, being utterly unable to en- 
dure it, took to flight, and, carrying the child away with 
him, appeared to them no more. On this, the woman, returning 
to herself, exclaimed, " Now do I know of a truth that the 
Lord hath delivered me from the hands of the enemy ;" and 
she then related to them that she had been informed by the 
Devil, that, since the time when Jesus Christ prevailed over 
hell, there had not been so great sorrow or lamentation in hell 
as there was now, in consequence of the assumption of the 
cross : but, said she, his sorrow will be turned into joy, because 
so great will be the iniquities and offences of the Crusaders, 
that the Lord will blot them out of the Book of Life, and 
many of them, forsaking the religion of the cross, will become 
persecutors of the cross and of the name of Christ a thing 
that afterwards proved to be the case. 

Our lord the king next came to Windsor, and there, on the 
Lord's day on which is sung 55 "Latare, J&rusalem" [" Eejoice, 
Jerusalem,"] which this year fell on the day before the 
calends of April, he dubbed his son John a knight, and imme- 
diately after sent him to Ireland, appointing him king thereof. 
In the meantime, a mighty earthquake was heard 56 throughout 
nearly the whole of England, such as had not been heard in that 

65 The commencement of the introit on the Fourth Sunday in Lent. 

66 The word is " auditus.;" at the present day we speak of feeling an 
earthquake, and, in general, not of hearing one. 



A.D. 1185. PBINCE JOHN COMES TO IRELAND. 51 

land since the beginning of the world ; for rocks were split 
asunder, houses of stone fell down, and the metropolitan 
church of Lincoln was rent from top to bottom. This earth- 
quake took place on the day after Palm Sunday, that is to say, 
on the seventeenth day before the calends of May ; and on the 
day after the said earthquake our lord the king of England, 
Heraclius, the Patriarch, and Hugh, bishop of Durham, with 
many of the principal men of England, crossed over between 
Dover and Witsand. After his arrival in Normandy, our lord the 
king of England raised a considerable army, and then sent 
word to his son Richard, earl of Poitou, who had fortified 
Poitou against him, and had taken prisoner his brother Geof- 
frey, earl of Brittany, that unless he delivered up to his mother 
Eleanor the whole of Poitou freely and quietly, he would visit 
him with a rod of iron, and war against him with all the 
power of his might. Upon receiving this command, the said 
Richard, ceasing all hostilities, delivered up Poitou to his 
mother, and, returning to his father, remained with him like 
an obedient son. 

In the meantime, on the calends of May, being the day of 
the Apostles, Saint Philip and Saint James, about mid-day, a 
total eclipse of the sun was seen, which was followed by 
thunder and lightning, and a mighty tempest ; from the effects 
of which men and animals perished, and many houses, bein^ 
set on fire thereby, were burned to the ground. After this, 
Philip, king of France, and Henry, king of England, holding 
a conference as to giving aid to the land of Jerusalem, pro- 
mised that they would afford it ample assistance both in men and 
money : but, for all this the before-named Patriarch cared 
but little, as he had been in hopes that he should be enabled to 
bring back with him, for the defence of the land of Jeru- 
salem, the before-named king of England, or one of his sons, 
or else some other person high in authority ; but, being unable 
to effect this, he retired feom the court in sorrow and confusion 
on his return to his country. 

In the same year, Walter, the archbishop elect of Rouen, 
received the pall from pope Lucius, and immediately conse- 
crated Gilbert de GlanviUe, who had been presented with the 
bishopric of Rochester by the king of England. In this year 
also, John, the king's son, coming into Ireland, was honorably 
received by John, the archbishop of Dublin, and the other 

E2 



52 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1185. 

subjects of his father, who had preceded him ; however, as he 
thought fit to shut up everything in his own purse, 56 and 
was unwilling to pay their wages to his soldiers, he lost the 
greater part of his army in several conflicts with the Irish, 
and being at last reduced to want [of troops], after appointing 
justices and distributing his knights in various places for the 
defence of the country, he returned to England. 

In the month of December, in this year, pope Lucius de- 
parted this life ; and was succeeded in the papacy by pope 
Urban the Third ; who immediately thereupon, in order that 
notice thereof might be universally given, wrote to the prelates 
of the Holy Church to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Urban on his Election. 

" Urban, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his 
venerable brethren the archbishops and bishops, and to his 
dearly beloved sons the abbats, priors, and other prelates of 
churches, to whom these letters shall come, health and the 
Apostolic benediction. The exalted counsels of heaven, re- 
taining in their dispensations a constant supervision thereof, 
have founded the Holy Church of Rome, to the governance 
whereof, insufficient as we are, we have been chosen, upon a 
rock which is based upon the solidity of the faith ; bestowing 
upon her that foundation in the strength of the Apostolic con- 
fession, that so neither the outbreaks of the storm, nor the 
winds of the tempest can prevail against her. Wherefore it is 
that the universal Mother Church, ever retaining wit hher the 
Saviour, even unto the end of the world, has so, as expressed in 
the Song of Solomon, 67 " embraced him whom she loved," that, 
by reason of no change of events or of times, can she be separated 
from the singleness of her faith, or the fixedness of her affection. 
For although, by reason of the repeated changes of her pastors 
as they depart, she has frequently fallen into various perils, or 
in consequence of the attacks of the wickedness of this world 
has endured persecutions and labours innumerable, still, never 
has the Divine favour forsaken her, any further than that she 
might perfect her strength in some temptation, and thence ob- 
tain the joyous fulfilment of her hope, on receiving thereby a 
strengthening of her faith. The Lord thus dealing towards her, 
within these few days as a mark of His goodness, although no 
slight grief and sorrow affected her for the death of the pious 

56 * He more than once alludes to the avarice of John. 67 Probablv 
in allusion to ch. vii, 1 0. 



A.D. 1185. THE LETTEK OF POPE URBAN. 53 

father Lucius, Divine Providence has preserved her in the unity 
of the spirit and in the bond of peace, so that after the sorrow 
of the evening joy came in the morning, and she, like a most 
beauteous dove, rejoicing amid her sighs, retained her beauty 
without a ruffle even or a spot upon her whiteness. Now, after 
the decease of the father of pious memory, our predecessor 
Lucius, our lord the pope, when his most venerable body had 
been honorably entombed, there was held by the brethren a con- 
ference as to the election of a successor, at which there was such 
unity among all, and such concord of each with the other, 
that He may be supposed to have wrought upon them, in whose 
hands are the hearts of all men, and through whom the diversity 
of minds is reconciled. But, while in the church of God, there- 
were many venerable and prudent men, of whom it is our belief 
that their votes might have more prudently and more worthily 
have made choice, inefficient as we are, they turned their eyes 
upon us ; and it was done accordingly as it pleased the Lord, 
in that they made choice of us as their father and shepherd, 
who have neither strength nor merits to suffice to the elevation 
of a dignity so great. However, although we were fully con- 
scious to ourselves of our own infirmities, so as to believe that 
we might, not without good reason, have offered resistance to 
their proposals ; still, to the end that through delay in the 
transaction or pertinacity in making resistance, no danger might 
ensue to the Church, although unwillingly, we consented to 
undertake the labour of the burden entrusted to us ; hoping that 
our steps would be guided by Him who bestowed on Saint Peter, 
when sailing on the waves, faith even to that degree that he 
went down into the sea, and went forth to meet Him in the 
midst thereof, that doubting he might not perish. Now there- 
fore, being placed in such a position and office, as to require 
to be aided therein by the suffrages of all the faithful, to you 
do we resort, as especial sons of the Roman Church, with 
full confidence and security, and, prefacing with the salutation 
of the Apostolic benediction, we do by these familiar letters 
admonish you, and do earnestly request and exhort you in the 
Lord, that, attending the death of our before-named father and 
lord Lucius, with the devout suffrages of your prayers, you will 
especially pay to ourselves that fidelity and duty which is owed 
to us, in virtue of your respect for Saint Peter and Saint Paul 
the Apostles and the Apostolic See, by all of you in common, 
that by so doing, you may be enabled both to obtain your 



54 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1185, 

reward of God, and always be enabled to find more abundant 
grace in my eyes, and prove yourselves deserving before the 
whole Church. Given at Yerona, on the second day before the 
ides of January." 

In the same year, Henry, king of England, sent envoys to pope 
Urban, and obtained many things of him, which pope Lucius had 
stoutly refused ; one of which was that such one of his sons as 
he should think fit should be crowned king of Ireland. This 
was acceded to by our lord the pope, who confirmed the same by 
his bull, and, as a proof of his assent and confirmation thereof, 
sent him a crown made of peacock's feathers, embroidered with 
gold. In this year, shortly before the feast of Saint Peter ad 
Vincula, the before-named Patriarch, having returned to Jeru- 
salem, and brought with him no aid for the defence of that land, 
great fear came upon the inhabitants of the land of Jerusalem. 
Consequently, a certain brother of the Temple, an Englishman 
by birth, whose name was Eobert de Saint Alban, having for- 
saken the Christian faith, went to Saladin, king of Babylon, 
and promised him that he would deliver up to him the city of 
Jerusalem ; and, on his giving him security for the same, Sala- 
din gave him his niece in marriage, and a considerable body 
of troops, and put him in command of his army, making him 
general thereof. Upon this, he immediately went forth with 
his army to the plains of Saint George, and there divided 
it into three detachments, two of which he sent into the parts 
adjacent to lay them waste ; on which they ravaged the whole 
country, from Montreal to Neapolis, while Jericho, and the city 
of Sebaste, with some other cities, were destroyed. 

But the before-named Eobert, with the third part of his 
army, marched against the city of Jerusalem ; on which the 
few inhabitants who were in the city, trusting in the Lord, 
went forth by the postern gates, and, carrying before them the 
wood of the Cross of our Lord as a standard, by the might of 
the Lord smote the army in which was the before -named 
Robert; on which, taking to flight, he turned his back on the 
smiters, while the men of Jerusalem followed him and his army, 
and slew many of them with the edge of the sword : Robert, 
however, though with considerable difficulty, made his escape. 

After this, on Saladin purposing a fresh attack upon the 
land of Jerusalem, the Templars and Hospitallers and other 
chief men of that land, gave him sixty thousand besants 
for a truce until the octave of the ensuing Easter. In the 



A.D. 1186. KING HEXEY AT CAKLISLE. 55 

meantime, "William de Marchis, earl of Joppa, having died, 
William the Leper, the king of Jerusalem, abdicated the throne 
of the kingdom, and, naming the boy Baldwin, son of the 
before-named William and Sibylla, who was his sister, his 
heir, caused him to be crowned long in the Holy City of 
Jerusalem; shortly after which he died, on which the boy 
Baldwin reigned in his stead for nearly two years, and his 
mother Sibylla married Guido de Lusignan, and by him had 
two daughters. 

In the year of grace 1186, being the thirty-second year of 
the reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said 
king was at Damfront, in Normandy, on the day of the Nati- 
vity of our Lord ; after which festival a conference was held 
between him and Philip, king of France, at Gisors, where he 
made oath that he would give Alice, the sister of the king 
of France, in marriage to his son Eichard, earl of Poitou. The 
king of France also promised to the before-named Eichard, 
together with his said sister, Gisors, and all that his father 
Louis had promised, together with his daughter Margaret, to 
Henry, the son, the king of England ; and he further made 
oath that he would never after that advance any claim against 
them in respect thereof. 

After having held this conference, the king of England 
crossed over to England, and gave to Hugh, prior of the house 
of Wicham, which is of the Carthusian order, and in the bishop- 
ric of Bath, the bishopric of Lincoln ; whom Baldwin, the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, shortly after consecrated. After this, 
the king proceeded with a large army to Carlisle, intending to go 
still further to wage war against Eoland, the son of Ucthred, son 
of Fergus, for the injuries and spoliations which he had been 
guilty of towards Dunecan, the son of Gilbert, son of Fergus ; 
but the said Eoland came thither to the king and made peace 
with him. The king also, while there, caused Paulinus of Leeds 
to be elected to the bishopric of Carlisle ; which, however, the 
said Paulinus declined. On this, in order that Paulinus might 
be willing to accept of that bishopric, the king offered him to 
enrich it with revenues to the amount of three hundred marks 
yearly, arising from the church of Bamborough, the church of 
Scarborough, the chapelry of Tickhill, and two of the king's 
manors near Carlisle. 

In the same year, Philip, king of the Franks, gave to Bela, 



56 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1186. 

king of Hungary, his sister Hargaret in marriage, who had 
been the wife of Henry, the son of the king of England. In 
the same year, Geoffrey, earl of Brittany, son of Henry, king of 
England, died at Paris from bruises which he had received 
from the hoofs of horses at a tournament, and was buried in 
the cathedral church of that city. In this year also some of 
the Irish cut off the head of Hugh de Lacy in Ireland. In 
the same year, our lord the king of England gave Ermengard, 
his kinswoman, daughter of Richard, viscount de Beaumont, in 
marriage to "William, king of Scotland ; and caused them to 
be married in his chapel at Woodstock by Baldwin, archbishop 
of Canterbury, where he held in their honor great nuptial 
festivities at his palace for a period of four days. Our lord the 
king also there presented the king of Scotland with the castle 
of Edinburgh ; which the said king immediately gave to the 
before-named Ermengard his wife as a marriage portion, and 
by way of increasing the same he gave her one hundred pounds 
of yearly revenue, and forty knights' fees. 

In the same year, while the king of England was staying at 
Carlisle, Robert Buteville, dean of the church of York, de- 
parted this life, and was succeeded in the deanery by Hubert 
Fitz- Walter, clerk to Ranulph de Glanville, at the king's 
presentation. In the same year, our lord the king of Eng- 
land gave to William de J^orthale the bishopric of Worcester, 
and to John, subdean of Salisbury, the bishopric of Exeter ; 
who were accordingly consecrated by Baldwin, the archbishop 
of Canterbury. 

In the same year, after pope Urban, upon the complaint of 
John, the bishop of Dunkeld, had heard the dispute that existed 
between him and Hugh, the bishop of Saint Andrew's, he wrote 
to the king of Scotland to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Urban to William, king of Scotland. 

"Urban, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
William, the illustrious king of the Scots, health and the 
Apostolic benediction. Inasmuch as, by the duties enjoined 
upon us by God in virtue of our office, we are bound to give 
our earnest attention to all the churches, both those near to 
us, as also those at a great distance, and, if we know of any un- 
reasonable attempts made by them or by their ministers, to 
recall them to a more suitable line of conduct, the princes of 



A.D. 1186. LETTEE OF POPE TJBBAN. 57 

this world ought not to feel themselves aggrieved inconsequence 
thereof, if sometimes we think proper to extend our hands for the 
correction of those things which they have done amiss; inasmuch 
as they themselves also, in conformity with the power that has 
been entrusted to them, ought to aid us herein, and, when it 
is necessary and the obstinacy of any stands in need thereof, 
stoutly to resist the contumacy prompted by a spirit of wicked- 
ness. Your royal excellency is not unaware what a grie- 
vous dissension has arisen between our venerable brethren, 
John, bishop of Dunkeld, and Hugh, bishop of Saint Andrew's ; 
and although either party has undergone great labours, and 
submitted to great expenses, and, in the time of pope Lucius 
of blessed memory, our predecessor, held a long discussion 
thereon at the Apostolic See, they still were unable to bring 
the matter in dispute to a conclusion. And whereas lately 
the said bishops came to our presence, and discussed the said 
matters at length, in our hearing, upon which, by the advice 01 
our brethren, we gave to the before-named bishop of Dunkeld 
power to act in the bishopric of Saint Andrew's, in opposition 
to the said bishop Hugh, and the said bishop of Saint .Andrew's 
was sufficiently instructed in our presence, to return to his own 
place within a period named, upon the understanding that 
if he should not do so within the said time, our venerable 
brother Jocelyn, bishop of Glasgow, and our dearly beloved 
sons, the abbats of Melrose, Newbottle, and Dunfermline, 
should from thenceforth suspend him from the episcopal 
duties, and if he should after that prove contumacious, should 
place him under the ban of excommunication, and not revoke 
their sentence until such time as he should have come into our 
presence. For it is our wish, that this matter should no longer 
remain in a state of suspense, in order that thereby the said church 
of Saint Andrew's may incur no grave detriment to its interests, 
but rather that, the truth being known, with the aid of the Lord, 
by our means it may be brought to a suitable conclusion. We 
have also ordered the before-named bishop of Glasgow and his 
colleagues, relying upon our authority, to extend their protection 
to our dearly-beloved sons, Aiulph, dean of Lothian, Odo, the 
seneschal, Roger de Feric, and other clerks, friends of the be- 
forenamed bishop of Dunkeld, from all molestation whatsoever, 
and not to allow their possessions or other goods, or the reve- 



58 ANXALS OF flOGEE DE HOYEDEX. A.D. 1186. 

nues of the said bishop to be seized upon by any person. 
And if any one shall presume to disregard this prohibition 
hereon, they are, by means of canonical censure, to restrain them 
in such course, no appeal to the contrary withstanding. To 
the end, therefore, that what we have ordered may without any 
difficulty whatever be complied with, we do advise your royal 
excellency, and exhort you in the Lord, and, for the remission of 
your sins, enjoin you, out of your love of justice, and your 
reverence for Saint Peter and for ourselves, to allow pro- 
ceedings to be taken in this matter in conformity with the 
tenor of our mandates, and with your royal protection to de- 
fend the before-named dean and seneschal, and Eobert de 
Fedic, and the rest of the kinsmen and friends of the before- 
named bishop of Dunkeld, as also the bishopric, and the rest 
of his revenues, and neither in any way to aggrieve them nor 
suffer them to be aggrieved by others ; that so this dispute may 
without any hindrance be brought to a conclusion, and your 
royal mightiness may for this work of justice gain a never- 
failing reward from God, and a good name among men. You 
are to know also, that we have enjoined the before-named 
bishops, in virtue of their obedience to us, not to receive any- 
thing from the churches or clergy subject to them in re- 
spect of the expenses which, in the transaction of the matters 
before-named, they are liable to incur, but to make it their 
care to supply the necessary expenses from their own re- 
venues alone. For we are unwilling that by their deeds the 
churches, or any persons in your kingdom, should incur any 
detriment whatever. We also wish it not to escape your 
royal excellency, that the before-named bishop of Dunkeld 
has so honorably conducted his cause, and has paid such 
deference to your kingly dignity, that he has made no propo- 
sition whatever, which might by any possibility redound to the 
derogation of your royal name, or, by reason of which, your 
serene highness ought to feel angered against him. Where- 
fore, if anything to the contrary shall be suggested to your 
highness by his opponents, you must not lend your royal ear to 
the words of such persons. Given at Yerona, on the second 
day before the calends of August." 



A. D. 1186. LETTER OF POPE TJEBAN. 59 



The Letter of the same Pope to John, bishop of Glasgow, and the 
alibats, his colleagues, on the same subject. 

""Urban, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his 
venerable brother, Jocelyn, bishop of Glasgow, and his dearly- 
beloved sons, the abbats of Melrose, Newbottle, and Dunferm- 
line, health and the Apostolic benediction. Inasmuch as, by 
the duties enjoined upon us by God in virtue of our office, we 
are bound to give our earnest attention to all the churches, 
both those near to us as also those at a great distance, and if 
we know of any unreasonable attempts made by them, or by 
their ministers, to recall them to a more suitable line of con- 
duct ; the princes of this world ought not to feel angered in 
consequence thereof. Your discreetness is not unaware what a 
grievous dissension has arisen between our venerable brethren, 
John, bishop of Dunkeld, and Hugh, bishop of Saint Andrew's: 
and although either party has undergone great labours and 
submitted to great expenses, and, in the time of pope Lucius, 
of blessed memory, our predecessor, held a long discussion 
thereon at the Apostolic See, they still were unable to bring 
the matter in dispute to a conclusion. And whereas lately 
the said bishops came to our presence and discussed the said 
matters at length in our hearing, upon which, by the advice of 
our brethren, we gave to the before-named bishop of Dunkeld 
power to act in the bishopric of Saint Andrew's, in oppo- 
sition to the said bishop Hugh, and the said bishop of Saint 
Andrew's was sufficiently instructed in our presence to re- 
turn to his own place within a period named. And to the end 
that our most dearly beloved son in Christ, the illustrious king 
of the Scots, may not by his power impede the prosecution of 
this business, we have warned him by our letters that he is to 
allow proceedings to be taken in this business according to the 
tenor of our mandate, and to defend with his royal protection 
our dearly beloved sons, Aiulph, dean of Lothian, Odo, the sene- 
schal, and Robert de Fedic, and the other kinsmen of the above- 
named bishop of Dunkeld, and neither to aggrieve them in any 
way himself, nor suffer them to be aggrieved by others. 
To the end, therefore, that the business before-named may no 
longer remain in suspense, and the church of Saint Andrew's 



60 ANNALS OP EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1186. 

thereby incur detriment to its own interests, we do, by these 
Apostolic writings, enjoin your discreetness, and do, in virtue 
of your obedience, order you, reducing to writing whatever 
you shall know of yourselves or through other persons on the 
subject of this business, to make it your care to inform us of the 
same, sending it to us under the protection of your seals, in 
order that we, being instructed by your intimations thereon, 
using the advice of our brethren, may proceed in the business 
in such manner as it is our duty to do. And if any per- 
sons shall with rash daring lay hands upon the before-named 
dean, Odo, the seneschal, Robert de Fedic, or any other friends 
of the bishop of Dunkeld, and their possessions or other pro- 
perty, or the bishopric and other revenues of the said bishop, 
then, fully relying on our authorization, you are, by canonical 
censure, to restrain them, without any obstacle thereto by way 
of appeal. Also, you will, on our behalf, forbid the said 
bishops, as we have also done orally, to receive anything what- 
ever from the churches or clergy subject to them, in respect of 
the expenses which they are liable to incur in the prosecution 
of the before-named business ; as they are to supply the ne- 
cessary expenses from their own revenues alone. For we are 
unwilling that, by their deeds, they should cause detriment to 
the Church, or to any other person of your kingdom. Where- 
fore, by our authorization, you are strictly to warn the before- 
named bishop of Saint Andrew's, that, having received suffi- 
cient notice, he is to repair to our presence, within a time 
appointed by us for both parties. And if he shall not come, 
then you are, all appeal set aside, immediately to suspend him 
from 'his episcopal duties. And if even then he shall not 
show obedience thereto, you are to place him under the ban of ex- 
communication, and not to relax your sentence, until such time 
as he shall have presented himself before us. Also, you are to 
intimate to his royal excellency that the before-named bishop 
of Dunkeld has so honorably conducted his cause, and has paid 
such deference to his kingly dignity, that he has made no pro- 
position whatever which may by any possibility redound to 
the derogation of his royal name, or by reason of which he 
ought to feel angered against him. Wherefore, make it your 
care, by unceasing exhortations, to persuade him, that if any 
thing should be suggested by his opponents to the contrary, 



A.D. 1186. HOSTILITIES OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE. 61 

he is not to lend his royal ear to their words. Given at Verona, 
on the second day before the calends of August." 

On the authority therefore of this letter, Jocelyn, bishop of 
Glasgow, and his colleagues, when the time drew nigh which 
had been appointed by the Supreme Pontiff for the hearing 
of the before-named bishops of Dunkeld and Saint Andrew's, 
summoned the before-named bishops a first, second, and third 
time to set out upon their journey : on which the bishop of 
Dunkeld came, but the bishop of Saint Andrew's, staying 
beyond the time, delayed coming, whereupon the above-named 
iudges delegate suspended him from the episcopal duties, and 
then, in consequence of his contumacy, according to the tenor 
of the Apostolic mandate, excommunicated him. 

In the same year, Philip, king of France, demanded of 
Henry, king of England, the charge of the daughter of Geoffrey, 
earl of Brittany, whom at his death he left his heir ; a thing 
which the king of England would on no account comply with, 
but sent to him Walter, archbishop of Rouen, William de Man- 
deville, earl of Aumarle, and Ranulph de Glanville, the justi- 
ciary of England, at whose instance the king of Prance made a 
truce, and promised to keep the peace until the feast of Saint 
Hilary then next ensuing. In the same year, Richard de Yals, a 
knight of the king of Prance, fortified a castle in his vill of Vals, 
between Gisors and Trie ; on seeing which, Henry de Vere, con- 
stableof Gisors, underthe before-named William,earl of Aumarle, 
took it amiss, and, wishing to impede the work if he possibly 
could, came thither with his people ; on which the men of the 
before-named Richard de Yals went out to meet him, and an 
engagement taking place, Rader, the son of Richard de Vals, was 
slain, and after many men of the said Richard had been wounded, 
they took to flight. The saidHenry de Vere, however, not daring 
to return to Gisors, went to Richard, earl of Poitou. On this 
becoming known to the king of Prance, he ordered that all 
who belonged to the territories of the king of England, both 
clergy and laymen, who should be found in his dominions, 
should be taken in custody, together with all their chattels. 
On the other hand, the bailiffs of the king of England, in the 
parts beyond sea, did the like as to the subjects of the king of 
Prance and their chattels, which were found in their respective 
bailiwicks. But shortly after, at the suggestion of his fol- 
lowers, the king of Prance gave orders that the subjects of 



62 ANNALS OF EOGEK DE SOVEDEX. A.D. 1186. 

the king of England should be liberated, and that their chattels 
should be restored to them ; on which the bailiffs of the king of 
England did the same as to the subjects of the king of France 
and their chattels. 

In the same year, Constance, the countess of Brittany, 
daughter of earl Conan, whom Geoffrey, earl of Brittany, her 
husband, had left pregnant at the time of his decease, was 
delivered of her eldest son on the holy night of Easter, and 
his name was called Arthur. In the same year, Baldwin, the 
boy-king of Jerusalem, son of William le Marchis, departed 
this life, and was succeeded in the kingdom by his mother 
Sibylla, by hereditary right ; but before she was crowned, a 
divorce was effected between her and Guido de Lusignan, her 
husband, by the Patriarch Heraclius and the Templars and 
Hospitallers, who wished her to marry "Walran, earl of Tripolis, 
or some nobleman of the principal people of the land of Jeru- 
salem ; she, however, by a wonderfol piece of cunning, deceived 
them, saying : "If a divorce takes place between me and my 
husband, I wish you to make me sure, by your promises and 
oaths, that whomsoever I shall make choice of you will Choose 
for your head and lord." 

Accordingly, after they had so done, they led her into the 
Temple, and the before-named Patriarch crowned her ; shortly 
after which, when all were offering up their prayers that God 
the Lord Almighty would provide a fitting king for that land, 
the before-named queen took the royal crown in her hands, 
sad placed it on the head of Guido de Lusignan her husband, 
saying, " I make choice of thee as king, and as my lord, and 
as lord of the land of Jerusalem, for those whom God hath 
joined together, let not man put asunder." 

At these words all stood in amazement, but on account of 
the oath which they had made, no one dared oppose her, 
and the Patriarch, approaching, anointed him king ; and then, 
Divine service having been celebrated, the Templars escorted 
the king and queen to their abode, and provided for them a 
sumptuous entertainment. The earl of Tripolis, however, vexed 
and sorrowful that the queen had rejected him, went to Saladin, 
king of Babylon, and, entering into an alliance with him, 
devised many evils for the destruction of the king and queen. 
Saladin, however, requested that the truce before-mentioned, 
which he had made until the ensuing Easter, should be pro- 



A. D. 1187. PEACE IS MADE BETWEEN PHILIP AND HENBY. 63 

longed for the three years next ensuing ; to which proposition 
king Guido, by the advice of the Templars, assented, although 
it was evident to him that there would shortly come a vast 
number of pilgrims, both from England and other kingdoms, 
in consequence of the preaching of the Patriarch. Accordingly, 
after Easter, there came to Jerusalem an immense multitude 
of men-at-arms and other pilgrims ; but as the truce had been 
prolonged, very few of them chose to remain. However, Roger 
de Mowbray and Hugh de Beauchamp remained there in the 
service of God. 

In the year of grace 1187, being the thirty- third year of the 
reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, that king 
was at Guilford, in England, on the day of the Nativity of 
our Lord. In the same year, after the Nativity of our Lord, 
pope Urban sent to England Octavianus, a cardinal- subdeacon 
of the Holy Church of Borne, and with him Hugh de Nunant, 
to whom he gave the legateship to Ireland, for the purpose of 
there crowning John, the king's son ; but eur lord the king put 
off that coronation, and took the before-named legates with him 
to Normandy, to a conference to be held between himself and 
Philip, king of France. Accordingly, the king of England 
crossed over and landed at Witsand, in Flanders, and with him 
che legates before-named, and shortly after, a conference was 
ield between him and the king of France at Ve Saint Remy, 
but they could come to no agreement, in consequence of the ex- 
orbitant demands made by the king of France, and parted 
without any hopes of peace and reconciliation. 

In the same year, after Pentecost, Philip, king of France, 
levying a large army, besieged Richard and John, the sons of 
the king of England, in Chateau Raoul ; hearing of which, the 
king of England came thither with a great army to succour 
his sons so besieged. On this, the king of France met him 
with his army, and drew up his troops in battle array ; but, by 
the mercy of God and the injunction of Urban the Supreme Pon- 
tiff, and by the advice of the archbishops, bishops, and other 
influential men of both kingdoms, they agreed to a truce for 
two years, and that the king of France should hold Yssoudon 
and Urse de Fretteval till the end of the truce ; and upon these 
terms they desisted from hostilities and returned home. 

Alter peace was thus made, Richard, earl of Poitou, remained 
with the king of France, though much against the will of 



64 ANNALS OP BOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1187. 

his father, and the king of France held him in such high 
esteem, that every day they ate at the same table and from 
the same dish, and at night had not separate chambers. In 
consequence of this strong attachment which seemed to have 
arisen between them, the king of England was struck with 
great astonishment, and wondered what it could mean, and, 
taking precautions for the future, frequently sent messengers 
into France for the purpose of recalling his son Richard ; who, 
pretending that he was peaceably inclined and ready to come 
to his father, made his way to Chinon, and, in spite of the 
person wh'o had the custody thereof, carried off the greater 
part of his father's treasures, and fortified his castles in Poitou 
with the same, refusing to go to his father. 

This is supposed to have taken place through the Providence 
of God, in order that his father might not be deceived by the 
pretended affection of his son, nor be in too great haste to 
promote him to the helm of state, in the same way that he 
had promoted the other one, 62 who, as already mentioned, had 
caused him endless troubles by his unrighteous and vexatious 
conduct. At length, however, through the mercy of God, it 
came to pass that Richard, earl of Poitou, neglecting the counsels 
of the wicked, returned to his father, and once more did homage 
to him in presence of a great number of people, both clergy 
and laity, and swore fealty to him upon the Holy Evangelists 
against all men, and promised that he would not forsake his 
counsels. These matters being concluded, the king of England 
set out for Brittany, and took the castle of Montrelais by siege, 
of which Hervey de Lyons and his brother Guimar had taken 
possession after the death of Geoffrey, earl of Brittany. 

In the same year, Donald, the son of William, son of Dune- 
can, an enemy of William, king of Scotland, and whom the 
Scotch called Mac William, was slain in Moray. In the same 
year, Isabella, the queen of France, and daughter of the earl of 
Hainault, was delivered of her first-born son on the third day 
before the nones of September, being the fifth day of the 
week, who was named Louis. In the same year, Saladin, 
king of Babylon, with an immense multitude of his Turks, 
on pretext of the disunion which existed between the king 
and the earl of Tripolis, entered the land of Jerusalem ; on 
which the brethren of the Temple and of the Hospital went 
83 His eldest son, Henry. 



A.D. 1187. DEFEAT OF THE CHRISTIANS. 65 

forth against him with a great multitude of people, and on an 
engagement taking place between them, the army of the Pagans 
prevailed against the Christians, on which the latter betook 
themselves to flight, and many of them were slain and many 
taken prisoners. On the same day also, being the calends of 
May, sixty brethren of the Temple, and the Grand Master of 
the Hospital, together with sixty brethren of his house, were 
slain. 

Saladin, on gaining this great victory, attacked and took a 
considerable number of the castles, cities, and fortresses of the 
Christians; after which, returning to his own country, he 
levied a great army, and, by the advice, it is said, of the earl 
of Tripolis, who was an enemy to the king, entered the ter- 
ritory of Jerusalem, on the Friday after the feast of the Apostles 
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, with eight hundred thousand men 
or more ; on which he took Tiberias, with the exception of 
the keep of the castle, to which place the lady of the castle 
had retreated, together with a few knights. On king Guido 
being informed of this, by the advice of the earl of Tripolis, 
who had lately, with fraudulent intent, entered into a treaty 
of peace, the king proceeded one day's march towards Tiberias, 
when the earl of Tripolis, who was the leader and guide in 
the march, halted the whole army on an elevated and craggy 
spot. Being there threatened with an attack of the enemy on 
every side, the king, urged by necessity, and compelled by the 
advice of his barons, thought proper to engage, and, at their 
entreaty,, gave the honor of striking the first blow to the Master 
and knights of the Temple. 

Upon this, the brotherhood of the Temple, rushing upon 
the foe with the bravery of lions, put some to the sword, and 
forced others to take to flight. The rest, however, neglecting 
the king's commands, did not join the battle, or give them 
any succour whatever ; in consequence of which, the knights 
of the Temple were hemmed in and slaughtered. After this, 
the troops of Saladin surrounded the army of the Christians, 
worn out with the fatigues of the march, exhausted by the 
intense heat of the climate, and utterly destitute of water, and, 
in a great measure, of food as well. At this conjunction, six 
of the king's knights, namely, Baldwin de Fortune, Raymond 
Buck, and Laodicius de Tiberias, with three companions, being 
seized with a diabolical spirit, fled to Saladin, and spontaneously 
became Saracens, informing him of every particular as to the 

TOL. II. F 



66 ANNALS OF KOOEE BE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1187. 

present state, intentions, and resources of the Christians. On 
this, Saladin, who before was in anxious doubt as to the result 
of the warfare, took courage, and with trumpets sounding, 
made an attack with an infinite multitude of warriors on the 
Christians, who, in consequence of the rocky and inaccessible 
nature of the spot, were unable to fight ; and so, assailing them 
with every possible method of attack, he utterly routed the 
Christians. At last, Thekedin, the nephew of Saladin, took 
Guido, king of Jerusalem, while flying, and the wood of the 
Cross of our Lord, after slaying Rufinus, bishop of Acre, who 
was carrying it. And this was done through the righteous 
judgment of God ; for, contrary to the usage of his predeces- 
sors, having greater faith in worldly arms than in heavenly 
ones, he went forth to battle equipped in a coat of mail, and 
shortly after he perished, being pierced by an arrow. Nearly 
all the others, being utterly routed, were taken prisoners and 
either slain or loaded with chains, the Persians, oh, great dis- 
grace ! remaining masters of the camp. 

The earl of Tripolis alone, who was the designer of this 
treachery, escaped with his men unhurt. Immediately after 
the battle, Saladin ordered the knights of the Temple and of 
the Hospital to be separated from the rest, and to be decapi- 
tated in his presence, he himself with his own hand slaying 
"Raymond de Castiglione, their chief. After this he took the 
city of Acre and the places adjacent, with nearly all the forti- 
fied spots in those parts. 

In the meantime, Conrad le Marchis, brother of the above- 
mentioned William, earl of Joppa, having been guilty of mur- 
der in the city of Constantinople, took to flight, deserting his 
wife, the niece of Isaac, emperor of Constantinople ; and on 
the very same day on which Saladin gained this victory over 
the Christians, Conrad came to Tyre and found it deserted, 
for nearly all the citizens of the place were slain in the before- 
mentioned battle. On Saladin coming thither, expecting to have 
free ingress, Conrad offered a stout resistance, and refused him 
permission to enter ; on which, Saladin, seeing that he could 
effect nothing by staying there, took his departure, and cap- 
tured the city of Beyrout, and both the cities which are called 
Gibelet, with Sidon, and the city of Cassarea, as also Joppa, 
Saint George, Saint Abraham, Bethlehem, the New Castle of 
Caiaphas, Saphet, Jaunay, Mount Tabor, Eaba, and Caffar- 
nmndel, the Cave of the Temple, Calenzun, Marie of the 



A.D.1187. DEATH OF POPE URBAN. 67 

Temple, the Castle on the Plain, Raman, Bethurun of the 
Knights, Castle Arnald, Castle Bourgoing, Tarentum, Blanche- 
warde, Galatia, Gasseres, Damn, 63 Rouge Cisterne, the Castle 
of Saint Peter, Saint Lazarus of Bethany, Saint Mary of Mount 
Sion, and the City of Jerusalem. 

On this, the queen, the wife of Guido, betook herself, with 
her two daughters and her household, to the city of Ascalon, 
and fortified it with provisions and soldiers ; these, however, 
in the second year after, she surrendered to Saladin for the 
ransom of her husband Guido, and thus liberated him from 
the custody of Saladin. All those, however, who had fled to 
Acre, and a multitude of Christians who had taken to flight, 
betook themselves to Tyre, and made Conrad their ruler and 
protector ; Antioch also, and Margat, with nearly all the lands of 
the prince thereof, stoutly fortified themselves against Saladin. 

While the earl of Tripolis was endeavouring to wean his 
nation from the worship of God, and to betray his country to 
Saladin, he was found dead in his bed just as though fast asleep ; 
on which his wife, with all her people, surrendered herself 
and the city of Tripolis to Raymond, prince of Antioch, and 
he appointed his son Jocelyn lord thereof. 

Now when pope Urban heard that in his time the king of 
Jerusalem had been taken prisoner, as also the Cross of our Lord, 
and the Holy City of Jerusalem, he was greatly afflicted, and 
fell ill, and died on the thirteenth day before the calends of 
November, at Ferrara ; being succeeded in the papacy by Albert 
his chancellor, who was called pope Gregory the Eighth. On 
this, the cardinals, with the sanction of our lord the pope, 
strictly pledged themselves to each other, disregarding all 
wealth and luxuries, to preach the cross of Christ, and that 
not in word only but by deed and example, and to be the first, 
assuming the cross, to go begging for succours, and to precede 
the rest to the land of Jerusalem. They also, with the con- 
sent of our lord the pope, established a most strict truce between 
all the princes of Christendom, to last for a period of seven 
years ; on the understanding that whoever in the meantime 
should commence war against a Christian, should be subject 
to the curse of God, and of our lord the pope, and the excom- 
munication of all the prelates of the Universal Church. They 
also solemnly promised each other, that from thenceforth they 
would receive presents from no one who had a cause to try 
63 A great portion of these names are most probably incorrect. 

F 2 



68 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1187. 

in the court, but would only receive as much as should be given, 
or sent to supply their necessities and for their sustenance ; 
as also that they would not mount a horse so long as the land 
on which the feet of the Lord had stood should remain under 
the feet of the enemy. 

It is also worthy of observation, and to be ascribed to the 
Divine Providence, that at the time when the city of Jerusalem 
and Antioch had been rescued from the power of the Pagans, 
on the expedition headed by Audemar, bishop of Puy, and many 
other bishops and religious men, as also Hugh, brother of Philip, 
king of France, Godfrey, duke of Lorraine, Stephen, count of 
Chartres, Robert, duke of Normandy, brother of William the 
Second, the king of England, then reigning, (which Robert 
conquered in battle, Colbrand, the chief of the knighthood of 
the Pagans), Robert, earl of Flanders, Eustace, earl of Bou- 
logne, and Baldwin, the two brothers of duke Godfrey, Ray- 
mond, earl of Saint Gilles, Boamund, son of Robert Guiscard, 
and many other noblemen, the pope who was then living was 
named Urban, the Patriarch of Jerusalem was called Heraclius, 
and the emperor of Rome was called Frederic ; and so now, 
when the land of Jerusalem was taken from the hands of the 
Christians by the people of Saladin, the pope was called Urban, 
the patriarch of Jerusalem Heraclius, and the Roman emperor 
Frederic. It also deserves to be known, that between the time 
when Jerusalem was rescued from the hands of the Pagans by 
the warriors before-named, and the time when king Guido was 
deprived of it, a space of eighty-seven years intervened. 

The Letter of Terricms, Master of the Temple, on the capture of 
the land of Jerusalem. 

" The brother Terricius, so called Grand Master of the most 
impoverished house of the Temple, and of all the brethren him- 
self the most impoverished, and that brotherhood all but anni- 
hilated, to all commanders and brethren of the Temple to whom 
these presents shall come, greeting, and may they lift up their 
sighs to Him at whom the sun and moon are astounded. "With 
how many and how great calamities, our sins so requiring it, 
the anger of God has lately permitted us to be scourged, we are 
unable, sad fate ! either in writing or in the language of tears 
to express. For the Turks, assembling together an immense 
multitude of their nations, began with bitter hostility to invade 
the territories of us Christians ; and accordingly, uniting the 



A.D. 1137. LETTEB OF THE GRAND MASTEE TERBICIUS. 69 

forces of our nation against them, we ventured, before the oc- 
tave of the Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, to attack 
them ; and for that purpose ventured to direct our march to- 
wards Tiberias, which, leaving their camp unprotected, they 
had taken by storm. After repulsing us among some most 
dangerous rocks, they attacked us with such vehemence, that 
after they had captured the Holy Cross and our king, and 
a whole multitude of us had been slain, and after two hundred 
and thirty of our brethren, as we verily believe, had been 
taken by them and beheaded, (besides those sixty who had 
been slain on the first of May), with great difficulty, the lord 
the earl of Tripolis, the lord Keginald of Sidon, the lord Bal- 
lovius, and ourselves, were enabled to make our escape from 
that dreadful field. After this, the Pagans, revelling in the 
blood of us Christians, did not delay to press on with all their 
hosts towards the city of Tyre ; and, taking it by storm, spread 
themselves over nearly the whole of the land, Jerusalem, Tyre, 
Ascalon, and Berytus being alone now left to us and to Chris- 
tendom. These cities also, as nearly all the citizens have been 
slain, we shall not be at all able to retain in our hands, unless 
we speedily receive the Divine assistance, and aid from your- 
selves. For at the present moment they are besieging Tyre with 
all their might, and cease not to assault it either night or day, 
while so vast are their numbers, that they have covered the whole 
face of the land from Tyre, as far as Jerusalem and Gaza, just 
like swarms of ants. Deign, therefore, with all possible speed, 
to bring succour to ourselves and to Christianity, all but ruined 
in the East, that so through the aid of God and the exalted 
merits of your brotherhood, supported by your assistance, we 
may be enabled to save the remainder of those cities. Farewell." 

In the same battle in which Guido, king of Jerusalem, was 
made prisoner, Roger de Mowbray was also taken ; whom in 
the following year the brethren of the Hospital and the Temple 
ransomed from the hands of the Pagans ; shortly after which he 
died. In the same battle also, Hugh de Beauchamp was slain. 

In the same year, the king of England gave Constance, 
countess of Brittany, the mother of Arthur, in marriage to 
Ranulph, earl of Chester. In this year also, Baldwin, arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, erected new buildings and a church 64 
near the walls of the city of Canterbury, and assigned thereto 
prebends in the churches of the monks at Canterbury ; but 
6 * Akington, or Hackington, in the suburbs of Canterbury. 



70 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1187. 

the said monks complaining in consequence thereof, pope Urban 
forbade that this should be done, and thus the persons who 
had built the place expended their labour in vain. However, 
the said archbishop transferred this building to Lamhe, 64 * 4 which 
is on the other side of the Thames, opposite to Westminster. 
In the same year, Richard, earl of Poitou, assumed the cross 
of the pilgrimage to Jerusalem. 

The Letter of pope Gregory tlie Eighth to all the faithful in 
Christ. 

" Gregory, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to all 
the faithful in Christ, to whom these presents shall come, 
health and the Apostolic benediction. On hearing of the 
severity of the tremendous judgment which the hand of God 
has inflicted upon the land of Jerusalem, both we and our 
brethren have been put to confusion with terror so extreme, and 
afflicted with sorrows so great, that it did not readily suggest itself 
to us what we were to do, or what indeed we ought to do. We 
only called to mind the words of the Psalmist, where he laments 
and says, 65 ' God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance : 
thy holy temple have they defiled, they have laid Jerusalem 
in heaps. 66 The dead bodies of thy servants have they given 
to be meat unto the fowls of the heaven, the flesh of thy saints 
unto the beasts of the earth.' For, taking advantage of the 
dissensions, which, through the wickedness of men, at the sug- 
gestion of the Devil, had arisen throughout the earth, Saladin 
came with a multitude of troops to those parts, and, being met 
by the king, the bishops, Templars, Hospitallers, earls, and 
barons, with the people of the land, together with the Cross 
of our Lord (through which, by the remembrance of Christ 
and faith in Him who hung therefrom and redeemed man- 
kind, there used formerly to be assured protection, and a de- 
fence now vainly regretted against the assaults of the Pagans) 
part of our people were there slain, the Cross of our Lord 
was captured, the bishops slaughtered, the king made prisoner, 
and nearly all either slaughtered with the sword or taken by 
the hands of the enemy, so much so, that it is said that but very 
few escaped. The Templars also, and Hospitallers, were be- 
headed in his presence. How, after they had vanquished our 
army, they subsequently attacked and gained possession of all 

w * Lambeth. Psalm Ixxix. 1,2. 6C These words in our 

version appear in the text as " in pornoruna custodiam." 



A.D. 1187. LETTEK OF POPE GREGORY. 71 

quarters, so that only a few places are said to be remaining 
which have not fallen into their hands, we do not think requires 
to be set forth in our letters. However, although we may 
now say with the Prophet, i Oh that my head were waters, and 
mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep night and 
day for the slain of my people ;' 67 still, we ought not to be so ut- 
terly cast down as to fall into distrustfulness, and to believe that 
God is so angered with His people, that what in His wrath He 
has allowed to be done through the multitude of our sins in 
common, He will not speedily, when appeased by our repent- 
ance, in His compassion alleviate, and will, after our tears and 
lamentation, cause gladness and rejoicing. Whatever person 
then, amid such vast grounds for lamentation, does not, if not in 
body, still in heart, condole with us, is not only forgetful of 
the Christian faith, which teaches us to grieve with all who 
grieve, but even of his own self and of our common humanity, 
as every person of ordinary discretion is able well to esti- 
mate both the very magnitude of the danger, the fierceness of 
the barbarians who thirst for Christian blood, and exert the 
whole of their might in profaning the holy places, and using 
their endeavours to sweep away the name of God from off the 
earth, points on which we will not enlarge. And whereas 
the Prophets first laboured with all their zeal, and after them 
the Apostles and their followers, that the worship of God might 
exist in that land, and flow thence unto all regions of the 
world, aye, and even more than that, God (who was willing to 
become flesh, by whom all things were made, and who in his in- 
effable wisdom and his incomprehensible mercy was willing thus 
to work out our salvation, through the infirmity of the flesh, 
through hunger, fasting, thirst, the cross, and His death and 
resurrection, according to the words, ' Of himself he wrought 
out our salvation in the midst of the earth ;') also deigned here 
to undergo labours as well, neither tongue can tell, nor sense can 
imagine what grief it causes to us and to all Christian people 
to think what this land has now endured, and what under its 
former people it is read of as having suffered. Still, we ought 
not to believe that it is through the injustice of the judge who 
smites, but rather through the iniquity of the sinful people that 
these things have come to pass ; since we read that when the 
people turned unto the Lord, one thousand pursued, and twelve 
thousand fled; nay more, that, while the people slept, the army 
67 Jer. ix. 1. 



72 A1TOA18 OP EOGER DE HOVEDEN". A.D. 1187- 

of Sennacherib was cut off by the hand of the angel of the Lord. 
Still, however, that land devoured its inhabitants, and was never 
able to remain in a state of quietude, or to retain its people, as 
being transgressors of the laws of God ; thus giving a lesson and 
an example to those who are aiming at gaining a heavenly Jeru- 
salem, that they cannot possibly attain the same but by the 
exercise of good works and through many temptations. These 
events, in fact, might have been already apprehended when 
Arroaise and other lands passed into the hands of the Pagans, 
and proper prudence would only have been used if the people 
who survived had returned to repentance, and by their con- 
version appeased God, whom by their transgressions they had 
offended. Nor yet did His wrath come suddenly upon them, 
but He delayed His vengeance and gave time for repentance. 
At last, however, He who loses not justice in mercy, has exer- 
cised His vengeance in the punishment of the transgressors, and 
in thus giving a warning to those who wished to be saved. 
Moreover, we, who amid such great sorrow for that land, ought 
to give our attention not only to the sins of the inhabitants 
thereof, but also to our own and to those of the whole people, and 
to be in dread lest what still remains to us of that land may be 
lost, and their might may rage to the detriment of other nations 
as well, as we hear in all parts of dissensions and offences be- 
tween kings and princes, cities and cities, may well mourn 
with the Prophet and say : ' There is no truth nor know- 
ledge of God in the land. By lying, and killing, and 

committing adultery, they break out, and blood toucheth 
blood.' 68 Wherefore this is imperative upon all, and is to be 
thought upon and to be done ; making atonement for our 
sins by a voluntary chastisement, we ought, through repent- 
ance and works of piety, to turn to the Lord our God, and first 
to amend in ourselves those matters in which we have done 
amiss, and then to stand prepared for the fierceness and malice 
of our enemies, and those attacks which they do not fear to 
make upon God, inasmuch as we ought on no account to 
hesitate to act in the cause of God. Think, therefore, my 
sons, how you have come into this world, and how you are to 
depart therefrom, how transitory are all things, and how tran- 
sitory are you yourselves as well; and with thanksgiving receive, 
so far as in you lies, this opportunity for repenting and doing 
good, and both offer your possessions, and offer yourselves 
Hos. iv. 1, 2. 



A.D. 1187. LETTER OF POPE GKEGOBY. 73 

as well, because you are not of yourselves, nor have you any- 
thing of yourselves, who are not able to make so much as a 
single fly upon the earth. And we do not say, ' leave behind 
you,' but rather ' present beforehand' to the garner of heaven 
what you possess, and lay it up with Him, with whom t neither 
rust nor moth destroy, nor thieves break through and steal,' 
labouring for the recovery of that land in which for our salva- 
tion the Truth of the earth was born, and did not disdain for 
us to bear the cross. And devote not your thoughts to lucre 
or to temporal glory, but to the will of God, who in His 
own case has taught you to lay down your lives for your bre- 
thren, and give unto Him your riches, which, whether wil- 
lingly or unwillingly, you know not to what heirs you are at 
last to leave. For indeed it is no new thing that that land 
is chastised, nor in fact is it unusual that scourgings and chas- 
tisements should accompany mercifulness. God indeed by His 
will alone can save it ; but still, we have no right to ask him 
why He has acted thus : for perhaps He has wished to make trial, 
and to place this before the notice, of others, if any there are 
who are of good understanding or who seek for God, and who will 
with joy embrace the opportunity offered them for repentance, 
and, laying down their lives for their brethren, will compress 
and include the deeds of a long life in a small compass. Con- 
sider how the Maccabees, influenced with zeal for the Divine 
law, submitted to every extremity of peril for the purpose of 
liberating their brethren, and showed how that, for the safety 
of their brethren not only their substance but also their lives 
were to be laid down, exhorting one another, and saying, 

' Arm yourselves, and be valiant men For it is better to 

die in battle than to behold the calamities of our people and 
of our sanctuary.' 69 And yet these were under the control of 
the law only, whereas you, through the Incarnation of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, being led by the light of truth, and being in- 
structed by many examples of the Saints, ought to act without 
any hesitation, and not to fear to give your earthly things, few 
in number, and destined to last for a short time only ; you to 
whom those good things have been promised and reserved, which 
' Neither eye hath seen nor ear heard, neither have entered 
into the heart of man;' 70 and as to which the Apostle says, 
' The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be com- 
pared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.' 71 Where- 
6 1 Mace. iii. 58, 59. 7 1 Cor. ii. 9. * Rom. viii. 18. 



74 AITOALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1187- 

fore, to those who with a contrite heart and humble spirit 
shall undertake the labour of this expedition, and shall die in re- 
pentance for their sins and in the true faith, we do promise ple- 
nary indulgence for their offences, and eternal life. And whether 
they shall survive or whether die, they are to know that they 
will have, by the mercy of Almighty God and of the authority 
of the Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and of our- 
selves, remission of penance imposed for all sins of which they 
shall have made due confession. The property also of such 
persons, from the time that they shall have assumed the cross, 
together with their families, are to be under the protection of 
the Holy Church of Rome, and of the archbishops, bishops, 
and other prelates of the Church of God, and no person is to make 
any claim against the property of which, on assuming the cross, 
they were in quiet possession, until it is known for certain as to 
their return or death, but their property is to remain in the 
meantime untouched, and in their quiet possession ; they are 
also not to pay interest to any person, if they have so bound 
themselves ; nor yet are they to go in costly apparel,. or with 
dogs or hawks, which seem rather to minister to ostentation 
and luxury than to our necessities ; but they ought to be seen 
with plain apparel and equipments, by which they may appear 
rather to be acting in penitence than affecting an empty pomp. 
Given at Ferrara, on the fourth day before the calends of No- 
vember, in the sixth year of the indiction." 

The Letter of pope Gregory the Eighth to all the faithful, upon 
the same subject. 

" Gregory, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to all 
the faithful in Christ, to whom these presents shall come, 
health and the Apostolic benediction. Never is the wrath of 
the Supreme Judge more successfully appeased, than when, at 
His command, carnal desires are extinguished within us. 
Wherefore, inasmuch as we do not doubt that the disasters 
of the land of Jerusalem, which have lately happened through 
the irruption of the Saracens, have been expressly caused by 
the sins of the inhabitants of the land and of the whole people of 
Christendom, we, by the common consent of our brethren, and 
with the approval of many of the bishops, have enacted that 
all persons shall, for the next five years, on every sixth day 
of the week, at 'the very least, fast upon Lenten fare, and that, 
wherever mass is performed, it shall be chaunted at the ninth 



A.D. 1187. EFFORTS FOR THE KESCTTE OF JERUSALEM. 75 

hour : and this we order to be observed from the Advent of our 
Lord until the Nativity of our Lord. Also, on the fourth day 
of the week, and on Saturdays, all persons without distinction, 
who are in good health are, to abstain from eating flesh. We 
and our brethren do also forbid to ourselves and to our house- 
holds the use of flesh on the second day of the week as well, 
unless it shall so happen that illness or some great calamity or 
other evident cause shall seem to prevent the same ; trusting 
that by so doing God will pardon us and leave His blessing 
behind Him. 72 This therefore we do enact to be observed, 
and whosoever shall be guilty of transgressing the same, is 
to be considered as a breaker of the fast in Lent. Given at 
Ferrara, on the fourth day before the calends of November." 

Upon this, the princes of the earth, hearing the mandates 
and exhortations of the Supreme Pontiff, exerted themselves 
with all their might for the liberation of the land of Jerusalem ; 
and accordingly, Frederic, the emperor of the Romans, and 
the archbishops, bishops, dukes, earls, and barons of his em- 
pire, assumed the sign of the cross. In like manner, after 
their example, great numbers of the chief men of all the 
nations of Christendom prepared to succour the land of Jeru- 
salem. 

There was a certain clerk named master Bcrther, a native of 
Orleans, who aroused the spirits of many to assume the cross 
by repeating the following lines : 73 "In the strains of Jere- 
miah the ways of Sion mourn indeed, that no longer is there 
one upon the solemn day to visit the Holy Sepulchre, or to 
recall the fulfilment of that prophecy ; the prophecy in which 
the poet writes that from Sion the law shall go forth. Never 
shall the law perish there or have an avenger, 74 where Christ 
drank of the cup of passion. The wood of the cross, the banner 

72 Sic in original. Probably the real presence in the Eucharist is re- 
ferred to. 

73 This Leonine dirge begins as follows : 

" Juxta threnos Jeremiae 
Vere Sion lugent viae ; 
Quod solemni non sit die 
Qui sepulchrum visitet, 
Vel casum resuscitet 
Hujus prophetiae." 

The enthusiasm of the composer seems to have considered a meaning 
as comparatively unnecessary in his lines. 

74 The meaning of these lines is involved in obscurity. 



76 



ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1187. 



of the chieftain, the army follows, which has never given way, 
but has gone before in the strength of the Holy Spirit. To bear 
the burden of Tyre it is now the duty of valiant men to try their 
strength, and daily to contend ; spontaneously to be graced 
with the glories of the warfare. But as to the persons who are 
about to engage in this conflict, there is need of hardy cham- 
pions, not effeminate epicures. For it is not those who pamper 
their flesh with many luxuries who purchase God with their 
prayers. The wood of the cross, &c. \_as lefore.~\ r Fresh 
Philistines once more, the cross captured of Him who was con- 
demned, have taken the ark of God, the ark of the New Tes- 
tament, the substance of the ancient type, in succession the 
type of the substance. But as it is clear that these are the 
forerunners of Antichrist, to whom Christ would have resist- 
ance made, what answer at the coming of Christ is he to 
make who shall not have resisted them ? The wood of the 
cross, &c. The despiser of the cross is trampling on the cross, 
whence overwhelmed the faith sends forth groans. Who for 
vengeance does not shout aloud ? At the same value which 
each man sets upon the faith let him ransom the cross, if by 
the cross any one has been ransomed. Those who have but 
little silver, if found to be faithful, with pure faith let them 
be content. Sufficient provision for the journey is the body 
of the Lord for him who defends the cross. The wood of the 
cross, &c. Christ, on delivering himself to the torturer, has made 
a loan to the sinner ; if then, sinner, thou wilt not die for Him 
who died for thee, thou dost but poorly pay the debt to thy 
Creator. Well may he be indignant to whom thou dost refuse 
to bend, while, tortured in the wine-press of the cross as a 
victim for thee, to thee he extends his arms, and thou wilt not 
receive his embrace. The wood of the cross, &c. When thou 
hast listened to what is my request, take up thy cross and 
make thy vow and say, ' To Him do I commend myself, who 
gave His body and His life, as a victim to die for me.' The 
wood of the cross, &c." 

A Letter of the same pope to the prelates of churches. 

" Gregory, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to all 

prelates of churches to whom these presents shall come, health 

and the Apostolic benediction. Inasmuch as it is especially the 

duty of bishops to aid the afflicted and distressed, and God, 

75 This is the refrain of the composition. 



A.D. 1187. THE KING OP PORTUGAL RESISTS THE POPE'S LEGATE. 77 

albeit our merits are but deficient, has willed that we should be 
one of them, we are bound and are willing to use all due care, 
that no person through fortuitous circumstances, in conse- 
quence of a visit to the Church of Rome, should be deprived 
of the due results of the labour which he has expended in coming 
to us. Wherefore, it has come to pass, that we, wishing to 
have due regard for the expense which many have incurred, and 
to alleviate their labours, have, in conformity with the custom- 
ary clemency of the Apostolic See, thought fit to enact that 
the letters of our predecessor pope Urban, sent at any time pre- 
vious to three months before his decease, for the purpose of 
pronouncing judgment and putting an end to litigation, (sup- 
posing always that they do not contain anything to the mani- 
fest prejudice of any person, or any breach of equity), shall have 
the same effect in the time of our administration, which they 
would have had if he had been still living. Wherefore, waiving 
all exceptions as to the death of him who so directs, do what 
he has directed to be done, and let no one for an excuse of 
this sort, be compelled to have recourse to us in his disappoint- 
ment, after having placed full confidence in obtaining justice by 
these means. Given at Ferrara, on the sixth day before the 
calends of September." 

In the same year died pope Gregory the Eighth, in the 
month of December, after having held the papacy hardly two 
months, and was buried at Pisa. He was succeeded by Pau- 
linus, bishop of Palestrina, who was called pope Clement the 
Third. In the same year, nearly the whole of the city of Chi- 
chester was burnt, together with the cathedral of the see, and 
the houses of the bishop and canons. 

In the same year, Saladin laid siege to Jerusalem, and 
offered the people of that city a truce till the middle of the 
month of May, if they would permit him to plant his standard 
in the Tower of David, and remain there eight days. This 
being accordingly done, many of the Christians who had before 
stoutly resisted the Saracens, surrendered their castles and 
houses to Saladin. In the same year died Gilbert, bishop of 
London. 

In the same year, cardinal Jacinto, at this time legate of the 
whole of Spain, degraded many abbats, either because they de- 
served it, or prompted by his own determination. But on his 
attempting to degrade the bishop of Coimbra, Alphonso, king of 
Portugal, would not allow that bishop to be degraded, but im- 



78 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1188. 

mediately ordered the before- named cardinal to leave his king" 
dom, or else he would cut off his foot. On hearing this, the 
legate departed on his return to Some, and the bishop of Coim- 
bra remained in peace in his see. 

It is also worthy to be known, that the before-named Al- 
phonso, king of Portugal, took from the Pagans by force, and 
with mighty prowess, six cities, namely, Lisbon, Coimbra, the 
city of Ferenza, and a most excellent castle, which is called 
Santa Herena, 27 with many other castles besides. But while 
he was besieging the city of Silves, and had gained possession 
of it as far as the fortresses of the city, the Pagans who were 
in the fortresses made an arrangement with him, that if they 
should not have succours within six days, they would surren- 
der the forts to him. In the meantime, on the third day, 
having given his army leave to make a sally into the adjacent 
parts of the province, while he was asleep in his tent as being 
in perfect security, Ferdinand, king of Saint Jago, (who had mar- 
ried the daughter of the said king of Portugal) came in one 
direction with a large army, while the Saracens came in the 
other. At the approach of these, the king of Portugal, awaking 
from his sleep, fled on a swift horse, but, when going through 
the gate of the city, broke his thigh against the bar of the 
gate, and then, having passed right through the enemy, who 
pursued him twenty-five miles, and could not overtake him, 
he and his horse fell into a deep pit. Some shepherds, seeing 
this, dragged him out, and gave him up to king Ferdinand, 
to whom he gave for his ransom twenty-five towns which 
he had taken from him, besides fifteen sumpter horses laden 
with gold, and twenty chargers ; to other persons, also, who 
gave assistance to that king, that he might be the more speedily 
liberated, he made numerous presents. 

In the year of grace 1188, being the thirty-fourth year of 

the reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said 

king was at Caen in Normandy, on the day of the Nativity 

of our Lord ; going from which place, he went to Harfleur, 

with the intention of crossing over to England. On hearing of 

this, Philip, king of Francejevied a great army, shamelessly 

boasting that he wouldlaywHste Normandy and the other 

( lands of the king of England beyond sea, unless he should 

\ surrender to him Gisors with its appurtenances, or make his 

\\ son Eichard, earl of Poitou, many his sister Alice. 

77 Now Santarem. 



A.D. 1138. SUBSIDY FOR THE LAND OF JERUSALEM. 79 

The king of England, on hearing of this, returned into Nor- 
mandy, and a conference being held between him and the king 
of France, between Gisors and Trie, on the twelfth day be- 
fore the calends of February, being the day of Saint Agnes the 
Virgirr-attd Martyr, they met there, together with the arch- 
bishops, bishops, earls and barons of their kingdoms. At this 
interview, the archbishop of Trie was present, who, filled with 
the spirit of wisdom and of jmderstandingj in a wonderful man- 
neFpreachcd the word of God "before the kings and princes, and 
tumeTl their hearts to assuming the cross ; and those who before- 
preTcnTng,*witn tKe aiifoT (?6d," weFelSaW 



friends on that same day, and from his hands received the cross ; 
while at the same hour there appeared the sign of the cross 
above them in the heavens ; on beholding which miracle multi- 
tudes of persons rushed in whole troops to assume the cross. 

The kings before-named, on assuming the cross, for the pur- 
pose of-^fecognizing their various nations, adopted distin- 
guishing signs for themselves and their people. For the king 
of France and his people wore red crosses ; the king of England 
with his people white crosses ; while Philip, earl of Flanders, 
with his people, wore green crosses. After this, they departed, 
each to his own country, for the purpose of providing all neces- 
saries for themselves and the expedition. Accordingly, Henry 
king of England, after he had thus assumed the cross, came to 
Le Mans, where, on his arrival, he gave orders that every one 
should give a tenth part of his revenues in the present year, 
and of his chattels, by way of alms, as a subsidy to the land 
of Jerusalem, the following articles being excepted therefrom : 
the arms, horses, and garments of men-at-arms, and the horses, 
books, clothes, vestments, and all kinds of sacred vessels be- 
longing to the clergy, as also all precious stones belonging to 
either the clergy or laity ; excommunication having been first 
pronounced by the archbishops, bishops, and rural deans, 78 in 
each parish against every one who should not lawfully pay 
his before-mentioned tithe in the presence and at the assessment 
of those whose duty it was to be present thereat. 

Further, the said money was to be collected in each parish 
in the presence of the priest of the parish, the rural dean, one 
Templar, one Hospitaller, one member of the household of our 

78 It is not improbable that at this period these were the persons called 
" Archipresbyteri." At an earlier time, they were the bishop's deputies 
in the performance of the cathedral duties. 



80 ANNALS OF KOGEK DE HOVEDEX. A. D. 1188. 

lord the king, a clerk of the king, and a yeoman of the baron's 
household, his clerk, and the clerk of the bishop ; and if any 
one should give less, according to their conscientious assessment, 
than he ought, four or six lawful men of the parish were to 
be chosen, who, on oath, were to state the amount that he 
ought to have stated, on which he would be bound to add the 
amount by which it was deficient. Clerks, however, and knights 
who should assume the cross, were not to pay any such tithes ; 
but the revenues from their demesnes, and whatever their vas- 
sals should owe as their due, were to be collected by the above- 
named persons, and to be remitted to them untouched. 

The bishops, also, were by their letters in each parish of 
their respective dioceses, to cause notice to be given on the 
day of the Nativity, of Saint Stephen, and of Saint John, that 
each person was to collect the before- mentioned tithe due from 
him by the day of the Purification of the Virgin Mary, and, on 
the day after the same, was lawfully to pay it to those present of 
the persons named, at such place as should be appointed. 

In addition to this, it was decreed by our lord the pope, 
that whatever clerk or layman should assume the cross, he 
should, on the authority of God and of the holy Apostles, 
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, be free and absolved from all sins 
as to which he should have repented and made confession. It 
was also enacted by the kings, archbishops, bishops, and other 
princes of the land, that all those persons, both clerks and lay- 
men, who should not go on this expedition, should pay tithes of 
their revenues and moveables for the present year, and of all 
their chattels, both in gold and silver, and of all other things, 
with the exception of the garments, books, and vestments of 
the clerks and priests, and with the exception of the horses, 
arms, and clothing of men at arms, pertaining to the use ot 
their own persons. It was also enacted that all clerks, knights, 
and yeomen who should undertake the said expedition, should 
have the tenths of their lands and of their vassals, and should 
pay nothing for themselves. Burgesses, however, and villeins, 
who, without the permission of their superior lords, should 
assume the cross, were still to pay tithes. 

It was also enacted that no one should swear profanely, and 

that no one should play at games of chance or at dice ; and no 

one was after the ensuing Easter to wear beaver, or gris, 79 

or sable, or scarlet; and all were to be content with two 

79 Grey fur ; the word is used by Chaucer, 



X.D. 1188. OIiDI]S T A^CES AS TO ASSUMING THE CEOSS. 81 

dishes.^ JSTo one was to take any woman with him on the 
pilgrimage, unless, perhaps, some laundress to accompany him 
on foot, about whom no suspicion could be entertained ; and 
no person was to have his clothes in rags or torn. It was also 
enacted that whatever clerk or layman should, before assuming 
the cross, have mortgaged his revenues, he was to have the in- 
come of the present year in full, and after the expiration of 
the year the creditor was again to have the revenues thereof, 
upon the understanding, however, that the revenues which he 
should then receive should be reckoned towards payment of the 
debt, and that the debt, from the period of the debtor assuming 
the cross, should not bear interest, so long as the debtor should 
be absent on the pilgrimage. 

It was also enacted that all clerks and laymen who should 
set out on the said pilgrimage, should be at liberty legally 
to mortgage their incomes, whether ecclesiastical, or lay, or 
otherwise, from the Easter, when they should set out, for a 
period of three years, upon the understanding that the cre- 
ditors should, in whatever case they should be due to the 
creditors, take in full, for three years from the Easter before- 
mentioned, all the profits of the revenues which they should so 
hold in mortgage. It was also enacted that whoever should 
die on the pilgrimage, should leave his money which he must 
have taken with him on the pilgrimage, to be divided for the 
maintenance of his servants, for the assistance of the land of 
Jerusalem, and for the sustenance of the poor, according to the 
judgment of certain discreet men, who were to be appointed 
for the performance of that duty. 

All the above-mentioned statutes were framed and enacted 
at Le Mans, by Henry, king of England, in presence of his 
son Eichard, earl of Poitou, "William, archbishop of Tours, 
Baldwin, archbishop of Canterbury, Walter, archbishop of 
Rouen, and in presence of John, bishop of Evreux, Ealph, 
bishop of Anjou, E., bishop of Le Mans, and M., bishop of 
Nantes, as also in presence of Hugh de Nunant, bishop of 
Chester elect, Lisardus, bishop of Seez elect, and in presence 
of the barons of Anjou, Maine, and Touraine. 

These matters being accordingly arranged beforehand, the 
king of England appointed servants of his, clerks and laymen, 
to collect the before-mentioned tithes throughout all his terri- 

80 " Exempto," " except," follows this word : the passage appears to be 
mutilated. 

VOL. II. O 



82 ANNALS OF ROGER T)E IIOYEDEN. A .D. 1188. 

lories beyond sea, and shortly after crossed over and landed in 
England, at Winchelsea, on Saturday, the third day before the 
calends of February. In the meantime, Baldwin, archbishop 
of Canterbury, who had come to England before the king, 
consecrated Hugh de Nunant bishop of Coventry. 

Immediately upon his landing in England, our lord the 
king held a great council of bishops, abbats, earls, and barons, 
and many others, both clergy and laity, at Gaintington, where, 
in the hearing of the people, he caused all the above-mentioned 
ordinances to be proclaimed, which he had enacted on the sub- 
ject of assuming the cross. After they had been proclaimed, Bald- 
win, archbishop of Canterbury, and Gilbert, bishop of Rochester, 
his deputy, delivered wonderful sermons on the same day before 
the king and his chief men, on the subject of the Word of the 
Lord and the mysteries of salvation gained by the cross. 

After this, our lord the king sent his servants, the clerks 
and laymen, throughout all the counties of England, to collect 
the tithes according to his order made as above-mentioned 
in his territories beyond sea. But in each of the cities 
throughout England he caused all the richest men to be se- 
lected, namely, in London two hundred, in York one hun- 
dred, and in other cities according to their quantity and num- 
bers, and made them all appear before him on days and places 
named ; on which he received from them the tenths of their 
property, according to an estimate made by trustworthy men 
who were acquainted with their incomes and possessions ; and 
if he found any inclined to be contumacious, he immediately 
caused them to be imprisoned and kept in irons until they had 
paid the last farthing. He did the same with the Jews in his 
territories, and received from them an immense sum of money. 

After this, he sent Hugh, bishop of Durham, and others of 
the clergy and laity, to William, king of the Scots, to collect 
the tithes in his kingdom ; on hearing which the king of Scot- 
land met them between Werk and Brigham, in Lothian, and 
would not allow them to enter his kingdom to collect the 
tithes, but offered to give to his liege lord the king of England 
five thousand marks of silver instead of the above-named tithes, 
and on condition that he might have his castles back again ; 
but to this the king of England would not agree. 

Philip, king of the Franks, also caused the tenths of the in- 
comes and property of his subjects to be collected throughout 
all his territories. In the same year, Richard, earl of Poitou, 



A.T>. 1188. THE EAKL OF POITOU INVADES FHANCE. 83 

Raymond, count of Saint Gilles, Aimar, count of Angouleine, 
Geoffrey de Rancon, Geoffrey de Lezivant, 81 and nearly all 
the more powerful men in Poitou, engaged in war, all against 
the before-named Richard, and he against all; he, however, 
was victorious. Among other persons whom he took prisoners 
in the territory of the count of Saint Gilles, he captured Peter 
Seillun, by whose advice the before-named count of Saint Gilles 
had taken some traders of the territory of the earl of Poitou, and 
had done many injuries to him and his lands. Accordingly, earl 
Eichard placed this Peter in close confinement and in most rigor- 
ous custody. The count of Saint Gilles being able on no terms 
to ransom him, he set spies throughout his cities and castles, to 
arrest any persons they could find belonging to the household of 
the king of England, or of earl Richard his son ; and it so hap- 
pened that, a few days after, as Robert Poer and his brother 
Ralph, two knights of the household and retinue of our lord the 
king, were passing through the territories of the count of Saint 
Gilles, from Saint Jago, 62 which they had been visiting on a pil- 
grimage, the men of the count of Saint Gilles laid hands on 
them, and carried them in chains to the count ; on which, 
the count said to them, " Unless Richard, the earl of Poitou, 
delivers up to me my servant Peter, and sets him at liberty, 
you shall not escape from my hands." On hearing this, earl 
Richard made answer, that he would neither make entreaties 
or give money for their ransom, inasmuch as the respect due to 
their character as pilgrims, ought to suffice for their libera- 
tion. 

Upon this, the king of France ordered them to be set at 
liberty, not tor his love or respect for the king of England, or 
for his son Richard, but out of respect and esteem for Saint 
James the Apostle. However, earl Richard entered the terri- 
tories of the count of Saint Gilles with a great army, laid it 
waste with fire and sword, and besieged and took his' castles in 
the neighbourhood of Toulouse. Upon this, the king of the 
Franks, hearing the lamentations of the people of Toulouse, 
sent his envoys to England to the king of England, to en- 
quire if the mischief which was being done by his son 
Richard was being done by his direction, and to demand 
reparation for the same. To this the king of England made 
answer, that his son Richard had done none of these things by 

81 Roger of Wendover calls him " de Liziniac." 
83 Saint Jago of Compostella, in Spain. 

G 2 



84 ANNALS OF KOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1188. 

his wish or advice, and that the said Bichard had sent word to 
him, by John, archbishop of Dublin, that be had done nothing 
in respect thereof, but by the advice of the king of France. 

In the same year, the Patriarch of the city of Antioch wrote 
to the king of England to the following effect : 

The Letter of the Patriarch of Antioch to Henry, king of 
England. 

" By the grace of the Holy God, and of the Apostolic See, the 
Patriarch of Antioch, to Henry, by the same grace, the most 
illustrious king of the English, his beloved lord and friend 
may he govern in Him, through whom kings govern. With 
tears and with sighs by these presents we announce to your ex- 
cellency, the dire and inexpressible grief which we feel for the 
unexpected and terrible disaster that has lately befallen us, or, 
indeed, all Christendom we may rather say. Let all the world 
listen, with yourself, to this our grief, that it may know whence 
proceed our tears and our lamentations, or what is their end. 
On the fourth day of the month of July, in the year of the 
Word made incarnate one thousand one hundred and eighty- 
seven, Saladin, having gathered together a multitude of our 
foreign foes, engaged with those of the Christians who were in 
the land of Jerusalem, and, having routed their forces, triumphed 
over them to his heart's content ; the vivifying Cross being 
exposed to the ridicule of the Turks ; the king being taken 
prisoner, and the Master of the Temple, as also prince Bay- 
mond, being slain by this accursed Saladin with his own hands ; 
while bishops, Templars, and Hospitallers, in all a multitude 
of nearly twelve hundred, and thirty thousand foot were 
slaughtered in the defence of the Holy Cross, besides a con- 
siderable number who were afterwards slain, or made pri- 
soners in the cities which he took. After this, being quite 
satiated with the blood of the Christians, he took Tiberias and 
fortified it ; and then, he had laid siege to the noble city of 
Acre, to Caiphas, Ca3sarea, Joppa, Nazareth, Sebaste, Neapolis, 
Lydda, Bamatha, Assur, Hebron, Bethlehem, and, last of all, 
the Holy City of Jerusalem, and the Sepulchre of our Lord, 
vowing that he would cut it into pieces and throw its frag- 
ments into the deep. As for the rest, fearful anxiety possesses 
us every day and every hour, amid our doubts whether these 
various places may not be subjugated to his dominion, and 
their inhabitants slain or made captive, especially as it is well 



A.D. 1188. LETTER OF KING HENRY. 85 

known that they are deprived of provisions, horses, muni- 
tions of war, and defenders. By reason of this mighty 
anger and indignation of God poured forth upon us from above, 
with tears we eat our bread, and are alarmed with dreadful 
apprehensions, lest the Sepulchre of our Lord may be delivered 
to strange nations, and lest we few, who still remain in this 
Christian land, may, if succours are tardy in their arrival, and 
our enemies press on, have to bow our necks to the swords of 
the smiters. Now as, in prudence, counsel, and riches, you 
surpass the other kings of the West, your aid we have always 
looked for; and we therefore pray that you will hasten to bring 
your powerful succour to the Holy Land. If you delay so to do, 
then the Sepulchre of the Lord, with the noble city of Antioch, 
and the territory adjacent thereto, will exist as an everlasting 
reproach to foreign nations. Be mindful of your glories and of 
your name, that so, God, who has raised you to a throne, may 
through you be exalted ; and if youare ready to give your assist- 
ance to so worthy an object, either coming yourself to us, or send- 
ing to us the wished-for succours, then to you, after God, will be 
imputed the liberation of the Holy Land. "We ourselves, with 
all possible contrition, and smiting our guilty breast, cry unto 
God that He will give to you both the will and the ability of 
thus acting to the praise and glory of His name ; wherefore, at 
this, the last gasp of life, in your clemency lend your aid to the 
Holy Land and to ourselves. Otherwise, we who, subjected to 
various perils, have been afflicted with a lingering illness, shall 
have nothing to expect but immediate death for ourselves, and 
that after the blood of the Christians has been poured forth, 
the Sepulchre of our Lord, with the noble city of Antioch, 
and the country thereto adjacent, will, to the eternal disgrace of 
foreign nations, be captured. We do further entreat, that you 
will receive our recommendations of our dearly beloved brethren, 
the bishops of Gabalus and Valenia, whom on this matter we 
have despatched to you. Farewell." 

The Letter of Henry, king of England, to the Patriarchs of Je- 
rusalem and Antioch, and Raymond, prince of Antioch. 

11 To the venerable fathers in Christ, and his friends, A. and 
E., the Patriarchs of Antioch and Jerusalem, and to Raymond, 
prince of Antioch, and to all the Christian people of the Church 
in the East. Henry, by the same grace, king of England, duke 
of Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, health and 
consolation in Christ. Inasmuch as, our sins so requiring it, 



86 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEEEN. A.D. 1188. 

the Lord has in our times visited our iniquities with the rod of 
His vengeance, and has, by the Divine judgment, permitted the 
land which was redeemed with His own blood to be polluted by 
the hands of the unbelievers ; it is therefore becoming, that we r 
and all who belong to the Christian religion, and are professors of 
that name, should attend with pious zeal to the desolate state of 
the said land, and make it our endeavour with all our might to 
impart thereto our aid and counsel. "Wherefore, as A., by the 
grace of God, the venerable bishop of Yalenia, has, with a profu- 
sion of tears and deep sighs, disclosed unto us the griefs and 
calamities with which the Eastern Church is afflicted, the greater 
the danger we behold impending, the more strenuous and im- 
mediate is the assistance which we are prompted by compassion 
to give. Having, therefore, faith and confidence in Him, who 
never forsakes those who put their trust in Him, act manfully, 
and let your hearts be strengthened in the Lord; for we believe 
that now is the prophecy of Isaiah fulfilled ; " Jerusalem, lift up 
thine eyes round about and see ; all they gather themselves to- 
gether, they come to thee ; Then thou shalt see, and flow 

together, and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged ; because 
the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the 
forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee." 83 For now, the 
Lord, who looks down upon the sons of men, that He may see 
if man is of good understanding or seeks God, has so aroused 
the feelings of the Christians, which were before asleep, to His 
own service, that every one who is of the Lord's side, has now 
girded his sword to his thigh, and each one reckons himself as 
blessed and faithful, who leaves his father and his mother and all 
things besides, that he may be able to avenge the injuries done to 
Christ, and to the Holy Land. Wherefore, be ye firm, and you 
shall speedily see the assistance of the Lord which is now prepar- 
ing for you. For sooner than you could believe, such vast mul- 
titudes of the faithful will by land and sea come to your rescue, as 
' Eye hath not seen nor ear heard, nor hath it entered into the 
heart of man to conceive ;' and whom the Lord has prepared 
for the deliverance of your land. Among other princes as well, 
I and my son, rejecting the pomps of this world, and setting 
at nought all its pleasures, and all things that belong to this 
world being laid aside, will shortly, by the assistance of the 
Lord, visit you in our own persons. Farewell." 

In the same year, Philip, king of France, levying a large 
* 3 Is. Ix 4, 5. 






A.D. 1188. HOSTILITIES OF THE KING OF FBA.XCE. 87 

army, entered Berry, and took Chateau Raoul, which the 
burgesses surrendered to him ; and, proceeding thence, nearly 
the whole of Berry was delivered up to him, with the excep- 
tion of Luches, and the other castles, demesnes of the king 
of England. Buchard of Vendome also surrendered to the 
king of France, with his lands and castles, and became his 
adherent. On the king of England making enquiry why this 
was done, he was told that the king of France was acting thus 
in revenge for the injuries that Itichard, earl of Poitou, had 
done to himself and the count of Saint Gilles. Having, there- 
fore, held counsel with his trusty advisers, the king of Eng- 
land sent Baldwin, archbishop of Canterbury, and Hugh, 
bishop of Lincoln, to the king of France ; that they might, 
at least, by words and exhortations, assuage the anger and in- 
dignation which, in his mind, he had conceived against him. 

These prelates being unable to succeed in their object, 
the king of England crossed over from England to Nor- 
mandy, and landed at Harneur on the fifth day before the ides 
of July; and going thence to Alenson, levied a great army 
in Normandy and the rest of his territories. Many of the 
Welch also accompanied him to Normandy as mercenaries. 
In the meantime, liichard, earl of Poitou, having raised a 
considerable force, marched into Berry ; on hearing of whose 
approach, the king of France gave Chateau Raoul into the 
charge of William des Barres, and he himself returned into 
France. On this, earl Richard ravaged the lands of the earls 
and barons who had given in their adhesion to the king of 
France, and took many of them prisoners. The king of France, 
however, in consequence of the arrival of the king of Eng- 
land, did not dare to move out of France, but directed his 
army to lay waste the territories of the king of England. 

On this, Philip, bishop of Beauvais, entered Normandy with 
an army, and ravaged with fire Blangeville, a town belonging 
to the earl of Auch, and Aumaiie, a castle of William, earl of 
Mandeville, together with the adjoining provinces. The king 
of France also burned the town of Trou, and the whole of the 
fortress there, but could not gain possession thereof; how- 
ever, he took forty of the knights of the king of England. On 
the other hand, liichard, earl of Poitou, took an extremely 
well fortified place, which is called Lcs Bodies, beyond Trou, 
towards Vendome, and captured in that place twenty-five 
knights and sixty yeomen. 



88 ANNALS OF EOGEB. DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1188. 

On this, Henry, king of England, sent Walter, archbishop 
of Eouen, John, bishop of Evreux, and William Marshal to 
the king of France, to demand reparation for the injuries which 
he and his people had done him ; and if he should refuse to re- 
store what he had taken away, he defied him. To this the king 
of France made answer that he would not desist from his pur- 
pose until the whole of Berry, and the whole of the Norman 
vexin should have been subjected to himself and to his kingdom. 
Having, therefore, now got an excuse, by reason of the injuries 
done to him by the king of France, Henry, king of England, 
levying a large army, entered the lands of the king of France, 
on the Tuesday after the beheading of Saint John the Baptist, 
and, burning many villages, rode the same day to the town 
of Mante, where the king of France was said to be. Here 
William des Barres and Drago de Merlou, accompanied by a few 
French knights, met Eichard, earl of Poitou, and William, 
earl of Mandeville, and some others of the household of the 
king of England ; upon which, William des Barres was taken 
prisoner by earl Eichard, and given in charge to his men ; but 
while the people of the king of England were intent on other 
matters, the said William des Barres made his escape upon his 
page's horse. 

On the Wednesday following, the king of England made 
a halt at Ivery, on which earl Eichard set out for Berry, pro- 
mising the king his father that he would serve him well and 
faithfully. On the Thursday after, being the feast of Saint 
Gilles, the Welch troopers of the king of England entered the 
territories of the king of France, and burned Daneville, the castle 
of Simon Daneth, together with many villages, and carried off 
considerable booty, after slaying many men. The same day, 
earl William de Mandeville burned the town of Saint Clair, 
which belongs to the demesnes of the king of France, and laid 
waste a very fine shrubbery which the king himself had planted. 

On the same day, the king of England, having with a few 
knights entered the territories of the king of France, that he 
might ascertain the weak points of those parts, there came to 
him envoys from the king of France to sue for peace, and 
offer him the lands which he had taken from him in Berry. 
Upon this, a conference was held between them at Gisors, 
where they were unable to come to terms as to making 
peace ; the king of France, aroused to anger and indignation 
thereat, cut down a very fine elm situate between Gisors 



A.D. 1188. TRANSACTIONS IN NORMANDY. 89 

and Trie, wnere conferences had been usually held between 
the kings of France and the dukes of Normandy, vowing that 
thenceforth there should be no more conferences held there. 
The earl of Flanders, however, and earl Theobald, and other 
earls and barons of the kingdom of France, laid down their 
arms, saying that they would never bear arms against Chris- 
tians until they should have returned from their pilgrimage to 
Jerusalem. 

Upon this, the king of France, being deprived of the aid of 
his allies, requested an interview with the king of England ; 
which being acceded to, it was accordingly held at Chatillon, on 
the morrow of the day of Saint Faith, where terms of peace 
were to have been agreed to between them, as follows ; the 
king of France was to restore to the king of England what- 
ever he had seized in his territories after the truce was broken, 
and earl Eichard was to restore to the count of Saint Gilles 
whatever he had taken from him by force of arms. The king 
of France also, prompted by his faithlessness, demanded of the 
king of England the castle of Pascy in pledge ; and, because the 
king of England refused to assent thereto, they separated 
mutually dissatisfied ; and the king of France, leaving the place, 
took the castle of Palud ; then passing through Chateau 
Eaoul, he led thence a Rout of Brabanters as far as Bourges, 
promising them ample pay; but on arriving at Bourges they 
were seized, and the king took from them their horses, arms, 
and the whole of their money, and turned them adrift un- 
armed and stripped. 

Earl Richard, however, made an offer to the king of France 
to come to his court and to take his trial as to the matters 
that had taken place between him and the count of Saint Gilles ; 
that so at least peace might be made between the king of 
France and the king of England, his father ; a thing which 
greatly displeased the king, his father. 

After this conference, JSfevolun Fitz Urse de Fretteval 
swore fealty to the king of England, and faithful service against 
all men ; on which the king of England secured to him by 
charter the honors of Lavardin and Faye ; he also gave to the 
king of England his son as a hostage, and many of the sons of 
his relations. 



90 AXNALS OF BOGEE DE HOYEDEN. A.D. 1188. 

The Letter of Terricius, Master of the Temple, to Henry, ling 
of England. 

"To his most dearly beloved lord, Henry, by the grace of 
God, the illustrious king of the English, duke of Normandy 
and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, the brother Terricius, formerly 
Grand Master of the house of the Temple at Jerusalem, health 
in Him who gives health unto kings. Be it known to you that 
Jerusalem, with the Tower of David, has been surrendered to 
Saladin. The Syrians, also, have possession of the Sepulchre 
until the fourth day after the feast of Saint Michael, and 
Saladin himself has given permission to ten of the brethren of 
the Hospital to remain in the Hospital for one year to attend the 
sick. The brethren of the Hospital of Bellivier are still making 
a stout resistance to the Saracens, and have .already taken two 
caravans of the Saracens; by the capture of one of which they 
have manfully recovered all the arms, utensils, and provisions 
that were in the castle of Faba, which had been destroyed by 
the Saracens. The following places also still show resistance to 
Saladin, Cragus of Montreal, Montreal, Saphet of the Temple, 
Cragus of the Hospital, Margat, Castel Blanco, the terri- 
tory of Tripolis and the territory of Antioch. On the cap- 
ture of Jerusalem, Saladin ordered the Cross to be taken 
down from the Temple of our Lord, and had it carried about 
the city for two days in public view, and beaten with sticks. 
After this he ordered the Temple of our Lord to be washed 
inside and out with rose-water, from top to bottom, and his 
laws to be promulgated with regard to it in four different 
places amid wondrous acclamations. 81 From the feast of Saint 
Martin until the Circumcision of our Lord he besieged Tyre, 
while thirteen stone engines day and night were incessantly 
hurling stones against it. At the Vigil of Saint Sylvester, our 
lord the Marquis Conrad arranged his knights and foot- soldiers 
along the city walls, and, having armed seventeen galleys and 
ten smaller vessels, with the assistance of the house of the 
Hospital and of the brethren of the Temple, fought against the 
galleys of Saladin, and, routing them, took eleven, and captured 
the high admiral of Alexandria together with eight other 
admirals, slaying vast numbers of the Saracens. The rest of 
the galleys of Saladin, escaping from the hands of the Chris- 
tians, fled to the army of the Saracens ; on which, by his com- 

84 He perhaps alludes to the opinions expressed by Mahomet in the 
Koran, as to the sanctity of the Temple. 



A. D. 1188. LETTEB. OF POPE CLEMENT. 91 

mand being drawn on shore, Saladin with his own hand had 
them reduced to ashes and embers ; and, moved with exces- 
sive grief, after cutting off the ears and tail of his horse, rode 
upon it in the sight of all through the whole army. Farewell." 
In the same year, John, bishop of Dunkeld, after the Purifi- 
cation of the Virgin Mary, returned from the court of our lord 
the pope, Hugh, bishop of Saint Andrew's, having been de- 
posed, bringing with him letters from our lord the pope to the 
following effect : 

The Letter of pope Clement to the bishops of Glasgow and 
Aberdeen. 

" Clement, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his venerable brethren Jocelyn, bishop of Glasgow, Mat- 
thew, bishop of Aberdeen, and to his dearly beloved sons 
Everard, abbat of Melrose, and Bertram, prior of Coldingham, 
health and the Apostolic benediction. Lest what has been 
done might cause scruples by reason of distrust, it is proper that 
the same should be committed to writing, and be introduced 
by a public and truthful intimation to the notice of those whom 
it may seem to interest. Now we bear in mind that pope 
Urban, of blessed memory, our predecessor, enjoined Hugh, 
formerly styled bishop of Saint Andrew's, to appear in his 
presence on a certain day, to make answer in the Apostolic 
court, respecting the dispute which existed between him and 
our venerable brother, bishop John, under penalty of excom- 
munication if he should neglect so to do. But, inasmuch as 
he was conscious of his deeds, and dreaded the result of the 
investigation, he contumaciously refused to appear ; wherefore, 
for this and for many other things which, according to fre- 
quent reports, had created scandal to the Church of God, with 
the advice and consent of our brethren, we have adjudged 
him, on the authority of the Apostolic See, to be for ever re- 
moved from the bishopric of Saint Andrew's, and suspended 
from the episcopal office until such time as the Apostolic See 
shall think fit to determine otherwise respecting him, absolving 
those subject to him from the fealty which they have been 
bound to pay to him ; and further, inasmuch as the rules of the 
holy canons forbid that churches should be deprived too long 
of the pastoral control, we do command your discretion, by 
these Apostolic writings, diligently on our behalf to advise 
our dearly-beloved sons, the chapter of Saint Andrew's, to 
choose for themselves such a bishop and pastor, as may be 



92 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOYEDEN- A.D. 1188. 

able worthily to enjoy the dignities of the episcopal office ; 
and more especially, you are to labour to induce them, as 
far as in you lies, to make choice, without any scruple or 
difficulty, of the before-named bishop John, a man of good cha- 
racter, and for his virtues acceptable to us and our brethren, 
for the governance and prelacy of that church. And if all of 
you shall not be able to take part in the performance hereof, 
then any two of you may carry out the same. Given at 
Pisa, on the seventeenth day before the calends of February, in 
the sixth year of the indie tion." 

The Letter of the same pope to William, king of the Scots. 

" Clement, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
William, the illustrious king of the Scots, health and the 
Apostolic benediction. "We are of opinion that it must shock 
the eyes of the majesty of God in no small degree if we leave 
without due correction those excesses of prelates which, with 
a safe conscience, we may not, through carelessness, neglect. 
Wherefore, inasmuch as pope Urban, of blessed memory, our 
predecessor, commanded Hugh, formerly styled bishop of Saint 
Andrew's, under pain of excommunication, to appear in his 
presence on a certain day, to make answer in the Apostolic 
court respecting the dispute which existed between him and our 
venerable brother bishop John ; but he, being conscious of his 
own deeds, and not without reason dreading the result of 
the investigation, through contumacy, neglected to come, for 
this and for many other things, which, according to frequent 
reports, have caused scandal to the Church of God, with the 
advice and consent of our brethren, we have adjudged him, on 
the authority of the Apostolic See, to be for ever removed 
from the bishopric of Saint Andrew's, and suspended from the 
episcopal office until such time as the Apostolic See shall think 
fit to determine otherwise respecting him, absolving those 
subject to him from the fealty which they have been bound to 
pay him. For although, so far as with God's assistance we may, 
we firmly purpose to consult your honor and your interest ; 
and, in the case of the before-named Hugh, the Roman court, 
not without the censure of many, has hitherto paid deference 
to your royal highness, still, inasmuch as the reports about 
Mm have, on undoubted authority, reached our ears, we have 
been unable, under any pretext, by closing our eyes thereto, any 
longer to forbear noticing his errors ; for which reason we do 



A.D. 1188. LETTER OF THE POPE TO THE KING OF ENGLAND. 93 

not think that anything has been done in his respect as to which 
your royal feelings ought on any account to he incensed. 
Therefore we ask your duteousness with prayers and affec- 
tionate entreaties, that you will receive, on our recommendation, 
the above-named bishop John, (whom we and our brethren 
love with sincerity of heart for his virtues,) with the bowels 
of brotherly love, as you respect the Apostolic See and our- 
selves ; and that laying aside the offence which, if any, in 
your indignation you have conceived against him, you will 
treat him in all respects with your royal clemency and kindness. 
And further, it is our belief that from his diligence and probity 
much benefit will accrue, by the aid of God, to yourself and 
your kingdom ; and it will always be a subject of gratification 
to us, if our prayers shall with the royal ears have the desired 
effect. Given at Pisa, on the seventeenth day before the 
calends of February, in the sixth year of the indiction." 

The Letter of the same pope to Henry, king of England. 

1 ' Clement, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to Henry, 
the illustrious king of the English, health and the Apostolic be- 
nediction. When your royal excellency, authority, and power 
has received prayers preferred by the Apostolic See, to which 
it is expedient effect should be given both for preserving the 
churches in their present state, and for ensuring the salvation 
of many, it is the duty of your royal highness diligently to listen 
thereto ; and the more strenuously and zealously to use all en- 
deavours to give effect to the same, the more certain it is that 
duteous attention thereto, and the diligent execution thereof, 
equally concerns your kingly glory and your salvation. Hence 
it is that we have thought fit that our Apostolic letters and 
prayers should be addressed to your serene highness in behalf 
of our venerable brother John, bishop of Saint Andrew's, with 
full confidence, therein entreating and advising, and for the 
remission of the sins of all, enjoining, your exalted royal high- 
ness with all the affection we possibly can, that, in considera- 
tion of your veneration for Saint Peter and ourselves, as also in 
consideration of the persecutions which there is no doubt he 
has endured, you will earnestly advise William, the illustrious 
king of the Scots, our most dearly-beloved son in Christ, and 
induce him, and if necessary compel him with that royal autho- 
rity in which you are his superior, and which has been con- 
ceded by him to your royal highness, to cease, by setting 



94 AOTTALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1188. 

aside every pretext for the same, all the rancour of his indigna- 
tion which, through the malice of certain whisperers, he has 
entertained against the said bishop, thus shewing due regard for 
his own royal dignity and the healthful works of piety ; and, 
for the future to allow him quietly and without challenge to 
hold the diocese of Saint Andrew's, which, by the common 
counsel and consent of his brethren, the Supreme Pontiff has 
confirmed unto him for ever ; and this the more especially, 
as he is ready to prove himself obedient and faithful in all 
respects to his royal majesty so far as shall be consistent with 
reason. Given at Pisa, on the seventeenth day before the 
calends of February, in the sixth year of the indiction. 

The Letter of pope Clement in behalf of John, bishop of Saint 
Andrew's. 

" Clement, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to alL 
the clergy of the see of Saint Andrew's, health and the Apos- 
tolic benediction. Although in doubtful matters some per- 
sons may be able to show their subtlety or artfulness, still, 
when all scruples and grounds for doubt are removed, and by 
manifest signs the tracks of truth are disclosed, all devious 
paths ought to be entirely forgotten, and the traces of the right 
path to be both sought for and observed ; lest, which God for- 
bid, acting otherwise, and persisting in their own contumacy, 
after the scourges of this world, and its condign punishments, 
they may be inwardly destroyed by the everlasting punishments 
of eternal death. Wishing, therefore, in our paternal anxiety 
to provide for your salvation, your interests, and your quietude, 
we do, by these Apostolic writings, command and order, and 
in virtue of your obedience, enjoin the whole of you, within 
fifteen days after the receipt hereof, humbly and duteously to 
receive as your father and pastor our venerable brother John, 
your bishop, who has been canonically elected to the pontifical 
office, and, all pretexts whatsoever laid aside, not to hesitate 
henceforth to pay due reverence and obedience to his whole- 
some advice and commands ; being hereby informed that if, after 
Hugh, the man who was formerly styled the bishop, was re- 
moved from the dignity of your bishopric by the Church of Rome, 
or after his decease, 85 the above-named John, your bishop, still 
surviving, you shall have by chance made choice of any other 
bishop, we do, by the Apostolic authority, pronounce that elec- 
85 In case that may have happened before the letter reaches the clergy. 



A.D. 1188. LETTER OF POPE CLEMEST. 95 

tion to be null and void. But if, which may God forbid, you have 
presumed, by the persuasion of the enemy of mankind, to be 
guilty of any conspiracy against the said bishop John, then 
both yourselves, as also the whole see, we are determined to 
subject to sentence of interdict until such time as. acknow- 
ledging your transgressions, you shall have re turned to obedience 
to the commands oi: the said bishop John. Given at Pisa, on the 
seventeenth day before the calends of February, in the sixth 
year of the indiction." 

Another Letter of the same pope on the same subject. 

" Clement, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his 
venerable brethren, Jocelyn, bishop of Glasgow, Matthew, 
bishop of Aberdeen, and Richard, bishop of Moray, and his 
dearly-beloved sons Ernulph, abbat of Melrose, Hugh, abbat 
of Newbottle, and the abbats of Holyrood, Stirling, and Scone, 
health and the Apostolic benediction. Although it is our belief 
that, even without our advice, it is incumbent upon you to give 
your serious and diligent attention, in conformity with the duties 
of your office, to those things which concern a good life and 
conduce to the salvation of souls, still, we have thought fit, 
by these Apostolic letters, to exhort your diligence to manifest 
greater anxiety in these respects; to the end that the more 
fervently you devote yourselves to those works so worthy of 
all praise, the more healthful it may be for you in these re- 
spects to apply yourself with all diligence to comply with the 
exhortations of the Apostolic See. And whereas it is clear 
that some prelates of churches must, together with those who 
have been offended, submit to the heat of persecution, and be 
weak with those who are weak, in obedience tothe rule laid down 
by the Apostle 86 how great the persecutions which the church of 
Saint Andrew's has lately sustained, how great the calamities 
and oppressions it has endured ! how much, also, has it been dis- 
turbed and shaken of late under the shadow of the indignation 
of his royal highness ! and, above all, how many and how great 
the dangers which our brother John, the bishop of Saint Andrew's, 
has endured ! how many the perils to which he has been exposed, 
and what have been his labours in preserving the liberties of the 
church entrusted to his care, and confirmed to him by ourselves 
and our two predecessors ! butinasmuch as all this is well known 
to you, it seems needless to reiterate the same to your hearing. 
66 Alluding to the words in 1 Cor. ix. 21, 22. 



96 ANNALS OF EOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1188. 

But inasmuch as it is universally agreed upon as being most ex- 
pedient, it befits us to give all due attention both to the king's 
salvation, to the reformation of the state of the before-named 
church, and to the preservation of peace for the bishop himself, we 
deem it proper that we should employ your circumspection to 
aid us therein ; therefore we do, by these Apostolic writings, com- 
mand and enjoin your discretion, that, on receiving these our 
letters, meeting together, as befits prudent and discreet men, 
you will repair to the presence of our most dearly -beloved son in 
Christ, William, the illustrious king of Scotland, and diligently 
advise, and urgently press him to put an end to the ran- 
cour of his indignation against the before-named bishop, and 
herein not to despise the Church of Rome, which has now for a 
long time deferred to the wishes of his serene highness, but 
without delay wholesomely to obey and humbly to assent to the 
advice of it and of yourselves, in such manner as befits 
his royal glory and his salvation, and to allow the before- 
named bishop to hold in peace the above-mentioned diocese 
of Saint Andrew's ; inasmuch as he is bound by the duties 
of the kingly dignity not to disperse the churches with their 
shepherds, but rather to cherish them ; not to despise them, 
but to love them ; not to persecute them, but to defend them. 
But if, which God forbid, he shall, to the peril of his own 
salvation, think proper to resist this Apostolic advice, then, by 
the Apostolic authority, you are to inform him, that, within 
twenty days, without any obstacle arising from appeal, sentence 
of interdict will be pronounced by you against the kingdom of his 
highness, and against his own person, as also all the abettors of 
his majesty. Those also who have remained obedient to Hugh, 
and have given him encouragement in his obstinacy, after the 
Apostolic See had removed him for ever from the diocese of 
Saint Andrew's, and had pronounced sentence of excommunica- 
tion against him, you are to smite with a like sentence, and, 
publicly pronouncing them to be excommunicated, are to cause 
them to be strictly avoided by others, until they shall have 
returned to obedience to the Church, and sought the benefit 
of absolution from the said bishop : and further, you are, in con- 
formity with the usage of the Church, to make purification and 
sane tification of the altars and chalices, with which the said Hugh 
has, since he has been placed under sentence of excommuni- 
cation, celebrated Divine service. You are also in like manner 
to repair to the church of Saint Andrew's, and, convoking the 



A.n. 1188. PESTILENCE AT EOME. 97 

brethren to enter the chapter-house, and make diligent enquiry 
as to the order and state of the church ; and if you shall find 
anything in the said church changed by the before-named 
Hugh, or enacted by him, you are, of our authority, to place 
it again in its proper state ; and if anything therein shall stand 
in need of correction, you are zealously to endeavour to change 
the same for the better. But if, and may it not be so, you 
shall find any of the canons reluctant to receive their before- 
named pastor humbly and devoutly, and contumaciously inclined, 
you are most earnestly to advise them to shew due respect and 
obedience to him, their father, and to cease to persist in their 
malignant and damnable purpose. And if they shall continue 
to be contumacious, you are to suspend them both from their 
duties and their benefices, and to check them by the ban of . 
excommunication, under which you are to hold them, until 
they shall have listened to the mandates and advice of the 
Church. And if all of you shall not be able to take part in 
the performance hereof, then let the rest carry out the same. 
Given at Pisa, on the seventeenth day before the calends of 
February, in the sixth year of the indiction." 

On hearing these things, the king of Scotland, being pre- 
vailed upon by the counsels and entreaties of his people, re- 
ceived the before-named bishop John into his favour, and 
allowed him peaceably to hold the bishopric of Dunkeld, and all 
the revenues which he had held before his consecration, on 
condition, however, that the said John should give up all claim 
to the bishopric of Saint Andrew's. Accordingly, the bishop, 
though protected in the assertion of his claim by the before- 
mentioned letters of our lord the pope, obeyed the king's will in 
all respects, and released the bishopric of Saint Andrew's from 
all claims of his, throwing himself upon the mercy of God and of 
the king, well knowing that " Better is a dry morsel and quiet- 
ness therewith, than a house full of sacrifices with strife." 87 

Hugh, however, who was formerly styled bishop of Saint 
Andrew's, on being degraded and excommunicated, proceeded to 
Rome. Here, having given security to abide by the decision 
of the Church, he was, in his clemency, absolved by our lord 
the pope, but only survived a few days. For, in the month of 
August, there was such a great pestilence at Rome and in its 
territories, that many of the cardinals and most wealthy men in 
the city died, with a countless multitude of the lower classes : 
87 Prov. xvii. 1. 

TOL. II. H 



98 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1188. 

on which occasion this Hugh, with nearly the whole of his house- 
hold, and Henry, the bishop elect of Dol, with his household, 
died there. On this, the king of Scotland gave the bishopric of 
Saint Andrew's to Roger, son of the earl of Leicester, his 
chancellor, John, bishop of Dunkeld, being present, and making 
no objection thereto. The king of Scotland also gave his 
chancellorship to Hugh de Roxburgh, his clerk. 

In the same year, on the twelfth day before the calends of 
October, being the third day of the week, and the vigil of Saint 
Matthew the Apostle and Evangelist, nearly the whole of the 
town of Beverley, with the noble church of Saint John the 
Archbishop, was burnt. In the same year, master John Gil- 
bert, of Sempringham, 88 first founder and pastor of the order 
which is called the order of Sempringham, departed this life, 
and was buried in his church at Sempringham, among the nuns. 

In the same year, Gilbert de Ogleston, a brother of the 
Temple, who had been elected and appointed by our lord the 
king of England, together with some others, clerks and laymen, 
to collect the tenths, was detected in the mal-appropriation 
thereof; but as the king could not, by the ordinary mode of 
trial, pass sentence upon him, he handed him over to the 
Master of the Temple, at London, in order that he might be 
dealt with according to the statutes of his order. On this 
the master of the Temple placed him in irons, and inflicted 
on him various punishments ; but as to what those various 
punishments were, it is for you to enquire, who feel an interest 
in the concerns of that order. 

In the same year, a thing took place at Dunstable, in Eng- 
land, very wonderful to be mentioned and glorious to be seen, 
on the vigil of Saint Lawrence the Martyr, being the second 
day of the week ; for, about the ninth hour of the day, the 
heavens opened, and, in the sight of many, both clergy and 
laity, a cross appeared, very long and of wonderful magnitude, 
and it appeared as though Jesus Christ was fastened thereto 
with nails, and crowned with thorns ; His hands also were 
stretched out on the cross, and the wounds of His hands, and 
feet, and sides were bloody, and His blood was flowing down, 
but did not fall upon the earth. This appearance lasted from 
the ninth hour of the day till twilight. 

88 In Lincolnshire called " Semplingham" in the text. This order 
was, from its founder, called " the Gilbertines." Both men and women 
lived in their houses, but separated by high walls. 



A. D. 1188. REPORT OF THE ENVOYS OF THE KING OF FRANCE. 99 

In the same year, the king of England and 'the king of 
France held a conference, between Bonimolt and Sulenne, on 
the fourteenth day before the calends of September, being the 
sixth day of the week. At this conference the king of 
France offered to restore to the king of England whatever he 
had taken from him in war, upon the following conditions : 
That he should give his sister Alice in marriage to his son 
Richard, and should allow homage and fealty to be done to the 
said Richard, his heir, by the people of his territories. But the 
king of England, not forgetful of the injuries which the king, 
his son, had done to him in return for a similar promotion, 
made answer that he would on no account do so. At this, 
earl Richard being greatly indignant, without the advice and 
wish of his father, did homage to the king of France fop all 
the possessions of his father beyond sea, and, swearing fealty 
to him against all men, became his adherent : on which, the 
king of France gave to him Chateau Raoul, and Yssoudun, 
with the whole honor thereof, in return for his homage and 
fealty. However, the before-named kings made a truce be- 
tween them until the feast of Saint Hilary ; but Henry, the 
cardinal-bishop of Albano, whom our lord the pope had sent 
to put an end to the dispute between the before-named kings, 
excommunicated earl Richard, because he had broken the 
peace, and then, returning to Flanders, he died at Arras. 

In the same year, the envoys of the king of France, whom 
he had sent to Isaac, the emperor of Constantinople, on their 
return home, reported that the sultan of Iconium had given his 
daughter in marriage to the son of Saladin, and that Saladin had 
given his daughter to the son of the sultan; and that Daniel, a 
prophet of Constantinople, had prophesied that in the same 

fyear in which the Annunciation of our Lord should be on 
Easter day, 88 the Franks should recover the Land of Promise, 
and should stall their horses in the palm groves of Baldack, 8 ' 
and should pitch their tents beyond the trees of the desert, and 
that the tares should be separated from the wheat. They also 
reported that in the palace of the emperor of Constantinople 
more honor was paid to the envoys of Saladin than to any other 
persons of the very highest dignity; and that, with the consent 
of the emperor of Constantinople, Saladin had sent his idol 
to Constantinople, in order that it might there be publicly 
worshipped; but, by the grace of God, before it arrived. 

88 The latter being a moveahle feast. 

89 Probably meaning either Baalbec or Bagdad. 



100 ANNALS OF TtOGEB DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1188. 

there the Venetians captured it at sea; on which, together 
with the ship, it was taken to Tyre. They also reported that 
a certain old man, a Greek by birth, from Astralix, had informed 
them that the prophecy was about to be fulfilled which 
was written on the Golden Gate, which had not been opened 
for two hundred years past ; which was this, " When the 
Yellow-haired King of the West shall come, then shall I open 
of my own accord, and then shall the Latins reign, and 
hold rule in the city of Constantinople." They also stated 
that the emperor had promised Saladin a hundred galleys, 
and that Saladin had promised him the whole of the land of 
promise, if he should impede the passage of the Franks ; and 
that, in consequence of this, the emperor had forbidden any one 
throughout all his territories to assume the cross ; and if by 
chance 'any one in his territories did assume the cross, he was 
immediately arrested and thrown into prison. There was 
also a prophecy and astrological prediction among the Greeks 
and Turks, that within the next three years one third of the 
Turks should perish by the sword, another third should fly 
beyond the trees of the desert, 90 and the remaining third be 
baptized. 

In the same year, a certain monk, of the Cistercian order, a 
religious man and one who feared God, beheld a vision of this 
nature relative to Henry, king of England. There appeared 
to him in his sleep a man of wonderful magnitude and noble 
features, and clothed in white garments, who said to him, 
"Observe and read these things about the king: 'I have set 
my seal upon him ; the womb of his wife shall swell against him , 
and in torments he shall suffer torments, and among the veiled 
women he shall be as one wearing the veil.' " 

In the same year, Frederic, emperor of the Romans, having 
assumed the cross at the hands of Henry, the cardinal-bishop 
of Albano, as befitted a prudent and circumspect man, made 
all necessary provisions for himself and his journey; for, in 
the first place, he reconciled himself to God and the Holy 
Church, and then wrote to Saladin to the following effect : 

The Letter of Frederic, emperor of the Romans, to Saladin, ruler 
of the Saracens. 

" Frederic, by the grace of God, emperor of the Romans, 
ever august, and the mighty triumpher over the enemies of the 

90 " Arborem siccam ;" perhaps in allusion to the oases of Baalbec or 
Palmyra, on the north-eastern side of Syria. 



A. B. 1188. LETTER OF FREDERIC TO SALADIN. 101 

empire, to Saladin, ruler over the Saracens ; may he take warning 
from Pharaoh, and flee from Jerusalem. The letters which your 
devoted services addressed to us a long time since, on matters 
of importance to yourself, and which would have benefitted 
you, if reliance could have been placed on your words, we re- 
ceived, as became the mightiness of our majesty, and deemed 
it proper to communicate, through the medium of our letters, 
with your mightiness. But now, inasmuch as you have pro- 
faned the Holy Land, over which we, by the authority of the 
Eternal King, bear rule, solicitude for our imperial office 
admonishes us to proceed with due rigour against audacity so 
rash, so criminal, and so presumptuous. Wherefore, unless before 
all things you restore the land of Judasa, Samaria, and Pales- 
tine, which you have seized, with the addition thereto of due 
satisfaction to be adjudged for excesses so nefarious according 
to the Holy Constitutions, that we may not appear to wage an 
unlawful war against you, we give you the space of the revo- 
lution of one year from the beginning of the calends of Novem- 
ber, in the year of the Incarnation of our Lord one thousand 
one hundred and eighty-eight, after which time you must make 
trial of the fortune of war on the plains of Tanis, 90 by virtue 
of the vivifying Cross and in the name of the true Joseph. For 
we can scarcely believe that you are ignorant of what, being 
testified by the writings of the ancients and the histories of 
antiquity, we are to presume is to be the course of events in 
our time. Do you pretend not to know that both the .^Ethio- 
pias, Mauritania, Persia, Syria, 91 Parthia, where our 92 dictator 
Marcus Crassus met with a premature death, JudaBa, mari- 
time Samaria, Arabia, Chaldasa, Egypt itself as well, where, 
shameful to repeat! a Roman citizen, Antony, a man en- 

Idowed with distinguished virtues, passing the limits of pro- 
priety and temperance, and, acting otherwise than as became 
a soldier sent from the mistress of the world, became enslaved 
by his sensual- passion for Cleopatra do you pretend not to 
know that all these and Armenia and innumerable other lands 






90 Roger of Wendover says, " the field of Zoan," which, if correct, may 
possibly allude to Psalm Ixxviii. 12. It is more probable, however, that 
he alludes to the city of Tanais, or Tanis, in Saladin's kingdom of Egypt, 
which was situate at the Tanaitic mouth of the Nile, and was rebuilt by 
the Caliphs of the line of the Ommiades. 

91 More probably " Scythia," with Roger of Wendover 

92 He speaks in his capacity of emperor of Rome. 



102 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1188. 

became subject to our sway ? Too well is this known to the kings 
in whose blood the Roman sword has been so often drenched; 
you too, God willing, shall learn by experience what our con- 
quering eagles, what the troops of the various nations can effect. 
You shall now become acquainted with the rage of Germany, 
who even in peace brandishes her arms the untamed head of 
the Rhine 93 the youths who know not how to flee the tall Ba- 
varian the cunning Swede wary Trance cautious England 
Albania 94 Cambria Saxony, that sports with the sword 
Thuringia Westphalia active Brabant Lorraine, unused to 
peace restless Burgundy the nimble inhabitants of the Alps 
Frisonia, darting on with javelin and thong Bohemia, 95 de- 
lighted at braving death Polonia, fiercer than her own wild 
beasts Austria Styria 96 Rutonia the parts of Illyria 
Lombardy Tuscany the March of Ancona 97 the pirate of 
Yenice the sailor of Pisa; and lastly also, you shall learn 
how effectually our own right hand, which you suppose to be 
enfeebled by old age, has learned to brandish the sword on 
that day full of reverence and gladness which has been ap- 
pointed for the triumph of the cause of Christ." 

In the same year, on the feast of Saint Thomas the Apostle, 
before the Nativity of our Lord, "William, bishop of Win- 
chester, departed this life. In the same year also, Frederic, 
emperor of the Romans, having given his kingdom of Ger- 
many to his son Henry, leaving his city, which is called Raines- 
burg, being unwilling to trust himself to the winds and waves, 
determined to proceed by land ; and when he arrived at Con- 
stantinople, the emperor Isaac received him very courteously, 
and supplied him and his people with all necessaries. 

After this, with a strong hand and outstretched arm, he 
passed through the territory of the sultan of Iconium, and when 
he had come into Armenia, the territory of Rupin de La- 
montaigne, at a river which bears the name of Salef, when half of 
his army had forded the stream, he, while accompanying the rest, 

93 " Regni," " of the kingdom," in the text, is clearly erroneous. 

94 Probably Scotland. 95 In this and the next instance we have 
adopted the words of Roger of Wendover, instead of those in our author, 
which are ' Reemia," and " Boemia." It seems impossible to say what 
country is meant by " Reemia;" but it is most probably a misprint. 

96 Incorrectly in the text, " Frisia." 

97 This absolutely stands in the text as " Amonitana Narcia," instead 
of " Anconitana Marcia ! ! " 



A.D. 1188. PEATEES FOK THE LAJffD OF JERUSALEM. 103 

fell from his horse into the river, and was the only person 
drowned. Accordingly, they drew him on shore, and there 
disembowelled him ; after which, his entrails, brains, and flesh, 
which had been boiled in water, and thus separated from the 
bones, were buried in the city of Antioch. His bones being 
wrapped in clean linen, Conrad, duke of Suabia, his son, carried 
them with him to the city of Tyre, 98 where he buried them. 

In the same year, it was enacted by our lord the pope and 
the cardinals that prayers should be put up to the Lord by 
the Church Universal, without intermission, for the peace and 
deliverance of the land of Jerusalem and of the Christian captives 
who were confined in chains by the Saracens. Mass was 
performed each day in the church of Saint Paul in the follow- 
ing form : when the priest had said " Pax Domini sit semper 
vobiscum" [the peace of the Lord be with you always], and the 
choir had made answer "Et cum spirituo tuo" [and with thy 
spirit], before the " Agnus Dei" [the Lamb of God] was be- 
gun, the priest or precentor commenced with this antiphone, 
" Tua est potentia, tuum regnum. Domine, tu es super omnes 
gentes. Da pacem, Domine, in diebus nostris' ' [ Thine is the power, 
thine is the kingdom. Lord ! thou art above all nations. Grant 
peace, Lord, in our days.] On the Lord's day, this was ac- 
companied with the following Psalm, beginning " Quare fre- 
mueunt gentes" [ WTiy do the heathen rage?] ;" on Monday, with 
this Psalm, "Deus, in nomine tuo, salvum me fac" [Save me, 
God, by thy name] j 1 on Tuesday, with this Psalm, " Deus repu- 
listi nos et destruxisti?" [ God, Why hast thou cast us out?] 2 on 
Wednesday, with this Psalm, ' ' Ut quid Deus, repulisti in finem ? ' ' 
[ God, why hast thou cast us of for ever ?] 3 on Thursday, with 
this Psalm, " Deus, venerunt gentes in hasreditatem tuam" [0 
God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance'] ; 4 on Friday, with 
this Psalm, " Deus quis similis erit tibi" [God, who shall be like 
unto Thee ?] 5 and on Saturday, with this Psalm, " Deus, ulti- 
onum Dominus" [0 Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth]* 
After having repeated these Psalms and the antiphone before- 
mentioned, the " Eyrie eleison, Christe eleison, Kyrie elei- 
son" 7 was to follow, and then the " Paternoster" and the 
prayer " Et ne nos;" s [after which the following sentences were 

98 Menzel, Hist. Germ, says Antioch. 

9 Psalm ii. * Psalm liv. a Psalm Ix 3 Psalm Ixxiv. 

4 Psalm Ixxix. 5 Psalm Ixxxii. This Psalm begins differently in our 
version. e Psalm civ. < " Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have 
mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us." 8 " And lead us not." 



104 ANNALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1188. 

to be repeated] " Lord, shew unto us thy mercy. Let thy 
mercy, Lord, be shewn upon us. Lord, deal not with us 
after our sins. Remember not our former iniquities. Assist 
us, Lord of our salvation. Save thy people, Lord. Be 
thou to them, Lord, a tower of strength. Let not their 
enemies prevail against them. Let there be peace through 
thy might, Lord. Lord God of might, correct us. Lord, 
hear our prayer. The Lord be with you." " Let us pray." 
" Almighty and everlasting God, in whose hands are the power 
and rule of all kingdoms, in thy mercy look upon the Christian 
armies, that the heathen who put trust in their own valour 
may be vanquished by the might of thy right hand." 

In the same year, Baldwin, archbishop of Canterbury, by 
means of the influence of the king, seized into his own hands 
the priory of the Holy Trinity at Canterbury ; and having ex- 
pelled the monks who held offices therein from their said offices, 
placed his own servants in their room, and refused sustenance to 
the monks. In this year also, Honorius, prior of the church of 
Canterbury, having gone to Eome to procure the restitution of 
his house, departed this life at Rome, together with all the monks 
whom he had taken with him. In the same year, Hugh, bishop 
of Durham, having assumed the cross, gave the priory in charge 
to the prior and convent of Durham, for which they Avere bound 
to pay two hundred marks or more, and which he for the profits 
thereof had retained in his hands for a period of two years.< 

In the same year, our lord the pope, hearing of the death 
of Henry, the cardinal-bishop of Albano, whom he had sent for 
the purpose of settling the dispute between the king of Prance 
and the king of England, sent cardinal John of Anagni for 
the same purpose. In the same year, William, king of the Scots, 
sent envoys to Clement, the Supreme Pontiff, and obtained 
from him letters of protection to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Clement to William, king of the Scots, as to 
tJie exemption of the churches of his kingdom. 

" Clement, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his dearly-beloved son in Christ, William, the illustrious king 
of the Scots, health and the Apostolic benediction. Whereas 
all persons subject to the yoke of Christ ought to find favour 
and protection at the Apostolic See, it is most especially proper 
that those should be supported with our defence and protection 
whose fidelity and dutifulness have been experienced on the 



A.D. 1188. LETTER OF POPE CLEMENT. 105 

most occasions, to the end that a stronger inducement may 
be held out to obtain the favours consequent upon such a 
choice, and duteous affection and reverence to the same may 
be more generally extended, from the fact of its being known 
that they will certainly obtain the pledges of its benevolence 
and favour. Wherefore, most dearly-beloved son in Christ, 
considering the reverence and dutifulness which for a long 
period we know you to have felt towards the Church of Rome, 
by the pages of this present writing we have thought proper 
to enact that the Church of Scotland, as an especial daughter 
thereof, shall be subject to the Apostolic See, with no inter- 
mediate party thereto ; 9 in which Church the following are 
recognized as episcopal sees ; namely, the churches of Saint 
Andrew's, Glasgow, Dunkeld, Dumblane, Brechin, Aberdeen, 
Moray, Eoss, and Caithness. And it is to be lawful for no 
one but the Eoman Pontiff or his legate a later e to pronounce 
against the kingdom of Scotland any sentence of interdict or 
excommunication; and if such shall be pronounced, we do 
hereby decree that the same shall not be valid ; we do also 
declare that it shall not be lawful for any person in future who 
is not a subject of the king of Scotland, or one whom the 
Apostolic See shall have especially appointed from its body for 
that purpose, to hold courts in the said kingdom for the settle- 
ment of disputes therein. We do moreover forbid that any dis- 
putes which may exist in the said kingdom as to its possessions, 
shall be brought for judgment before judges out of that king- 
dom, except in cases of appeal to the Roman Church. And 
further, if any written enactments shall appear to have been 
obtained in contravention of the liberties hereby granted by 
enactment, or if in future, no mention being therein made of 
this concession, any such shall happen to be granted, nothing 
to the prejudice of yourself or of your kingdom is thereby to 
arise with reference to the concession of the above-mentioned 
prerogative ; but we do enact that the liberties and immunities 
that have in their indulgence been granted to you or to the said 
kingdom or to the churches therein existing by our predecessors 
the Roman Pontiffs, and hitherto observed, shall be hereby 
ratified, and shall at all future times remain untouched. Let no 
man therefore deem it lawful to infringe upon the tenor of this 
our constitution and prohibition, or in any way to contravene 
the same. And if any person shall presume to attempt so to 
Without any archbishop holding intermediate authority. 






106 A?TN T ALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEtf. A.l). 1189. 

do, let him know that he will thereby incur the indignation 
of Almighty God and of the Apostles Saint Peter and Saint 
Panl. Given at the Lateran, on the third day before the 
ides of March, in the first year of onr pontificate." 

In the year of grace 1 1 89, being the thirty-fifth and last year 
of the reign of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, the said 
Henry was at Saumur, in Anjou, on the day of the Nativity of 
our Lord, which fell on the Lord's day, and there he kept 
that festival ; although many of his earls and barons, deserting 
him, had gone over to the king of France and earl Richard 
against him. After the feast of Saint Hilary, the truce being 
broken, which existed between the before-named kings, the 
king of France, and earl Richard and the Bretons, (with whom 
the said king of France and earl Richard had entered into 
covenants, and had given sureties that if they should make 
peace with the king of England, they would not omit to include 
them in that peace,) made a hostile incursion into the territo- 
ries of the king of England, and ravaged them in every direction. 

On this, the cardinal John of Anagni came to the before- 
named kings in behalf of our lord the pope, and sometimes 
with kind words, sometimes with threats, exhorted them to 
make peace. Moved by his urgent entreaties, the said kings, 
by the inspiration of the Divine grace, gave security that they 
would abide by the decision of himself, and of the archbishops 
of Rheims, Bourges, Rouen, and Canterbury, and named as the 
day for a conference to be held near La Fert Bernard, the oc- 
tave of Pentecost ; on which the before-named cardinal, and the 
four archbishops above-mentioned, pronounced sentence of ex- 
communication against all, both clergy and laity, who should 
stand in the way of peace being made between the said kings, 
the persons of the kings alone excepted. 

On the day of the conference, the king of France, and the 
king of England, earl Richard, the cardinal John of Anagni, 
and the four archbishops before- mentioned, who had been 
chosen for the purpose, and the earls and barons of the two 
kingdoms, met for a conference near La Ferte" Bernard. At 
this conference, the king of France demanded of the king of 
England, his sister Alice to be given in marriage to Richard, 
earl of Poitou, and that fealty for his dominions should be 
sworn to the said Richard, and that his brother John, assuming 
the cross, should set out for Jerusalem. To this the king of 
England made answer that he would never consent to such a 



A.D. 1189. DEFEAT OF THE KING OF ENGLAND. 107 

proposal, and offered the king of France, if he should think 
fit to assent thereto, to give the said Alice in marriage to his 
son John, with all the matters previously mentioned more at 
large, more fully and more completely than the king de- 
manded. The king of France would not agree to this ; on 
which, putting an end to the conference, they separated, mutu- 
ally displeased. However, the cardinal John of Anagni declared 
that if the king of France did not come to a complete arrange- 
ment witli the king of England, he would place the whole of 
his territory under interdict; to which the king of France 
made answer, that he should not dread his sentence and that 
he cared nothing for it, as it was supported upon no grounds 
of justice. For, he said, it was not the duty of the Church 
of Rome to punish the kingdom of France by its sentence or 
in any other manner, if the king of France should think fit 
to punish any vassals of his who had shewn themselves un- 
deserving, and rebellious against his sway, for the purpose of 
avenging the insult to his crown ; he also added, that the be- 
fore-named cardinal had already smelt the sterling coin of the 
king of England. Then closing the interview, the king of 
France departed thence, and took La Fert Bernard, and then 
Montfort, and next Malestroit, Beaumont, and Balim. 

After this he came to Le Mans, on the Lord's day, pretend- 
ing that he was going to set out for Tours on the ensuing 
Monday ; but when the king of England and his people seemed 
to have made themselves at ease as to the further progress of 
the king of France, he drew out his forces in battle array, for 
the purpose of making an assault upon the city. This being 
perceived by Stephen de Tours, the seneschal of Anjou, he set 
fire to the suburbs. The fire, however, rapidly gaining strength 
and volume, running along the walls, communicated with the 
city; seeing which, the Franks approached a bridge of stone, 
where Geoffrey de Burillun and many with him of the party 
of the king of England met them with the intention of pulling 
down the bridge ; on which, a desperate conflict took place, 
and a great part of the armies were slain on both sides, and in 
the conflict, the before named Geoffrey was taken prisoner, and 
wounded in the thigh ; many others also of the king of Eng- 
land's army were taken, while the rest immediately took to 
flight, with the intention of betaking themselves to the city, 
but the Franks entered it with them. 






108 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1189. 

The king of England seeing this, and being in a state of 
desperation, contrary to his promise when he came, took to 
flight with seven hundred of his knights. For he had pro- 
mised the inhabitants of that city that he would not forsake 
them, giving it as his reason, that his father rested there, as 
also, the circumstance that he himself was born there, and 
loved that city more than all others. The king of France pur- 
sued him for three miles ; and if the stream which the Franks 
forded had not been very wide and deep, they would have 
pursued them as they fled with such swiftness, that they 
would have been all taken prisoners. In this flight, many 
of the Welch were slain. The king of England, however, with 
a few of his men, got to Chinon and there took refuge within 
the fort. The rest of the household of the king of England 
who were surviving, took refuge within the tower of Le Mans : 
immediately on which, the king of France laid siege to the 
town, and, partly through his miners, partly the assaults of 
his engines, the tower was surrendered to him within three 
days, together with thirty knights and sixty men at arms. 

Marching thence, he took Mont Double by surrender of the 
castle and its lord. For the viscount of this castle had been 
the means, indeed, the especial cause, of this catastrophe ; for, 
lying in ambush, he had, armed, fallen upon Geoffrey, the earl 
of Vendome, who was unarmed, and had wounded him so seri- 
ously, that at first his life was despaired of, though by the grace 
of God he afterwards entirely recovered from the effects thereof. 
The king of France was the more vexed at his acting thus, be- 
cause the before-named viscount had strictly bound himself to 
the king of France, by a promise that he would injure none of 
his people either in going or returning, or annoy him while 
engaged in the siege of Le Mans. The king departing thence, 
the castle of Trou was surrendered to him, together with Roche 
TEveque, Montoire, Chateau Carcere, Chateau Loire, Chateau 
Chaumont, Chateau d' Amboise, and Chateau de Roche Charbon. 

At length, on the sixth day of the week after the festival of 
the Nativity of Saint John, on the day after the feast of Saint 
Peter and Saint Paul the Apostles, the king of France came to 
Tours. On the Lord's day next after this, Philip, earl of 
Flanders, William, archbishop of Rheims, and Hugh, duke of 
Burgundy, came to the king of England, who was then at 
Saumur, for the purpose of making peace between him and the 



A. D. 1189. PEACE BETWEEN ENGLAND AND FRANCE. 109 

king of France. The king of France had, however, sent him 
word before they set out, that from Chateau Saint Martin, 
whither he had betaken himself by fording the Loire, he 
should make an attack upon the city. Accordingly, on the 
ensuing Monday, at about the third hour, applying their 
scaling ladders to the walls on the side of the Loire, which on 
account of the small quantity of the water, was much contracted 
and reduced, the city was taken by storm r and in it eighty 
knights and a hundred men at arms. 

To their great disgrace, on the one side, the Poitevins were 
planning treachery against their liege lord the king of England, 
and on the other the Bretons, who had joined the king of 
France, and had obtained from him letters patent, to the 
effect that he would never make peace with the king of Eng- 
land unless the Bretons were included in the treaty. Ac- 
cordingly, the king of England, being reduced to straits, made 
peace with Philip, king of France, on the following terms : 

Conditions of peace made between Henry, king of England and, 
Philip, king of France. 

" Upon this, the before-named king of France and king of 
England, and Richard, earl of Poitou, with their archbishops, 
bishops, earls, and barons, about the time of the feast of the 
Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, held a conference between 
Tours and Arasie, where the king of England wholly placed 
himself under the control and at the will of the king of France. 
The king of England then did homage to the king of France, 
although 11 at the beginning of the war he had renounced the 
lordship of the king of France, and the king of France had 
quitted all claim of his homage. It was then provided by the 
king of France that Alice, his sister, whom the king of Eng- 
land had in his charge, should be given up and placed in the 
charge of one of five persons, of whom earl Richard should make 
choice. It was next provided by the king of France that se- 
curity should be given by the oath of certain men of that land 
that his said sister should be delivered up to earl Richard on 
his return from Jerusalem, and that earl Richard should receive 
the oath of fealty from his father's subjects on both sides the 
sea, and that none of the barons or knights who had in that 
war withdrawn from the king of England and come over to earl 
Richard should again return to the king of England, except 
11 Meaning that it was done previous to the war breaking out. 



41 



110 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1189. 

in the last month before his setting out for Jerusalem ; the 
time of which setting out was to be Mid-Lent, at which pe- 
riod the said kings and earl Richard were to be at Yezelay. 
That all the burgesses of the rills, demesne of the king of 
England, should be unmolested throughout all the lands of 
the king of France, and should enjoy their own customary 
laws and not be impleaded in any matter, unless they should 
be guilty of felony. The king of England was to pay to 
the king of France twenty thousand marks of silver ; and all 
the barons of the king of England were to make oath that if 
the king of England should refuse to observe the said cove- 
nants, they would hold with the king of France and earl Rich- 
ard, and would aid them to the best of their ability against 
the king of England. The king of France and earl Richard 
were to hold in their hands the city of Le Mans, the city of 
Tours, Chateau Loire, and the castle of Trou ; or else, if the king 
of England should prefer it, the king of France and earl Richard 
would hold the castle of Gisors, the castle of Pasci, and the 
castle of Novacourt, until such time as all the matters should 
be completed as arranged above by the king of France. 

While the before-named kings were conferring in person 
hereon, the Lord thundered over them, and a thunderbolt fell 
between the two, but did them no injury ; they were, however, 
greatly alarmed, and separated accordingly, while all who were 
with them were astonished that the thunder had been heard 
so suddenly, seeing that no lowering clouds had preceded it. 
After a short time the kings again met together for a confer- 
ence, on which a second time thunder was heard, still louder 
and more terrible than before, the sky retaining its original 
sereneness; in consequence of which, the king of England, 
being greatly alarmed, would have fallen to the ground from 
the horse on which he was mounted, if he had not been sup- 
ported by the hands of those who were standing around him. 
From that time he entirely placed himself at the will of the 
king of France, and concluded peace on the terms above- 
written, requesting that the names of all those who, desert- 
ing him, had gone over to the king of France and earl Richard, 
should be committed to writing and given to him. This being 
accordingly done, he found the name of his son John written 
at the beginning of the list. 

Surprised at this beyond measure, he came to Chinon, and, 



A.T>. 1189. ACCESSION OF RICHARD TO THE THRONE. Ill 

touched with grief at heart, cursed the day on which he was 
born, and pronounced upon his sons the curse of God and of 
himself, which he would never withdraw, although bishops and 
other religious men frequently admonished him so to do. Being 
sick even unto death, he ordered himself to be carried into 
the church, before the altar, and there devoutly received the 
communion of the body and blood of Christ ; and after con- 
fessing his sins, and being absolved by the bishop and clergy, 
he departed this life in the thirty-fifth year of his reign, on the 
octave of the Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, being the 
fifth day of the week ; after a reign of thirty- four years, seven 
months, and four days. 

After his death, having plundered him of all his riches, all 
forsook him ; so true it is that just as flies seek honey, wolves 
the carcase, and ants corn, this crew followed not the man, but 
his spoils. At last however, his servants returned, and buried 
him with royal pomp. On the day after his death, when he 
was being carried out for burial in the Church of the Nuns at 
Fontevraud, earl Eichard, his son and heir, came to meet him, 
and, smitten with compunction, wept bitterly; immediately 
on which the blood flowed in streams from the nostrils of the 
body at the approach of his son. His son, however, proceeded 
with the body of his father to the abbey of Fontevraud, and 
there buried him in the choir of the Nuns, and thus it was that 
he was " among the veiled women as one wearing the veil." 12 

EICHARD THE FIEST. 

THE king being thus buried, earl Eichard, his son, imme- 
diately laid hands on Stephen de Tours, the seneschal of 
Anjou, and, throwing him into prison, loaded him with heavy 
fetters and iron manacles, and demanded of him the cas- 
tles and treasures of the king, his father, which he had in 
his possession ; and, after the same had been delivered up, earl 
Eichard 13 took ransom from him to the uttermost farthing. 
Just the time at which the before-named king of England died, 
Matilda, duchess of Saxony, his daughter, died. 

After this, the said earl Eichard came to Eoucn, and was 
girded with the sword of the dukedom of Normandy by Walter, 
the archbishop of Eouen, in presence of the bishops, earls, and 

12 Alluding to the prophecy of the Cistercian monk, mentioned before 
in p. 100. 

13 So called, as not yet being crowned king of England. 






112 ANITAL8 OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1189. 

barons of Normandy, on Saint Margaret's day, being the fifth 
day of the week, and the thirteenth day before the calends of 
August. Having then received the oaths of fealty from the 
clergy and the people of the dukedom of Normandy, he gave 
to Geoffrey, son of Kotrod, earl of Perche, his niece, Matilda, 
daughter of the duke of Saxony, in marriage. 

On the third day after this, that is to say, on the feast of 
Saint Mary Magdalen, Philip, king of France, and Richard, 
duke of Normandy, met to hold a conference between Chau- 
mont and Trie. Here the king of France urgently requested 
that the duke of Normandy would restore to him Gisors, and 
many other places, which it would be tedious individually to 
mention. But Richard, seeing that if he did so, it would re- 
dound to his everlasting loss and disgrace, added to the before- 
mentioned twenty thousand marks of silver, which the king, 
his father, had covenanted that he would pay to the king of 
France, another four thousand marks of silver, and by these 
obtained his favour and regard ; and the king of France restored 
to him everything that he had taken in war from the king, his 
father, both castles as well as cities, and other fortified places, 
and vills and farms as well. 

;In the meantime, queen Eleanor, the mother of the before- 
lamed duke, moved her royal court from city to city, and from 
3astle to castle, just as she thought proper ; and sending mes- 
sengers throughout all the counties of England, ordered that 
all captives should be liberated from prison and confinement, 
for the good of the soul of Henry, her lord ; inasmuch as, in 
her own person, she had learnt by experience u that confinement 
is distasteful to mankind, and that it is a most delightful re- 
freshment to the spirits to be liberated therefrom. She, more- 
over, gave directions, in obedience to the orders of her son, 
the duke, that all who had been taken in custody for fore- 
stal offences should be acquitted thereof and released, and 
that all persons who had been outlawed for forestal offences 
should return in peace, acquitted of all previous offences 
against the forest laws; and further, that all persons who 
had been taken and detained by the will of the king, or of 
his justice, and who had not been detained according to the 
common law of the county or hundred, or on appeal, should be 
acquitted ; and that those who were detained by the common 
law, if they could find sureties that they would make due re- 

14 She had been kept sixteen years in close confinement by her hus- 
band, king Henry. 






A.D. 1189. EDICTS OF QUEEN ELEANOR. 113 

dress at law, in case any person should think proper to make 
any charge against them, should be set at liberty; if, also, 
they should make oath that they would make due redress, 
if any person should think proper to make any charge against 
them, even then they were to be set at liberty just as much. 
Those, also, who, on appeal, had been detained in custody upon 
any criminal matter, if they could find sureties that they 
would make due reparation and in full, were to be set at 
liberty. Those, also, who were outlawed at common law, with- 
out appeal, by the justices, were to return in peace, on condi- 
tion that they should find sureties that they would make duo 
reparation at law, if any person should think proper to allege 
anything against them ; and if they had been convicted 15 
upon appeal made, if they could make peace with their ad- 
versaries, they were to return in peace. All those persons, 
also, who were detained upon the appeal 16 of those who knew 
that they were evildoers, were to be set at liberty, free and 
unmolested. Those evildoers who, for their evidence, had 
been pardoned life and limb, were to abjure the territory of 
their lord, Richard, and to depart therefrom ; while those evil- 
doers who, without any pardon of life or limb, had accused 
others of their own free-will, were to be detained in prison, 
until their cases should have received due consideration. 

It was further ordered, that every free man throughout the 
whole kingdom should make oath that he would preserve his 
fealty to his lord Richard, king of England, son of our lord 
king Henry and queen Eleanor, his wife, with life and limb, 
and worldly honors, as being his liege lord, against all men 
and women whatsoever, who might live and die, and that 
they would be obedient to him, and would give him aid in all 
things for the maintenance of his peace and of justice. 

In addition to this, the said duke of Normandy restored to 
Robert, earl of Leicester, all his lands, which his father had 
taken from him, and restored all persons to their former 
rights, whom his father had deprived of their possessions. All 
those persons, however, clergy as well as laity, who, leaving his 
father, had adhered to himself, he held in abhorrence, and 
banished from his acquaintanceship; while those who had 

16 The word " appellatio," " appeal," is used in these-several instances 
in its sense of an accusation made of the commission of a heinous crime, 
by one subject against the other. In this sense it is derived from the 
French verb " appeller," " to summon," or " challenge." 

VOL. II. 



114 ANNALS OF ROGEK BE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1189. 

faithfully served his father, he retained with him, and enriched 
with numerous benefits. 

After this, the said duke passed over to England from Har- 
fleur on the ides of August, being the Lord's day before the 
Assumption of Saint Mary, the Mother of God, while Walter, 
archbishop of Rouen, Henry, bishop of Bayeux, and John, 
bishop of Evreux, who had preceded him to England, were there 
awaiting his arrival. There came also from Normandy, Bald- 
win, archbishop of Canterbury, Gilbert, bishop of Rochester, 
Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, and Hugh, bishop of Chester, on 
which the duke and his brother John crossed over : at the 
arrival of whom, their kingdoms rejoiced, because they trusted 
that through them they might be brought to a better state. 
And although some, though but very few, were hurt at the 
death of the king, still it was some consolation that, as the 

fpoet says, ""Wonders I sing, the sun has set, no night ensued;" l 
for truly no night did ensue after the setting of the sun. For 

; a ray of the sun, 18 occupying the throne of the sun, spreads its 
own lustre more brilliantly, and to a greater distance than its 
own original sun. For when the sun has set below the earth 
from his throne, his ray, still remaining, and subject to neither 
eclipse or setting, being suddenly cut off from the body of the 
sun, and wholly reflected back upon itself, as though a sun it- 
self, it becomes much greater and much more brilliant than the 
sun, of which it was a ray, by reason of no clouds intervening 
and no impediment obstructing its course. But, in order that 
no difficulties may harass the mind of the reader, the mean- 
ing of this may be more fully ascertained on reading the fol- 
lowing pentameter: 

" Sol pater, et radius filius ejus erat." 19 

And thus, the son becoming greater and greater, enlarged the 
good works of his father, while the bad ones he cut short. 
17 Mira canam, sol occubnit, nox nulla secuta esl. 18 The mean- 

ing of this passage is very obscure, indeed it seems solely framed as a 
quaint conceit, for the purpose of punning upon the words " sol," "solum," 
and the like. It is as follows, " Nam radius solis solium soils seriens, 
sole suo jubar lucidius ac latius spargit. Cum enim sol a suo solio in 
solum deciderit, stans tamen ejus radius, occasum vel eclipsim nesciens 
de corpore solari repente divisus, et in se solide reverberatus sol, sole, 
cujus fuit radios, nulla nubium interpolatione vel injuria impediente 
multo major, et lucidior est eflfectus." He seems obscurely to allude to 
the superior prosperity of Richard over his father, in consequence of having 
no domestic grievances through undutiful children, who had brought clouds ' 
over his sunshine. 19 " The father was the suu, his son his ray." 




A. D. 1189. PROMOTIONS BY THE DUKE OF NORMANDY. 115 

For those whom the father disinherited, the son restored to 
their former rights ; those whom the father had banished, the 
son recalled ; those whom the father kept confined in irons, 
the son allowed to depart unhurt ; those upon whom the father, 
in the cause of justice, inflicted punishment, the son, in the 
cause of humanity, forgave. 

Accordingly, as already stated, Eichard, the said duke of 
Normandy, son of Henry, king of England, lately deceased, 
came over to England ; on which he gayj&4o~bi^4>go&er.Jjphn 
the earldom of Mortaigne, and the earldoms of Cornwall, 
DoreetfBomerset, Nottingham, Derby, Lancaster, and the 
castles_gf-Marlboraiigh..-and.jQf.-Luggershall, with the forests 
and all their appurtenances ; the honor also of Wallingford, 
the honor of Tickhill, and- the honor of Haye ; he also gavahim 
the eastern of Gloucester, together with the daughter of the 
to be immediately married to him, 
jrlJiiry,' forbidding it, because they 
~ jjBjpW.. He also gave to 

him the Peak nnTTknignvpr KilT^P H "TU-P rpfainprl some castles 
of theTxtfore-named counties and honors in his own hands. 

In addition to this, the said duke gave to Andrew de 
Chauvigny the daughter of Eaoul de Dol, with the honor 
of Chateau Eaoul, in Berry, (she having been the wife of Bald- 
win, earl of Eivers), and had them immediately married at 
Salisbury, in presence of queen Eleanor; he also gave to 
William Marshal the daughter of Eichard, earl of Striguil, 20 
with the earldom of Striguil; and to Gilbert, son of Eoger 
Fitz-Eainfray, he gave the daughter of William de Lancaster. 
To Geoffrey, his own bastard brother, who had been formerly 
bishop-elect of Lincoln, he gave the archbishopric of York ; 
the canons having, with the king's consent, elected him to 
the archbishopric of York. And although Master Bar- 
tholomew, acting as the deputy of Hurbert Fitz- Walter, the 
dean of that church, both before the election and after it, ap- 
pealed to the presence of the Supreme Pontiff, because 
Hugh, bishop of Durham, and an especial son of that church, 
and Hubert Fitz-Walter, dean of the said church, to which 
parties belonged the first votes in the election, were absent, 

the said canons were determined not to abandon their 
)ose, but elected the person above-named, and under their 

confirmed the said election. 

20 Strongbow, earl of Pembroke. 

12 



116 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1189. 

However, on the bishop of Durham and Hubert Pitz-Walter 
making complaint as to this illegal conduct on the part of the 
canons, the duke gave orders that all things relative to the 
church of York should be in the same state as they were on 
the day on which his father had been living and dead ; and 
accordingly the ecclesiastical rights of the archbishopric re- 
turned into the hands of Hubert Fitz- "Walter and his deputies 
as before, while the secular benefices of the said archbishop 
returned into the charge of the servants of the duke. 

In the same year, Geoffrey, bishop of Ely, departed this 
life at "Winchester, on the twelfth day before the calends 
of September, and being carried to Ely was buried there ; 
on which duke Richard took possession of all his treasures. 
The said duke also sent his bishops, earls, and barons to all 
the treasuries of the king, his father, and caused all the trea- 
sures found, consisting of gold and silver, to be counted and 
weighed ; the number and weight of which it would be tedious 
to mention, inasmuch as this amount of treasure far exceeded 
in tale and weight one hundred thousand marks. After 
this, he sent his servants and bailiffs throughout all the sea- 
ports of England, Normandy, Poitou, and others of his lands, 
and caused the largest and best of all the ships to be selected 
for himself, which were able to carry large freights, and then 
distributed some of them among those of his friends who had 
assumed the cross for the purpose of setting out for Jerusalem, 
while the others were reserved for his own use. 

The duke then came to London, the archbishops, bishops, 
earls, and barons, and a vast multitude of knights, coming 
thither to meet him ; by whose consent and advice he was 
consecrated and crowned king of England, at Westminster, 
in London, on the third day before the nones of September, 
being the Lord's Day and the feast of the ordination of Saint 
Gregory, the pope (the same being also an ^Egyptian day 21 ), 
by Baldwin, archbishop of Canterbury, who was assisted at 
the coronation by Walter, archbishop of Rouen, John, arch- 
bishop of Dublin, Formalis, archbishop of Treves, Hugh, 
bishop of Durham, Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, Hugh, bishop of 
Chester, William, bishop of Hereford, William, bishop of 

21 ./Egyptian days were unlucky days, of which there were said to be 
two in each month. It is supposed that they were so called from au 
./Egyptian superstition, that it was not lucky to bleed or begin any new 
work on those days. 



A.D. 1189. THE CORONATION OF KING RICHARD. 117 

Worcester, John, bishop of Exeter, Eeginald, bishop of Bath, 
John, bishop of Norwich, Sefrid, bishop of Chichester, Gilbert, 
bishop of Rochester, Peter, bishop of Saint David's, the bishop 
of Saint Asaph, the bishop of Bangor, Albinus, bishop of 
Ferns, and Concord, bishop of Aghadce, while nearly all the 
abbats, priors, earls, and barons of England were present. 

The Order of the Coronation of Richard, King of England. 

First came the bishops, abbats, and large numbers of the 
clergy, wearing silken hoods, preceded by the cross, taper-bearers, 
censers, and holy water, as far as the door of the king's inner 
chamber ; where they received the before-named duke, and es- 
corted him to the church of Westminster, as far as the high altar, 
in solemn procession, with chaunts of praise, while all the way 
along which they went, from the door of the king's chamber to the 
altar, was covered with woollen cloth. The order of the procession 
was as follows : First came the clergy in their robes, carrying 
holy water, and the cross, tapers, and censers. Next came 
the priors, then the abbats, and then the bishops, in the midst 
of whom walked four barons, bearing four candlesticks of 
gold ; after whom came Godfrey de Lucy, bearing the king's cap 
[of maintenance], and John Marshal by him, carrying two 
great and massive spurs of gold. After these came William 
Marshal, earl of Striguil, bearing the royal sceptre of gold, 
on the top of which was a cross of gold, and by him William 
Fitz-Patrick, earl of Salisbury, bearing a rod of gold, having 
on its top a dove of gold. After them came David, earl 
of Huntingdon, brother of the king of Scotland, John, 
earl of Mortaigne, the duke's brother, and Robert, earl of 
Leicester, carrying three golden swords from the king's 
treasury, the scabbards of which were worked all over with 
gold ; the earl of Mortaigne walking in the middle. Next 
came six earls and six barons, carrying on their shoulders a 
very large chequer, upon which were placed the royal arms 
and robes ; and after them William de Mandeville, earl of 
Aumarle, carrying a great and massive crown of gold, deco- 
rated on every side with precious stones. Next came Richard, 
duke of Normandy, Hugh, bishop of Durham, walking at his 
right hand, and Reginald, bishop of Bath, at his left, and 
four barons holding over them a canopy of silk on four lofty 
spears . Then iollowed a great number of earls, barons, 



118 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1189. 

knights, and others, both clergy and laity, as far as the porch of 
the church, and dressed in their robes, entered with the duke, 
and proceeded as far as the choir. 

When the duke had coine to the altar, in presence of the 
archbishops, bishops, clergy, and people, kneeling before the 
altar, with the holy Evangelists placed before him, and many 
relics of the saints, according to custom, he swore that he 
would all the days of his life observe peace, honor, and reverence 
towards God, the Holy Church, and its ordinances. He also 
swore that he would exercise true justice and equity towards 
the people committed to his charge. He also swore that he 
would abrogate bad laws and unjust customs, if any such had 
been introduced into his kingdom, and would enact good laws, 
and observe the same without fraud or evil intent. After this 
they took off all his clothes from the waist upwards, except 
his shirt and breeches ; his shirt having been previously separated 
over the shoulders ; after which they shod him with sandals em- 
broidered with gold. Then Baldwin, archbishop of Canterbury, 
pouring holy oil upon hishead, anointed him king in three places, 
on his head, breast, and arms, which signifies glory, valour, and 
knowledge, with suitable prayers for the occasion ; after which 
the said archbishop placed a consecrated linen cloth on his 
head, and upon that the cap which Geoffrey de Lucy had 
carried. They then clothed him in the royal robes, first a tunic, 
and then a dalmatic ; after which the said archbishop delivered 
to him the sword of rule, with which to crush evil-doers 
against the Church : this done, two earls placed the spurs 
upon his feet, which John Marshal had carried. After this, 
being robed in a mantle, he was led to the altar, where the 
said archbishop forbade him, in the name of Almighty God, to 
presume to take upon him this dignity, unless he had the full 
intention inviolably to observe the oaths and vows before- 
mentioned which he had made ; to which he made answer that, 
with God's assistance, he would without reservation observe 
them all. After this, he himself took the crown from the altar 
and gave it to the archbishop ; on which, the archbishop de- 
livered it to him, and placed it upon his head, it being 
supported by two earls in consequence of its extreme weight. 
After this, the archbishop delivered to him the sceptre to hold 
in his right hand, while he held the rod of royalty in his left ; 
and, having been thus crowned, the king was led back to his 
seat by the before-named bishops of Durham and Bath, pre- 



A.D. 1189. PERSECUTION OF THE JEWS. 119 

ceded by the taper-bearers and the three swords before-men- 
tioned. After this, the mass of our Lord was commenced, and, 
when they came to the offertory, the before-named bishops led 
him to the altar, where he offered one mark of the purest gold, 
such being the proper offering for the king at each coronation ; 
after which, the bishops before-named led him back to his seat. 
The mass having been concluded, and all things solemnly per- 
formed, the two bishops before-named, one on the right hand 
the other on the left, led him back from the church to his 
chamber, crowned, and carrying a sceptre in his right hand and 
the rod of royalty in his left, the procession going in the same 
order as before. Then the procession returned to the choir, 
and our lord the king put off his royal crown and robes of 
royalty, and put on a crown and robes that were lighter ; and, 
thus crowned, went to dine ; on which the archbishops and 
bishops took their seats with him at the table, each according 
to his rank and dignity. The earls and barons also served in 
the king's palace, according to their several dignities ; while 
the citizens of London served in the cellars, and the citizens 
of Winchester in the kitchen. 

While the king was seated at table, the chief men of 
the Jews came to offer presents to him, but as they had 
been forbidden the day before to come to the king's court on 
the day of the coronation, the common people, with scornful 
eye and insatiable heart, rushed upon the Jews and stripped 
them, and then scourging them, cast them forth out of the 
king's hall. Among these was Benedict, a Jew of York, who, 
after having been so maltreated and wounded by the Christians 
that his life was despaired of, was baptized by William, prior 
of the church of Saint Mary at York, in the church of the 
Innocents, and was named William, and thus escaped the peril 
of death and the hands of the persecutors. 

The citizens of London, on hearing of this, attacked the 
Jews in the city and burned their houses ; but by the kindness 
of their Christian friends, some few made their escape. On 
the day after the coronation, the king sent his servants, and 
caused those offenders to be arrested who had set fire to the 
city; not for the sake of the Jews, but on account of the houses 
and property of the Christians which they had burnt and 
plundered, and he ordered some of them to be hanged. 

On the same day, the king ordered the before-named William, 
who from a Jew had become a Christian, to be presented to 



120 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1189. 

him, on which he said to him, " What person are you ?" to 
which he made answer, " I am Benedict of York, one of your 
Jews." On this the king turned to the archbishop of Canter- 
bury, and the others who had told him that the said Benedict 
had become a Christian, and said to them, " Did you not tell 
me that he is a Christian ?" to which they made answer, 
" Yes, my lord.'' Whereupon he said to them, " What are we 
to do with him ?" to which the archbishop of Canterbury, less 
circumspectly than he might, in the spirit of his anger, made 
answer, " If he does not choose to be a Christian, let him be a 
man of the Devil ;" whereas he ought to have made answer, 
" We demand that he shall be brought to a Christian trial, as 
he has become a Christian, and now contradicts that fact." 
But, inasmuch as there was no person to offer any opposition 
thereto, the before-named William relapsed into the Jewish 
errors, and after a short time died at Northampton ; on which 
he was refused both the usual sepulture of the Jews, as also 
that of the Christians, both because he had been a Christian, 
and because he had, "like a dog, returned to his vomit." 22 

On the second day after his coronation, Richard, king of 
England, received the oaths of homage and fealty from the 
bishops, abbats, earls, and barons of England. After this was 
done, the king put up for sale every thing he had, castles, 
vills, and estates. Accordingly, Hugh, bishop of Durham, 
bought of the king his good manor of Sedbergh, 23 with the 
Wapentake and knight's fees thereof, for six hundred marks of 
silver, by way of a pure and perpetual alms ; and the said pur- 
chase was confirmed by charter to the following effect : 

The Charter of king Richard, confirming the sale of the Manor of 

Sedbergh to JIugh, bishop of Durham. 

Eichard, by the grace of God, king of England, duke of 
Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, to the arch- 
bishops, bishops, [earls], barons, sheriffs, and all his bailiffs 
and servants throughout all England, greeting. Know ye that 
we have given and granted, and by this present charter do 
confirm to God, and to Saint Cuthbert and the church of 
Durham, and to Hu.gh, bishop of Durham, our dearly beloved 
cousin, and to his successors, as a pure and perpetual alms for 
the soul of our father, as also of our predecessors and successors, 
and for the salvation of ourselves and of our heirs, and for the 

22 Prov. xxvi. 11 ; 2 St. Pet. ii. 22. 23 Roger of Wendover says 

it was " Segesfield ;" meaning probably Sedgefield, iu Durham, 



A.D. 1189. A CHARTER OF KING RICHARD. 121 

establishment and increase of our kingdom, our manor of 
Sedbergh, together with the Wapentake to the said manor be- 
longing, and all other things thereto appurtenant, both men, 
and lands, sown and unsown, ways, paths, meadows, pastures, 
ponds, mills, waters, piscaries, as also the services of Peter 
Carou, and his heirs, for one knight's fee, held at Seton and 
Oviton ; the services of Thomas de Amudeville, and his heirs, 
for one knight's fee, at Cotton and Treyford ; and the services 
of Godfrey Baarde, and his heirs, for two halves of one knight's 
fee, at Middleton and Hartburn, which lands they held of us 
between the Tyne and the Tees, together with all other things 
to the aforesaid fees pertaining, in exchange for the services of 
three knight's fees, which Philip de Kimber has held of the said 
bishop in Lincolnshire, and two knights' fees which Gerard de 
Camville has also there held of the said bishop, and one knight's 
fee which Baldwin Wake and Roger Fitz-Oseville also held 
there of the same bishop. Therefore we do will and command 
that the before-named Hugh, bishop of Durham, and his succes- 
sors, shall have, hold, and enjoy, freely, quietly, and with all 
due honor, the said two knights' fees and the said two halves of 
one knight's fee, together with the before-mentioned manor of 
Sedbergh and the Wapentake as hereinbefore named, with all 
things thereto pertaining in wood and plain, with soc, and sac, 
and tol, and them, and infangtheof, and with all other liberties 
and free customs, and with the pleas belonging to the crown, 
in such manner as we hold the same in our own hands, and in 
such manner as the said bishop has and holds the other lands 
and knights' fees in his bishopric, and so that the said bishop, 
us also his successors, may dispose of the men and lands to the 
same manor pertaining according to his own pleasure and free 
will, in such manner as he does with respect to his other men 
and lands in the said bishopric. Witnesses hereto : Baldwin, 
archbishop of Canterbury, Walter, archbishop of Rouen, John, 
archbishop of Dublin, Reginald, bishop of Bath, Hugh, bishop 
of Lincoln, John, bishop of Norwich, Hugh, bishop of Coventry, 
Sefrid, bishop of Chichester, Gilbert, bishop of Rochester, John, 
bishop of Exeter, the lord John, brother of our lord the king, 
William de Mandeville, earl of Essex, Robert, earl of Leicester, 
Hamelin, earl of Warenne, Waleran, earl of Warwick, William, 
earl of Arundel, Richard, earl of Clare, William, earl of Salis- 
bury, Roger Bigot, William Marshal, lord of Striguil. Given in 
the first year of our reign, on the eighteenth day of September, 



122 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1189. 

at Eatingert, by the hand of William de Longchamp, our 
chancellor." 

Also the said bishop gave to the before-named king 

marks of silver for receiving the earldom of Northumberland 
for life, together with its castles and other appurtenances. 

After this, the king proceeded to an abbey called Pipewell, 24 
where he was met by the following persons : Baldwin, arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, Walter, archbishop of Rouen, John, 
archbishop of Dublin, Eormalis, archbishop of Treves, Hugh, 
bishop of Durham, Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, Hugh, bishop of 
Chester, John, bishop of Norwich, John, bishop of Evreux, 
John, bishop of Exeter, William, bishop of Hereford, William, 
bishop of Worcester, Reginald, bishop of Bath, Gilbert, bishop 
of Rochester, Sefrid, bishop of Chichester, Henry, bishop of 
Bayeux, Peter, bishop of Saint David's, in Wales, Albinus, 
bishop of Eerns, Concord, bishop of Aghadoe, together with 
nearly all the abbats and priors of England. Here the king gave 
to Godfrey de Lucy the bishopric of Winchester ; to Richard, 
archdeacon of Ely, his treasurer, the bishopric of Lincoln ; and 
to Hubert Eitz- Walter, dean of York, the bishopric of Salis- 
bury; the abbey of Selesby 26 to Roger, prior of that abbey; 
the abbey of Glastonbury to Henry de Soilly, prior of Ber- 
mondsey ; and to Geoffrey, his brother, the former bishop- elect 
of Lincoln, the archbishopric of York. To Henry, the brother 
of William Marshal, he gave the deanery of York, and to 
Bucard de Pudsey, nephew of Hugh, bishop of Durham, the 
treasurership of the church of York. To William de Chuneli 
he gave the archdeaconry of Richmond, and to William de 
Saint Mary L'Eglise, the prebendal stall which had belonged to 
Herbert Eitz- Walter in the church of York, with the deanery 
of Saint Martin, at London. 

When Baldwin, archbishop of Canterbury, saw that the 
archbishopric of York had been given to the said Geoffrey, 
he claimed the consecrating of him, and forbade that he 
should receive consecration, or priest's orders, at the hands 
of any one but himself, and appealed in the matter to our 
lord the pope, producing before the king and all the bishops 
and clergy, and people, the charter of king William the Bas- 
tard, in which was stated the dispute which formerly took 
place between the churches of Canterbury and York, with re- 
spect to the primacy of England and certain other dignities. 
24 In Northamptonshire. 26 Selby, in Yorkshire. 



A.D. 1189. PREPARATIONS FOR THE CRUSADE. 123 

In this charter also it was stated that Thomas, at that time 
archbishop of York, had received priest's orders and episcopal 
consecration at the hands of Lanfranc, at that time archbishop 
of Canterbury and primate of all England, and paid to him 
canonical obedience, and came to his synods with the bishop 
of the church of Lindisfarne and his other suffragan bishops, 
and showed him all respect as being his primate. This charter 
also attested that all the above things had taken place before 
king William, at the general council held at London, in ac- 
cordance with the final sentence pronounced thereon by pope 
Alexander the Second. 

On the following day, John, bishop elect of Whitherne, was 
consecrated bishop by John, archbishop of Dublin, at Pipewell, 
it being the Lord's Day, and the fifteenth day before the 
calends of October. At the same council also, our lord the 
king appointed Hugh, bishop of Durham, and William, earl of 
Aumarle, chief justiciaries of England, and associated with 
them in the government of the kingdom William Marshal, 
Geoffrey Eitz-Peter, William Bruyere, Eobert de Whitfield, 
and Koger Fitz-Rainfray. 

Geoffrey, the archbishop elect of York, immediately made 
complaint against Henry, the brother of William Marshal, 
Bucard, the nephew of Hugh, bishop of Durham, William de 
Saint Mary L'Eglise, and Roger, abbat elect of the abbey of 
Saint German, at Selby, on whom the king had conferred the 
honors above-mentioned, and swore that these presentations of 
the king should not hold good, unless with his consent and will. 
In consequence of this, the king deprived him of the see of 
York, and a great dissension arose between them, so much so, 
that the king went so far even as to deprive him of all his pos- 
sessions on either side of the sea. However, shortly after, the 
said archbishop elect of York received priest's orders from John, 
bishop of Whitherne, his suffragan, on the fourth day before 
the calends of September, at Swale. 27 

In the meantime, Richard, king of England, sending his 
envoys to pope Clement, obtained from him letters patent, that 
such persons as he should think fit to excuse and leave in charge 
of his dominions, should be exempt from assuming the cross, 
and proceeding to Jerusalem ; by which means he obtained an 
immense sum of money. 

2 7 In the text Suuelle." 



124 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEST. A.D. 1189. 

Henry, the brother of William Marshal, to whom the king 
had given the deanery of York, came to Burton, in Lindsey, and 
there received orders as subdeacon and deacon on the same 
day, from Concord, bishop of Aghadoe. But when the said 
Henry came to York with the king's letters, in order to 
receive his deanery, he found no one to instal him as dean : 
as the clergy of the see of York asserted that no person but 
the archbishop ought to instal him as dean. However, Hamo, 
the praecentor of York, installed him in the prebendal stall 
which the king had conferred on him : but when Bucard 
de Pudsey, the archdeacon of Durham, to whom the king had 
given the treasurership of the church of York, came with 
the king's letters directed to Hamo the praecentor, requesting 
him to instal the said Bucard, he was unwilling to obey the 
king's commands. For he asserted that Roger, the archbishop 
of York, had given to him the said treasurership, and that king 
Henry had confirmed it to him ; and he appealed thereon to 
the Apostolic See ; and thus, both missing the objects of their 
desire, took their departure. 

In the same year, Formator, 28 archbishop of Treves, departed 
this life at Northampton, in England. In this year, also, in 
the month of September, the men of London, and many others 
who had taken ship on their way to Jerusalem, laid siege, in 
Spain, to a certain city of the Saracens, which is called Silvia, 
and took it ; and, after clearing it of the abominations of the 
Saracens, they ordained that the Christian law should be there 
observed for ever, and built a church in honor of God and Saint 
Mary, the Mother of God, and caused it to be dedicated by the 
neighbouring bishops, and had a certain clerk of Flanders, who 
had come with them, consecrated bishop of the said city, and 
then delivered it up to Sancho, king of Portugal. 

In the same year, Godfrey de Lucy, bishop of Winchester, 
purchased of Richard, king of England, two excellent manors, 
namely, Wargrave and Menes, which formerly belonged to 
the bishop of Winchester, as was generally said ; and Samson, 
abbat of Saint Edmund's, bought of him the manor which is 
called Mildenhall, for a thousand marks, and which, of ancient 
right, was said to belong to the abbey of Saint Edmund's. All 
the rest as well, whoever chose, bought of the king their own 
rights and those of others ; by which the king acquired a very 
large sum of money. 

28 Properly " Formalis." 29 More commonly " Silves " 



A.D. 1189. GENERAL COUNCIL AT LONDON. 125 

Geoffrey, the archbishop elect, coming to York, was received 
with a solemn procession by the clergy and people. There 
came also to York, Henry, the brother of William Marshal, 
to whom the king had given the deanery of York, and Bucard, 
the nephew of Hugh, bishop of Durham, to whom the king 
had given the treasurership of York ; but the archbishop of 
York refused to receive or instal them, declaring that he would 
not do so until such time as his election had been confirmed 
by the Supreme Pontiff. 

In the same year, in the month of October, Henry, duke of 
Saxony, the son-in-law of Henry, king of England, returned to 
Saxony, his own country, and, having levied a large army, at- 
tacked those to whom the emperor had given his territories, 
and defeated them, taking more than thirty castles. In the 
same year, in the month of November, William de Mandeville, 
earl of Aumarle, died at Rouen, in Normandy, and Hugh de 
Pudsey, count de Bar sur Seine, nephew of Hugh, bishop of 
Durham, died at Aclea, and was buried in the place at Durham 
which is called the Galilee. 29 

In the same month, Eotrod, count de Perche, and other en- 
voys of Philip, king of France, came into England, to Richard, 
king of England, to say that, at a general council held at Paris, 
the king of Trance, touching the Holy Evangelists, had made 
oath, as had all the chief men of his kingdom who had as- 
sumed the cross, that, God willing, they would, without fail, 
be at Vezelay, at the close of Easter, for the purpose of setting 
out for Jerusalem ; and, in testimony of the said oath, the king 
of France sent to the king of England his letters, requesting 
of him that he and his earls and barons would in like manner 
give him assurance that, at the same period, tifey would be at 
Vezelay. 

Accordingly, Richard, king of England, and his earls and 
barons who had assumed the cross, met at a general council at 
London ; and, touching the Holy Evangelists, made oath that, 
with the help of God, they would, without fail, be at Vezelay 
at the close of Easter, prepared to set out thence for Jerusalem ; 
upon which the before-named count de Perche, and the other 
envoys of the king of France, made oath, at the council, upon 
the soul of the king of France, in presence of the king of Eng- 
land, to the same effect, and William Marshal and some others 

29 A portion of the cathedral, at the east end of it, overlooking the 
banks of the Wear. 



126 ANNALS OF B.OGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1189. 

made oath at the same council to the like effect, upon the soul 
of the king of England, in presence of the envoys of the king 
of France ; and the king of England sent to the king of Prance 
his agreement binding himself so to do. 

In the same year, Sibylla, queen of Jerusalem, gave Ascalon 
to Saladin, as the ransom of her husband, Guido de Lusignan ; 
on which Saladin set him at liberty, and gave him leave to 
depart, with a safe conduct as far as the city of Tyre ; on his 
arrival at which place, the marquis Conrad would not allow 
him to enter. Consequently, the king, having no place where 
to lay his head, remained outside of the city of Tyre in his 
tents ; on which, there flocked to him the Templars and Hos- 
pitallers, and all the Christians, who, through fear of the 
pagans, had been dispersed in that neighbourhood, and gave in 
their adhesion to him as their lord and king. 

Upon this, king Guido, by the advice of Heraclius, the Pa- 
triarch of Jerusalem, and of those who were with him, set 
out on his way to the city of Acre, to which he laid siege, at 
a spot which is called [Mount] Turon, in the month of August, 
on the octave of the Assumption of Saint Mary, that is to 
say, on the eleventh day before the calends of September ; but, 
as the king had but a small army, the pagans, who were in 
the city of Acre, did not shut the gates of the city either 
by day or night, but went to and fro, with their camels, 
carrying provisions and other things that were necessary to 
them. 

On the third day after, there landed at Acre, Robert, count de 
Drues, and his brother Philip, bishop of Beauvais, count Erard 
de Breines, an<J Jacques d'Avennes, with the landgrave of Ger- 
many, and many other Christian pilgrims, at whose arrival the 
king, and all who were with him, greatly rejoiced, with exceed- 
ing gladness. Accordingly, Saladin, after levying a large 
army, approached the army of the Christians, and fought a 
battle with them, on the fourth day of the week, being the 
day after the feast of Saint Michael, on the plain between 
Acre and Casale 1'Eveque, in which battle Saladin was de- 
feated and put to flight, so that he left all his tents in the 
hands of the Christians, and lost one half of his best troops ; 
the Christians also lost a great part of theirs. 

After a time, in consequence of their sinfulness, Saladin 
again got the better of the Christians, who were repulsed and 
driven to their camp, and Gerard de Bedford, the Grand Master 



A.D. 1189. THE MANNER OF THE SIEGE OF ACEE. 127 

of the Temple, and the Marshal of the Temple, with eighteen of 
the brethren, who had behaved most valiantly, were slain ; the 
Christians also lost many other soldiers, and among them forty 
knights and one hundred Turcopoles. 31 Saladin, however, lost 
Mirsalim, his eldest son, and his nephew Tekehedin, Migemal, 
his seneschal, and a hundred of the choicest of his troops, be- 
sides many others, whose numbers were not ascertained. On 
the fourth day of the week, Saladin again approached with his 
army; but when the Christians showed a readiness to engage 
with him, he hastily retreated, and, on the third day after, 
shifted his camp, and hastened to a place which has the name 
of Saftan, while his army occupied the whole space that lies 
between Casale TEveque and Docus ; as, from the time that 
Saladin was born, he had never levied such a mighty army 
as this. For, throughout the whole of his territories, there 
was not a person fitted for war who was not included in this 
army. Nor do I believe that any person could ever have set 
eyes upon so large and so valiant a band of Christians as he 
might have seen on this occasion. In addition to this, after the 
battle was over, there arrived five hundred most valiant Chris- 
tian knights and ten thousand men, brave warriors, well pro- 
vided with all kinds of arms. In the same year, also, there 
came to those shores ships and busses, 32 more than five hundred 
in number, besides numerous galleys and cutters, which imme- 
diately returned to Apulia, that they might bring further 
supplies of men and provisions. The ships, however, of the 
Germans and of the Danes remained at Acre, for the purpose 
of fuel : as the Christians there had no fuel with which to 
cook their food, except such as the ships had brought, and the 
ships themselves. 

It deserves to be described how the city of Acre was be- 
sieged ; Guido, king of Jerusalem, with the queen, his wife, 
and his two daughters, was lodged at Turon, looking towards 
the sea, and near the summit of the mountain, Heraclius, 
the Patriarch, and Geoffrey, the king's brother, being with 
him. The whole sea-line, which extends to Caiaphas, was 

31 Sons of Christian mothers by Saracenic fathers. 

32 " Burcise," or " busss," " busses," were a kind of large merchant 
ships, rounded fore and aft, and with capacious hulls. Spelman thinks 
that they took their name from the English word "buss," signify- 
ing " a box." It has been, however, suggested that they were so called 
" >m their resemblance to a wine-cask, which the Greeks of the middle 

called jftfrgto* 



128 ATTOALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEJT. A.D. 1189. 

occupied by the camp of the Pisans, so much so, that no one 
could escape from the city on that side. On the other side of 
[Mount] Turon, where Maconiatum is situate (called Lama- 
humheria by the Saracens), the lord landgrave and the said 
Jacques de Avennes, and all the Germans and the Genevese, 
had pitched their tents. Beyond these, the Temple with its 
brotherhood took up its quarters at the spot where were the 
gardens and the Tanks of the Latins. The Hospital, with 
its brethren and people, pitched its camp on the spot where 
were the gardens and land of the said Hospital. In the other 
direction, the whole space, as far as the sea, was occupied by 
the marquis Conrad, and many of the people from beyond 
the Alps, quite as far as Mount Musard. Count Robert de 
Drues, 33 the bishop of Beauvais, and the count Erard de Breines, 
as also the Franks and Campanians, together with the king's 
people, took up their quarters towards Mount Turon, and 
near the town; the archbishop of Pisa, the archbishop of 
Nazareth, the archbishop of Besanson, the archbishop of Arles- 
le-blanc, and the archbishop of Montreal being with them. 

The Christians next made a large trench from sea to sea, 34 
where the foss of the Temple was already in existence, lying 
between them and the army of the pagans. They also made 
another trench between themselves and Acre, so that they were 
in no fear of assault from the persons in Acre, and none of 
the pagans could go forth from Acre without falling into their 
hands. The engines also and stone batteries of the Christians 
were masked behind them, so that no one could do them any 
injury from the opposite side ; but the Christians there were 
exposed to the winds and rain, having neither houses nor 
cabins in which to shelter themselves ; nor indeed, if they had 
sworn so to do, could they have retreated, but there they must 
live or die. In this way, as previously mentioned, was siege 
on all sides laid to Acre ; so strictly that no person whatever 
could possibly escape therefrom, while day after day they made 
assaults against it. 

On the other hand, on one side of the Christians was Acre, 
full of pagan warriors, and on the other was Saladin with his 
mighty army. And, with all truth do I assert it, never were 
the Christians in a similar position, or one full of such anxious 

33 Such is the inaccuracy of the text, that it is doubtful whether this 
name is Drues or Arves ; as the same person is first called by one name 
and then by the other. 31 Across the Peninsula. 



A.D. 1189. A CHTTBCH FOUNDED AT LAMBETH. 129 

expectation, as no provisions could be brought them but by sea. 
In the meanwhile, prayers were put up for them without 
ceasing by the Church to the Lord. 

In the same year, in the month of October, Baldwin, 
archbishop of Canterbury, consecrated Godfrey, bishop of Win- 
chester, William, bishop of Ely, Hubert, bishop of Salisbury, 
and Richard, bishop of London. In the same month Rees, the 
son of Griffin, 35 king of South Wales, came into England as far 
as Oxford, under the safe conduct of John, earl of Mortaigne, 
the king's brother ; but because the king of England declined 
to come to meet him, he was greatly indignant, and returned 
to his country without an interview with the king. 

In the same year, in the month of November, cardinal John 
of Anagni, who had been sent as legate a latere by our lord 
the pope to put an end to the disputes which existed be- 
tween Baldwin, archbishop of Canterbury, and the monks 
of the Holy Trinity at Canterbury, landed at Dover, in Eng- 
land; on which he was forbidden to proceed any further with- 
out the king's command, and, accordingly, he remained there 
till our lord the king sent for him. In the meantime, our lord 
the king went to Canterbury, and made peace and a final recon- 
ciliation between Baldwin, archbishop of Canterbury, and the 
monks, on the following terms : Roger le Norreys, whom the be- 
fore-named archbishop, against the wishes of the monks, had 
made prior of the church of Canterbury, was to be deprived of 
the office, and the church, 36 which the said bishop had built in the 
suburbs against the wish of the monks, was to be pulled down, 
while the monks were to pay canonical obedience and make pro- 
fession thereof to the said archbishop, in the same manner in 
which they had been accustomed to do to his predecessors. Thus 
were matters arranged ; and, at the prayer of the archbishop of 
Canterbury, our lord the king gave to the before-named prior, 
after his deposition, the abbacy of Evesham, and he was ele- 
vated to the rank of abbat thereof. The archbishop also placed 
a prior over the church of Canterbury with the king's assent, 
and with the sanction of the chapter. The monks of Canterbury, 
however, after the death of that archbishop, deposed him. In the 
meantime, the archbishop built a church at Lamhe, 37 opposite 
to Westminster, and the prebends which he had given to the 

35 Rice ap Griffydd. 36 Akington or Hackington church, pre- 

viously mentioned. See p. 69. 37 Lambeth. 

VOL. II. K 



130 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1189. 

church built by him in the suburbs of the city of Canterbury, 
he gave to this new church which he had built at Lambeth. 

At this treaty of peace and final reconciliation there were pre- 
sent Richard, king of England, and queen Eleanor, his mother, 
"Walter, archbishop of Rouen, John, archbishop of Dublin, 
Hugh, bishop of Durham, John, bishop of Norwich, Hubert, 38 
bishop of Salisbury, Godfrey, bishop of Winchester, Gilbert, 
bishop of Rochester, Reginald, bishop of Bath, Hugh, bishop 
of Coventry, Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, William, bishop of 
Worcester, the abbat of Saint Augustin's at Canterbury, Bene- 
dict, abbat of Burgh, Sampson, abbat of Saint Edmund's, the 
abbat of Battle, the abbat of Westminster, Guarine, abbat of 
Saint Alban's, and many other priors and abbats, all of whom 
set their seals to the writing in which was set forth the said 
agreement. 

After this, the king sent for cardinal John of Anagni, who 
came to Canterbury, and was received with a solemn proces- 
sion, but was greatly offended that in his absence a reconcili- 
ation had been effected between the archbishop of Canterbury 
and his monks. 

In the same year, in the month of November, Geoffrey, the 
archbishop elect of York, together with the barons of York- 
shire, and the sheriff of York, by command of our lord the king, 
went as far as the river Tweed, and there received William, 
king of the Scots, and paid him all due honor, and gave him a 
safe conduct to the king of England. Accordingly, William, 
king of the Scots, came to the king of England at Canterbury 
in the month of December, and did homage to him for his 
dignities in England, in the same manner that his brother 
Malcolm had held them. Richard, king of England, also 
restored to him the castle of Roxburgh and the castle of Ber- 
wick, freely and quietly to be held by him ; and he acquitted and 
released him and all his heirs from all homage and allegiance, 
for the kingdom of Scotland, to him and the kings of England, 
for ever. For this gift of his castles and for quitting claim 
to all fealty and allegiance for the kingdom of Scotland, and 
for the charter of Richard, king of England, signifying the 
same, William, king of the Scots, gave to Richard, king of 
England, ten thousand marks sterling. The charter, executed 
by the king of England, was to the following effect : 

39 This is the proper reading, and not John, as it stands in the text. 



A. D. 1189. CHAETEB, OF THE KING OF ENGLAND. 131 

The Charter of the Icing of England as to the liberties granted ly 
him to William, king of Scotland. 

" Richard, by the grace of God, king of England, duke of 
Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, to the arch- 
bishops, bishops, abbats, earls, barons, justices, and sheriffs, 
and all his servants and faithful people throughout the whole 
of England, greeting. Know ye that we have restored to our 
most dearly-beloved cousin William, by the same grace king 
of the Scots, his castles of Roxburgh and Berwick, to be held 
by him and his heirs for ever as his own of hereditary right. 
"We have also acquitted and released him of and from all cove- 
nants and agreements which Henry, king of England, our father, 
of happy memory, extorted from him by new charters, and in 
consequence of his capture ; upon condition, however, that he 
shall in all things do unto us as fully as Malcolm, king of the 
Scots, his brother, did as of right unto our predecessors, and of 
right was bound to do. We likewise will do for him whatever of 
right our predecessors did and were bound to do for the said 
Malcolm, both in his coming with a safe-conduct to our court, 
and in his returning from our court, and while he is staying 
at our court, and in making all due provision for him, and ac- 
cording to him all liberties, dignities, and honors due to him as 
of right, according as the same shall be ascertained by four of 
our nobles who shall be selected by the said king William, and 
four of his nobles who shall be selected by us. And if any one 
of our subjects shall, since the time when the said king Wil- 
liam was taken prisoner by our father, have seized upon any 
of the borders or marches of the kingdom of Scotland, without 
the same being legally adjudicated to him ; then we do will 
that the same shall be restored to him in full, and shall be 
placed in the same state in which they were before he was 
so taken prisoner. Moreover, as to his lands which he may 
hold in England, whether in demesne or whether in fee, that 
is to say in the county of Huntingdon, and in all other coun- 
ties, he and his heirs shall hold the said counties as fully and 
freely for ever as the said Malcolm held or ought to have held 
the same, unless the said Malcolm or his heirs shall have since 
enfeoffed any one of the same ; on the further condition also that 
if any one shall be hereafter enfeoffed of the same, the services 
of the said fees shall belong to him or his heirs. And if our 
said father shall have given anything to. William, king of the 
Scots, we do will that the same shall be hereby ratified and con- 



132 ANNALS OF KOGEli DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1189. 

firmed. We have also restored to him all allegiances of his 
subjects and all charters which the king our father obtained 
of him by reason of his capture. And if any other charters 
shall chance, through forgetfulness, to have been retained by 
us or shall hereafter be found, we do hereby order that the 
same shall be utterly void and of no effect. He has also be- 
come our liegeman as to all the lands for which his prede- 
cessors were liegemen to our predecessors, and has sworn fealty 
to ourselves and to our heirs. The following being witnesses 
hereto: Baldwin, archbishop of Canterbury, Walter, arch- 
bishop of Kouen, Hugh, bishop of Durham, John, bishop of 
Norwich, Hubert, bishop of Salisbury, Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, 
Godfrey, bishop of Winchester, Gilbert, bishop of Rochester, 
Reginald, bishop of Bath, Hugh, bishop of Coventry, William, 
bishop of Worcester, Eleanor, the king's mother, John, earl of 
Mortaigne, the king's brother, and many others." 

On the same day, there came thither, namely, to Canter- 
bury, Hugh, bishop of Durham, and Hubert, bishop of Salis- 
bury, to appeal to the presence of our lord the pope, against 
Geoffrey, the archbishop elect of York, before the said cardinal 
and the above-named archbishops and bishops, wishing to 
prove that his election ought not to hold good, because they 
themselves to whom the first votes in the election belonged were 
not present at his said election. Bucard also, the treasurer of 
the church of York, and Henry, the dean of the said church, 
appealed against the said archbishop elect of York to the pre- 
sence of our lord the pope, affirming that he was not canoni- 
cally elected, and was a murderer, born in adultery, and the 
son of a harlot. But although all these allegations were made 
against him, the before-named cardinal John of Anagni, the 
legate of the Apostolic See, confirmed his election. 

After this, Richard, king of England, gave to his brother 
John, earl of Mortaigne, by way of augmentation, the earldoms 
of Cornwall, Devon. 39 Dorset, and Somerset. The king of 
England also gave to his mother, queen Eleanor, the whole of 
the dower which queen Matilda, the wife of king Henry the 
Elder, 40 had enjoyed, the whole of the dower which Alice, the 
wife of king Stephen, enjoyed, and the whole of the dower 
which Henry, king of England, son of the empress Matilda, 
had given to her. 

39 These have been previously mentioned as given to him, except that 
of the county of Devon, See p. 115 of this Volume. * Henry the First. 



A.D. 1189. KING EICHARD SAILS FOE CALAIS. 133 

King Richard departed from the city of Canterbury, on the 
fifth day of December, for Dover, in order to cross over ; for 
there many ships had assembled by his command from different 
parts of England. On the day after his arrival at Dover, Roger, 
the abbat elect of Saint German's, at Selby, received his bene- 
diction at Dover, on Saint Nicholas' day, from Hugh, bishop of 
Durham, by the king's command, notwithstanding the prohi- 
bition of Geoffrey, archbishop elect of York, 

On this, Geoffrey, the archbishop elect of York, becoming 
sensible that without the intervention of money he would in 
nowise be able to gain his brother's favour, promised him three 
thousand pounds sterling, for the purpose of so ingratiating him- 
self ; on which, the king restored to him the archbishopric of 
York, and confirmed the same to him by his charter, and restored 
to him all the lay fees which king Henry, his father, had given 
him, on either side of the sea ; namely, in England, the vill 
of "Wycombe, with its appurtenances, the county of Giffard, 
in Normandy, and in Anjou, the honor of Blauge, with its 
appurtenances. The said king also released to God and Saint 
Peter of York, and to the said Geoffrey, archbishop elect of 
York, and to all that were able to succeed him in the arch- 
bishopric of York, all his lands and those of his canons in 
York and Nottingham for ever, both from forestal regard, 41 
and all other demands and impositions of forest and foresters, 
and gave them free power, and by his charter confirmed the 
same, to take venison throughout all their prebends in York- 
shire and Nottinghamshire. 

In addition to this, Hugh, bishop of Durham, Hubert, bishop 
of Salisbury, Henry, dean of the church of York, and Bucard, 
treasurer of the same church,by the king's command, withdrew 
the appeals which they had made against the said archbishop 
elect of York ; and the said archbishop elect, at the king's 
request, confirmed to the said Henry, the deanery of York, 
and to Bucard, the treasurership ; and to Hugh, bishop of 
Durham, he confirmed all the privileges and covenants which 
had been made between the said bishop and Roger, archbishop 
of York, and promised, by the seal of his consecration, that he 
would confirm the same. 

After these matters were arranged, Richard, king of Eng- 

41 A fee to the court of regard, which was holden for each forest every 
three years, for the purpose of expeditation, or cutting off three claws of 
the fore-feet of dogs, to prevent them from killing the deer. 



134 AtfNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEtf. A.D. 1189. 

land, on the eleventh day of December, being the second day 
of the week, crossed over from Dover to Calais, in Flanders, 
whither Philip, earl of Flanders, came to meet him, and, re- 
ceiving him with congratulations, escorted him with a safe 
conduct to Normandy. There also crossed over with the king, 
the cardinal John of Anagni, Walter, archbishop of Rouen, 
Henry, bishop of Bayeux, and John, bishop of Evreux. Hugh, 
bishop of Durham, and William, bishop of Ely, remained in 
England as chief justiciaries ; with whom, before his de- 
parture, the king had associated Hugh Bardolph, William 
Marshal, Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, and William Bruyere. The 
king also delivered to William, bishop of Ely, his chancellor, 
one of his seals, by virtue of which he ordered his commands 
to be carried out in his kingdom ; he also gave into his charge 
the Tower of London. He also gave into the charge of Hugh, 
bishop of Durham, the castle of Windsor, with the forests and 
the earldom of the county. 

Immediately after the king had passed over, a dispute arose 
between the before-named bishops of Durham and Ely, which 
of them was to occupy the highest place ; for the thing that 
pleased the one, displeased the other. So true it is that " All 
authority is impatient of a partner;" and, not to go further 
for an illustration, " The first walls were steeped in a brother's 
blood/' 43 

In the month of November, in the same year, without issue, 
died William, king of Sicily, the dukedom of Apulia, and the 
principality of Capua, at Palermo, in Sicily. This William, 
king of Sicily, a long time before his death, had given Con- 
stance, the daughter of Roger, the former king of Sicily, his 
aunt, in marriage to Henry, king of Germany, and afterwards 
emperor of the Romans, and had made her his heir to succeed 
him on the throne of Sicily, if he should die without issue ; 
and this he caused to be confirmed by the oaths of the prin- 
cipal men of the kingdom. However, on the death of king 
William, Tancred, count de la Liche, his cousin, usurped the 
kingdom of Sicily, contrary to the oath of fealty which he had 
taken to the before-named Constance. On this, Henry, em- 
peror of the Romans, sent a large army into Apulia, under the 
command of the archbishop of Mentz and Henry Teste ; who, 
after burning many cities, and overthrowing many towns, 

42 "Fraterno prirai raaduerunt sanguine muri ;" alluding to the death of 
Remus at the hands of his brother Romulus, or of Celer, his lieutenant, on 
the walls of iufant Rome. 



A. D.I 190. PEACE BETWEEN ENGLAND AND FRANCE. 135 

returned home without effecting their purpose. On their 
withdrawal, Richard, count de Cirne, brother of the queen of 
Sicily, the wife of king Tancred, made war upon count Roger 
de Andria, on the ground, that he..had given aid to the king 
of Germany against king Tancred, and took him prisoner, and 
delivered him to king Tancred. Moreover, Joanna, the sister 
of Rrcfeai?d, king of England, who had been the wife of Wil- 
liam, king of Sicily, lately deceased, remained in the custody 
of k^Bg^ancred:.' ' 

tiTtltg yV&Tof grace 1190, king Richard was at Burun, in 
Normandy, on the day of the Nativity of our Lord, which took 
place on the second day of the week, and kept that festival 
there with the chief men of the territory ; for this Nativity of our 
Lord was the first since the coronation of the said king. After 
the Nativity, the said Richard, king of England, and Philip, 
king of .France, held a conference at V Saint Remy, where 
they agreed to a lasting peace between them and their re- 
spective kingdoms, and, committing the treaty to writing, 
ratified it by their oaths and seals, on the feast of Saint Hilary. 
The archbishops and bishops also of both kingdoms agreed to the 
same on their word of truth ; while the earls and barons of 
those kingdoms made oath and swore that they would faith- 
fully observe the said treaty of peace and keep the same un- 
broken. The tenor of this treaty was to the effect that each 
of them would maintain the honor of the other, and would 
keep faith with him for life, limb, and worldly honor, and 
that neither of them would forsake the other in the time of 
need ; but that the king of France would aid the king of Eng- 
land in defending his territories as he himself would defend his 
own city of Paris, if it were besieged, and that Richard, king 
of England, would aid the king of France in defending his ter- 
ritories as he himself would defend his own city of Rouen, if it 
were besieged. The earls and barons also of both kingdoms 
made oath that they would not depart from their fealty to the 
said kings or wage any war in their territories, so long as they 
should be on their pilgrimage. The archbishops also and 
bishops strictly promised, on their word of truth, that they would 
pronounce sentence of excommunication against such as should 
be guilty of a breach of the said treaty of peace and compact. 

The said kings also made oath that if either of them should 
die on the pilgrimage to Jerusalem, the one who should survive 
should have the treasures and forces of him who had died, 



136 ANNALS OF EOGEE BE HOVEDEtf. A.D 1190. 

to employ the same in the service of God. And because they 
could not be in readiness at Easter, the time previously ap- 
pointed, they postponed setting out for Jerusalem till the feast 
of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, determining that 
then without fail they would be at Vezelay. 

In the same year, on the vigil of the Epiphany of our Lord, 
a great dissension arose between Geoffrey, archbishop elect of 
York, and Henry, the dean of that church, and Bucard, the 
treasurer. For the said archbishop elect having expressed 
a desire to be present at vespers in the metropolitan church 
on such a solemn occasion, the said Henry and Bucard would 
not wait for him, but began vespers; consequently, when 
the said archbishop elect came into the choir, together with 
Hamo, the pracentor, and some other canons of the church, 
he was greatly indignant thereat, and immediately ordered 
silence, the praecentor ordering to the like effect ; while, on 
the other hand, the dean and treasurer gave orders that they 
should sing on ; however, in consequence of the orders of the 
archbishop elect and prsecentor, all kept silence; on which 
the archbishop elect was beginning vespers again, when the 
treasurer ordered the tapers to be extinguished. These being 
put out and the vespers brought to a close, the archbishop 
elect complained before God, the clergy, and the people, of the 
injury which the dean and treasurer had done him, and sus- 
pended them and the church from the celebration of Divine 
service, until such time as they should have given him satisfac- 
tion for the same. 

On the following day, when all the people of the city re- 
sorted after their usual custom to the metropolitan church, that 
there, on account of the solemnity of the day, they might more 
becomingly hear Divine service, both the archbishop elect and 
the said dean and treasurer ought to have been in the choir, 
together with the canons of the said church, to make peace and 
reconciliation between themselves; however, the dean and 
treasurer refused to make any satisfaction to their archbishop 
elect for such and so great a transgression, but spoke contemptu- 
ously of him ; in consequence of which the populace were en- 
raged against them, and were desirous to make an attack on 
them, but the archbishop elect would not allow them. On this, 
in great alarm, they fled from before the face of the people, 
and one of them took refuge at the tomb of Saint William, 
and the other betook himself to the house of the dean ; while 



A.D. 1190. PEKSECUTION OP THE JEWS AT YOEK. 137 

the archbishop elect pronounced them excommunicated. In 
consequence of this, Divine service ceased from that day in the 
metropolitan church. 

In the same year, after the Purification of Saint Mary, queen 
Eleanor, the mother of king Eichard, Alice, the sister of Philip, 
king of France, Baldwin, archbishop of Canterbury, John, 
bishop of Norwich, Hugh, bishop of Durham, Godfrey, bishop 
of Winchester, Eeginald, bishop of Bath, William, bishop of 
Ely, Hubert, bishop of Salisbury, Hugh, bishop of Chester, 
Geoffrey, archbishop elect of York, and John, earl of Mortaigne, 
the king's brother, by order of our lord the king crossed over 
from England to Normandy ; and after holding a council with 
them, our lord the king appointed William, bishop of Ely, his 
chancellor, chief justiciary of England ; while he made Hugh, 
bishop of Durham, justiciary from the river Humber to the 
territory of the king of Scotland. He also compelled Geoffrey, 
archbishop elect of York, and John, earl of Mortaigne, his bro- 
thers, to make oath, touching the Holy Evangelists, that they 
would not enter England for the next three years, except with 
his permission. However, he immediately released his brother 
John from the oath which he had made, and gave him per- 
mission to return to England, after swearing that he would 
faithfully serve him. 

The king also sent to England William, bishop of Ely, his 
chancellor, to make the preparations necessary for him and his 
expedition ; and, as he wished to exalt him above all other per- 
sons in his dominions, both clergy as well as laity, he sent envoys 
to pope Clement, and prevailed upon him to entrust to the be- 
fore-named chancellor the legateship of the whole of England 
and Scotland. On the chancellor arriving in England, he caused 
the Tower of London to be surrounded with a moat of very 
great depth, hoping that so the river Thames might pass around 
it. After this, the chancellor received, for the necessities of 
our lord the king, from each city of England two palfreys and 
two sumpter horses by way of aid ; from each abbey throughout 
England one palfrey and one sumpter horse ; and from each of 
the king's manors one palfrey and one sumpter horse 

In the same month of March, on the seventeenth 43 day be- 
fore the calends of April, being the sixth day before Palm 
Sunday, the Jews of the city of York, in number five hundred 
men, besides women and children, shut themselves up in the 
43 A various reading has " the eighteenth." 



138 AKSALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1190, 

tower of York, with the consent and sanction of the keeper of 
the tower, and of the sheriff, in consequence of their dread of 
the Christians ; but when the said sheriff and the constable 
sought to regain possession of it, the Jews refused to deliver it 
up. In consequence of this, the people of the city, and the 
strangers who had come within the jurisdiction thereof, at the 
exhortation of the sheriff and the constable, with one consent 
made an attack upon the Jews. 

After they had made assaults upon the tower, day and night, 
the Jews offered the people a large sum of money to allow them 
to depart with their lives ; but this the others refused to re- 
ceive. Upon this, one skilled in their laws arose and said : 
" Men of Israel, listen to my advice. It is better that we 
should kill one another, than fall into the hands of the enemies 
of our law." Accordingly, all the Jews, both men as well as 
women, gave their assent to his advice, and each master of a 
family, beginning with the chief persons of his household, with 
a sharp knife first cut the throats of his wife and sons and 
daughters, and then of all his servants, and lastly his own. 
Some of them also threw their slain over the walls among the 
people ; while others shut up their slain in the king's house 
and burned them, as well as the king's houses. Those who 
Lad slain the others were afterwards killed by the people. In 
the meantime, some of the Christians set fire to the Jews' 
houses, and plundered them ; and thus all the Jews in the city 
of York were destroyed, and all acknowledgments of debts due 
to them were burnt. 

In the same year died Isabella, queen of Trance, and 
daughter of the earl of Hainault, before her husband Philip, 
king of France, had set out for Jerusalem. In the same year, 
the Annunciation of our Lord fell on Easter day, a thing that 
had not happened for a long time previously. In the mean- 
time, the king's envoys, whom he had sent to Rome to obtain 
the legateship of England and Scotland for William, his chan- 
cellor, returned to him with letters of our lord the pope relative 
thereto. Accordingly, on the strength of his legateship, the 
said bishop of Ely, legate of the Apostolic See, chancellor of 
our lord the king, and justiciary of all England, oppressed the 
clergy and the people, confounding right and wrong ; nor was 
there a person in the kingdom who dared to offer resistance to 
his authority, even in word. 

After Easter, the said chancellor of the king came to York 



A.D. 1190. ATTEMPT TO SEIZE THE BISHOP OF DUfiHAM. 139 

with a great army, for the purpose of seizing those evil-doers 
who had destroyed the Jews of that city ; and, on learning 
that this had been done by command of the sheriff and the 
keeper of the tower, he deprived them both of their offices ; 
while he exacted of the citizens of the city a hundred hostages, 
as security for their good faith and keeping the peace of the 
king and the kingdom, and that they would take their trial in 
the court of our lord the king for the death of the Jews. After 
this, the said chancellor placed in charge of Osbert de Long- 
champ, his brother, the jurisdiction of the county of York, 
and ordered the castle, in the old castelry which William Rufus 
had erected there, to be fortified. The knights, also, of that 
county who would not come to make redress, he ordered to be 
arrested. 

The said chancellor, by virtue of his legateship, next sus- 
pended the canons, vicars, and clerks of the church of Saint 
Peter at York, because they had refused to receive him in solemn 
^recession ; and laid the church itself under an interdict until 
t j.e canons, vicars, and clerks of the church of Saint Peter should 
come and throw themselves at his feet ; he also caused the 
bells of that church to be laid upon the ground. 

In the meantime, Richard, king of England, gave to Hugh, 
bishop of Durham, leave to return to his country : who, on 
m r ,ting the chancellor at the city of Ely, 44 presented to him 
the king's letters, in which the king had appointed him justici- 
ary from the river Humber to the territories of the king of Scot- 
land; on which the chancellor made answer, that he would with 
pleasure execute the king's commands, and took him with him 
as far as Suwelle, 45 where he seized him, and kept him in cus- 
tody until he had surrendered to him the castle of Windsor 
and others which the king had delivered into his charge. In 
addition to this, the bishop of Durham delivered to the chan- 
cellor, Henry de Pudsey, his son, and Gilbert de la Ley, as 
pledges that he would keep faith to the king and his king- 
dom ; on which, the bishop of Durham, being liberated from 
the custody of the chancellor, came to a vill of his, which 
bears the name of Hoveden. 46 While the bishop was staying 
at this place for some days, there came to Hoveden Osbert de 
Longchamp, brother of the chancellor, and William de Stute- 
ville, with a considerable body of armed people, intending, by 

44 Erroneously called " Blie" in the text. 4i Southwell. 

46 Howden, in Yorkshire, the native place of our author. 






140 AJSNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1190. 

command of the chancellor, to seize the bishop ; however, the 
bishop gave them security that he would not depart thence, 
except with the permission of the king or of the chancellor. 
Accordingly, the bishop of Durham sent messengers to the king 
of England, to inform him of everything that had happened to 
him through the chancellor. 

In the meantime, the king of England marched into Gas- 
cony, and laid siege to the castle of William de Chisi, and 
took it ; on which he hanged William, the owner of the castle, 
because he had plundered pilgrims from Saint Jago, 47 and other 
persons, as they passed through his lands. After this, the 
king of England proceeded to Chin on, in Anjou, where he 
appointed Gerard, archbishop of Auxienne, Bernard, bishop of 
Bayonne, Eobert de Sabul, Richard de Camville, and William 
de Fortz de Oleron, chiefs and constables of the whole of his 
fleet which was about to proceed to the land of Syria, and gave 
them ordinances to the following effect : 48 

The CJiarter of Richard, king of England, containing ordinances 
for those who were about to proceed ly sea. 

" Richard, by the grace of God, king of England, duke of 
Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, to all his sub- 
jects about to proceed by sea to Jerusalem, greeting. Know 
ye, that we, with the common consent of fit and proper men, 
have made the enactments under- written. Whoever shall slay 
a man on ship-board, he shall be bound to the dead man and 
thrown into the sea. If he shall slay him on land, he shall be 
bound to the dead man and buried in the earth. If any one 
shall be convicted, by means of lawful witnesses, of having 
drawn out a knife with which to strike another, or shall 
strike another so as to. draw blood, he shall lose his hand. 
If, also, he shall give a blow with his hand, without shedding 
blood, he shall be plunged in the sea three times. If any man 
shall utter disgraceful language or abuse, or shall curse his com- 
panion, he shall pay him an ounce of silver for every time he has 
so abused him. A robber who shall be convicted of theft, shall 

47 Saint Jago de Compostella. 

48 These are a small portion of what are known as the " Oleron Laws," 
from having been made by king Richard when his fleet was lying at 
Oleron, an island at the mouth of the river Charente. They form the 
basis of a large part of the sea-laws in use at the present day. 



A.D. 1190. LAMENT ON THE EXPEDITION TO JERUSALEM. 141 

have his head cropped after the manner of a champion, 50 and 
boiling pitch shall be poured thereon, and then the feathers 
of a cushion shall be shaken 51 out upon him, so that he 
may be known, and at the first land at which the ships 
shall touch, he shall be set on shore. "Witness myself, at 
Chinon." 

The king also gave orders, in another writ of his, that all 
his subjects who were about to proceed to sea should pay obe- 
dience to the orders and commands of the before-named justices 
of his fleet. After this, the king proceeded to Tours, and 
there 52 received the scrip and staff of his pilgrimage from the 
hands of William, archbishop of Tours; but it so happened 
that, while the king was leaning on the staff, it broke asunder. 

After this, the said king, and Philip, king of France, met 
at Vezelay, where rests the body of Saint Mary Magdalen. 
Here they stayed two days, and left the place on the octave 
of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist. WTien they had 
arrived at the city of Lyons on the Rhone, after they with the 
greater part of their households had passed over the bridge 
across that river, the bridge, being thronged with men and 
women, broke down, not without doing injury to great numbers. 
Here also the two kings separated, in consequence of the mul- 
titude of men who followed them, as one place was not suf- 
ficient to hold them. Accordingly, the king of France, with his 
troops, went on to Genoa, while the king of England pro- 
ceeded with his to Marseilles. 

A Lament on the Expedition to Jerusalem. 
" Most grievous are the days which have come upon us, and 
worthy to be graced with no white stone. For the woes have 
ministered to our grief which Holy Jerusalem is known to 

50 Champions, before commencing the combat, had the hair cut close, 
probably for the purpose of offering no unfair advantage to the antatjo- 
gonist, by reason of the length of the hair and the facilities thereby 
offered for pulling them to the ground. 

11 This is a very early instance of the practice of tarring and feathering. 

52 Roger of Wendover says that he received it at Vezelay. 

53 This lament consists of thirty-two monkish lines, in rhymes of four. 
The first four will serve as a specimen : 

" Graves nobis admodum dies effiuxere 

fQui lapillis candidis digni non fuere. 
Nam luctus materiam mala praebuere, 
Quae sanctam Jerusalem constat sustinere." 
is not improbable that this was a song generally sung by the Crusaders. 



142 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1190. 

endure. For who can do other than grieve for the slaughter 
of so many of the Saints, so many sacred houses of the Lord 
profaned, princes led captive, dwellings destroyed, and nobles 
hurled at the feet of slaves? And yet these things shall not 
escape the eyes of Him who beholds them. The Lord, looking 
on, has beheld the woes of our race, has heard the groans of 
this innocent people, and has descended to crush the head of the 
serpent. For the God of the Hebrews has aroused the Christian 
princes and their knights to avenge the blood of his Saints, and 
to succour the sons of the slain. The illustrious king of Eng- 
land and the king of the Franks are onward marching with many 
thousand men-at-arms. 'Tis a glorious sight to behold the band 
of senators with the arms of justice and with the worshippers 
of God. 51 'Tis more pleasing still to hear of Frederic, lord of 
the empire of Home, joining them in war against the enemies 
of the Cross, that he may restore his country to its ancient 
glory. The Cross going before, they march on towards the 
East, and all the West they lead on with them. An army 
they lead that differs in language, rites, manners, and customs, 
but fervent in the faith. That they may return victorious, 
let us offer up our prayers to God ; that so, entering Jerusalem, 
they may root out from the midst of the earth the Canaanite, 
and expel the Jebusite, and so bear away the palm of Christian 
prowess." 

While Richard, king of England, was staying at Marseilles, 
there came to him the messengers of Hugh, bishop of Durham ; 
and, on hearing from him the injuries which the before-named 
chancellor had inflicted on him, the king ordered the earldom 
of Northumberland and the manor of Sedbergh to be delivered 
to the bishop of Durham ; relative to which, the king gave him 
his charter to the following effect : 

65 Another Charter of Ricliard, Icing of England, as to the con- 
veyance of Sedbergh to Iugh, the lord bishop of Durham. 

"Richard, by the grace of God, king of England, duke of 
Kormandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, to the arch- 
bishops, bishops, abbats, earls, barons, sheriffs, and all his 
servants and faithful people throughout the whole of England, 
greeting. Know ye that we have given to God, and to Saint 
Cuthbert and the church of Durham, and to Hugh, the bishop, 

51 " Deorum," " of the Gods," seems to be used instead of " Dei," as 
suitiug the rhyme. It may possibly allude to the Trinity. S5 See p. 120 



A.D. 1190. JOUKNAL OF ZING BICHAED. 143 

and his successors, for ever, the manor of Scdbergh, together 
with the Wapentake and knights' fees which we formerly gave 
him, and by our charter confirmed, by way of a pure and per- 
petual alms, for six hundred marks, which he paid us. Where- 
fore we do will and command that he shall freely, quietly, and 
honorably enter upon and enjoy the said manor, together with 
the said Wapentake and knights' fees, and all other its appur- 
tenances, as a pure and perpetual alms, in such manner as is 
set forth in our charters, which the said bishop now holds. We 
do also will and grant, so far as relates to ourselves, that, if any 
person shall use against him force or molestation in respect 
hereof, contrary to the tenor of our charters and confirmations, 
he shall incur the anger and curse of God and ourselves. Witness 
myself, at Marseilles. " 

When the king of England had waited eight days at Mar- 
seilles, in hope and expectation from day to day of the arrival of 
his fleet, finding himself deceived in his wishes, he hired ten 
large busses and twenty well-armed galleys, and embarked on 
board them with his household in sorrow and dejection, on 
account of the delay of his fleet. Accordingly, on the seventh 
day of August the king of England set sail from Marseilles, 
in the galley Pombone, and passed by the island of Saint 
Stephen and Aquila and Mont Noir, the island of Saint Hono- 
ratus, the city of Nice, and the city of Yintimiglia. It deserves 
to be known that between the city of Nice and that of Yinti- 
miglia is the division of the territories of the king of Arragon 
and of Italy. 

After this, the king of England passed Santa Maria de FUBZ, 
and Noli. On the thirteenth day of August the king of Eng- 
land passed a castle which is called Swene, 55 and on the same 
day arrived at Geneva, where he had an interview with the 
king of France, who was lying ill at a house near the church 
of Saint Laurence. On the fourteenth day of August the king 
of England arrived at Portofino, it being the vigil of the 
Assumption of Saint Mary, and there he stayed five days. 
While he was there the king of France sent to ask him for 
the loan of five galleys, on which the king of England offered 
him three, which the king of France refused. On the nine- 
teenth day of August he left Portofino, and came to Porto 
Yenere, and on the day after arrived at the port of Pisa. Here 
he was met by Walter, archbishop of Rouen, John, the bishop 
Lj * Evreux, then lying ill in the city of Pisa. 
65 Probably the present Savona, 



144 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1190. 

On the twenty-first day of the month of August the king 
of England passed by the island of Gorgona, and on the 
twenty-second day of the month of August the king came to 
Porto Baratto. On the twenty-third day of August, being 
the vigil of Saint Bartholomew the Apostle, the king proceeded 
two leagues by land, and a few knights with him, on hired 
horses, and came to a port, near a castle, called Piombino, to 
meet his galleys ; and here the king embarked on board the 
galley of Fulk Rustac, in which he had not previously sailed. 
Being gratified with a favourable wind, he next passed an island 
which is called Eerraria, and another called Argentaria, as also 
an island called Genit ; after which he arrived at a port called 
Talemunde. 

On the -twenty-fourth day of August the king came to a 
port which is called Portocarrero, which lies midway between 
Marseilles and Messina. On the same day the sails were split 
of the galley on board of which the king was, on which he 
again embarked on board the galley Pombone, and then passed 
the city of Corneto, the city of Civita Yecchia, 56 and the place 
which is called the Faro di Eoma; after which he entered 
the Tiber. At the entrance of this river there is a fine tower, 
but deserted, and there are also very considerable remains of 
ancient walls. Here Octavianus, cardinal-bishop of Ostia, came 
to meet him; to whom the king uttered many reproaches, 
charging the Romans with simony, because they had agreed 
to take seven hundred marks for the consecration of the bishop 
of Le Mans, and fifteen hundred marks for the legateship of 
the bishop of Ely, and a large sum of money that the arch- 
bishop of Bordeaux might not be degraded, who was criminally 
accused by his clergy. 

On the twenty-sixth day of August the king passed by a 
certain forest which is called Silvadena, in which there is a 
marble road, made like a pavement, which extends through the 
middle of the wood twenty-four miles, the wood abounding with 
deer, roebuck, and fawns. On the same day the king passed 
by a castle which is called IXettuno. Here is a quay which 
was formerly covered with copper ; here also was the entrance 
to a subterraneous passage, through which money brought from 
all quarters was conveyed to Rome. After this, the king 
passed by a castle which is called Estura. On the twenty- 

56 This place can be but faintly recognised under the name given in the 
text, " Senes la Veile." 



A.li. 1190. THE BISHOP OF NOKWICH RETURNS HOME. 145 

seventh day of August the king passed by a rock projecting 
into the sea, which is called the Capo di Cercel, 66 and an 
island called Parmerola, and another island called Ponza, and 
another called Palmera. On the top of the mountain called 
Capo di Cercel, is a castle in which robbers and pirates often 
take refuge. 

The king next came to a city called Terracina, in which was 
formerly a pier covered with copper. He next came to Oarilla, 
and then to a castle which bears the name of Capo del Espu- 
run. 57 Here is the division of the territories of the Bomans 
and of those of the king of Sicily, in that portion thereof which 
is called the principality of Capua. After this, the king passed 
an island which is called Pantea, and is distant from the city 
of Gaeta forty miles. Pantea was the native place of Pilate, 
and in it there was formerly a pier covered with copper. The 
king next passed an island called Istellemania, which is always 
smoking. This island is said to have been set on fire from the 
island called Yolcano, the fire from it flying and burning up, as 
they say, both sea and fish. Not far distant from this island is 
the island of Girun, where there is a good castle and harbour. 

The king next passed an island called Baterun, and the 
port of Baiae, where are the baths of Yirgil ; it is ten miles 
distant from Naples. He then passed Capua and Capo di 
Maverba, which lies midway between Naples and Salerno. 
On the twenty-eighth day of August the king arrived at 
Naples, and proceeded to the abbey of Saint Januarius, to 
see the sons of Naimundus, who lie in the crypt 58 there, skin 
and bone. Here he made a stay till the Nativity of Saint 
Mary the Virgin, the Mother of God, and on the same day, 
hiring horses, he proceeded to Salerno, where he stayed a con- 
siderable time. 

In the meantime, Baldwin, archbishop of Canterbury, Hu- 
bert, bishop of Salisbury, and Eanulph de Glanville, who had 
come with the king of England as far as Marseilles, there em- 
barked on board ship ; and the Lord gave them a prosperous 
voyage, so that in a short time, without any accident, he led 
them over a vast tract of sea to the siege of Acre. John, 
bishop of Norwich, however, went to the pope, and, receiving 
from him permission to return, gave up the cross, and returned 

58 The place now called " Circello," or "the Tower of Circe." 

67 Now called Sperlonga. 5( * These mummies being preserved 

(the antiseptic properties of the crypt. 
VOL. II. L 



146 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE KOVEDEN. A. D. 1190. 

home absolved therefrom. After this became known to our 
lord the king, he exacted from him, by the hands of the Tem- 
plars and Hospitallers, a thousand marks for excusing him. 

In the meantime, the fleet of the king of England, which 
was commanded by the archbishop of Auxienne, the bishop of 
Bayonne, Robert de Sabul, Richard de Camville, and William 
de Forts, set out immediately after Easter on its way for Jeru- 
salem from the various ports of England, Normandy, Brittany, 
and Poitou. One part of this fleet assembled at the port of 
Dartmouth, and, after staying there some days, the said ships, 
ten in number, set sail for Lisbon, and after passing a certain 
headland which projects into the sea, called Godestert, 59 passed 
Brittany, having Saint Matthew of Finisterre, or de Fin 
Posterne, on the left hand side of the fleet, and the Great 
Sea along which is the route to Ireland on the right, and left 
Poitou, Gascony, and Biscay on the left hand side of the fleet. 
When they had now passed through the British Sea and the 
Sea of Poitou, and had come into the Spanish Sea, on the 
holy Day of the Ascension of our Lord, at the third hour of 
the day, a mighty and dreadful tempest overtook them, and 
in the twinkling of an eye they were separated from each 
other. "While the storm was raging, and all in their affliction 
were calling upon the Lord, the blessed Thomas, the archbishop 
of Canterbury and Martyr, appeared at three different times 
to three different persons, who were on board a London ship, 
in which was William Fitz-Osbert, and Geoffrey, the gold- 
smith, saying to them, " Be not afraid, for I, Thomas, the 
archbishop of Canterbury, and the blessed Edmund the Mar- 
tyr, and the blessed Nicholas, the Confessor, have been ap- 
pointed by the Lord guardians of this fleet of the king of 
England ; and if the men of this fleet will guard themselves 
against sin, and repent of their former offences, the Lord will 
grant them a prosperous voyage, and will direct their foot- 
steps in His paths." After having thrice repeated these words, 
the blessed Thomas vanished from before their eyes, and im- 
mediately the tempest ceased, and there was a great calm on 
the sea. 

And now the London ship, in which the blessed Martyr 
Thomas had appeared, had passed by the port of Lisbon 
and Cape Saint Vincent, and had neared the city of Silva, 60 
which in those days was the most remote of all the cities of 

59 Probably " Good start ;" meaning what we now call " Start Point." 
w Now called " Silver." 



A.D. 1190. THE ENGLISH IN PORTUGAL. 147 

Christendom, and the Christian faith was as yet but in its 
infancy there, as it was only the year before that it had been 
wrested from the hands of the pagans, and had become Christian, 
as already mentioned. The people, therefore, on board the ship, 
being ignorant where they were, putting out a boat pulled for 
land, and learned, by certain indications, that the land was in- 
habited by Christians, and that there was no further [inland] 
any safe road for them without a good and sufficient escort. Ac- 
cordingly they approached the city ; and on learning the cause 
of their arrival, the bishop of the city of Silva, and the clergy 
and people, received them with congratulations, giving thanks 
to God for their arrival ; for there were in the ship a hundred 
young men of prowess and well armed. 

In the meantime Botac El Emir Amimoli, emperor of Africa 
and of Saracenic Spain, levying a large army, marched into 
the territories of Sancho, king of Portugal, to take ven- 
geance for the emperor of Africa, his father, who had died six 
years before while besieging Santa Erena, a castle of king 
Alphonso, father of the said Sancho, king of Portugal. On 
this, the citizens of Silva, being alarmed, refused to allow these 
young men of London to leave them, but broke up their ship, 
and with the timbers of it made bulwarks for the city, pro- 
mising and giving them all kinds of security that the king of 
Portugal would pay them well for the delay thus occasioned 
them, and the injury received in consequence of the loss of 
their ship ; which was accordingly done. 

The other nine ships of the fleet of the king of England 
which had been out in the same storm, made land in different 
parts of Spain ; after which, by the guidance of God, sailing 
up the river Tagus, they at last arrived at the city of Lisbon. 
In this city, of Lisbon rests the body of Saint Vincent the 
Martyr. Before they had arrived there, the before-named em- 
peror of Africa, on the day of the Nativity of Saint John the 
Baptist, forded the river Tagus, and .all his army with him, 
and laid siege to a castle of Sancho, king of Portugal, which 
is called Torresnovas. On this, the king of Portugal sent 
envoys to the strangers who had come in the ships to the. city 
of Lisbon, and asked succours of them against the Saracens. 

Accordingly, five hundred men, well armed, and selected from 
all the ships that had arrived, as being the bravest and most 
courageous, preferred to die in war for the name of Jesus 
Christ, rather than behold the misfortunes of their race and its 

L2 



148 ANNALS OF ROGEB BE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1190. 

extermination ; and, leaving their ships and companions, pro- 
ceeded up the river Tagus to Santa Erena, which is distant from 
the city of Lisbon two days' march, where they found Sancho, 
king of Portugal, utterly destitute both of resources and coun- 
sel ; for he had but few soldiers, and nearly all of those with- 
out arms, and the emperor had already taken the castle of the 
king which he had besieged, and had laid siege to another 
castle, which is called Thomar, and is a castle of the Templars. 
On hearing of the arrival of the foreigners, the emperor was 
greatly alarmed, and, sending ambassadors to the king of Por- 
tugal, demanded of him Silva, on obtaining which, he would 
depart with his army, and restore to him the castle which he 
had taken, and would keep peace with him for seven years ; 
but when the king of Portugal refused to do this, he sent him 
word that on the following day he would come to lay siege to 
Santa Erena. 

On this, the king of Portugal, taking counsel with the 
strangers who had come in the ships, placed his men in the 
towers, and at the strongest bastions of the walls; while 
the foreigners who had come in the ships chose for their 
position the weaker parts of the city, employing their own 
courage as their walls. On the following day, when all were 
prepared for the attack, and there was every moment a mur- 
muring at the gates, to the eifect that he would be there that 
instant and without delay, a messenger came on a sudden, 
and thus said : " The emperor has been dead these three days, 
and his army is taking to flight !" and, while he was still 
speaking, there came two, and then three, and then still more, 
all of whom spoke to the like effect. 

Accordingly, the king and all the people believed them, and 
the city was filled with gladness and exultation ; jand, on the 
next day, the king gave to the men who had come from the ship 
leave to return to them, promising that he would handsomely 
reward them for their labours. However, before they had 
arrived at their ships, Robert de Sabul and Richard de Cam- 
ville came to Lisbon with sixty-three great store-ships of 
the king of England ; (a store-ship is the same as a trans- 
port-ship). 61 Some, however, of the men who had come under 
the command of Robert de Sabul and Richard de Camville 
were evil-doers and vicious persons ; for, on disembarking from 
the ships, they made their way into the city of Lisbon, and as 
they went through the streets and lanes, talked to the people 
61 " Storiutn" " navigiutn." 






A.D. 1190. THE ENGLISH FLEET LEAVES LISBON. 140 

of the city giving themselves airs, and then committed violence 
upon the wives and daughters of the citizens. They also drove 
away the pagans and Jews, servants of the king, who dwelt 
in the city, and plundered their property and possessions, and 
burned their houses ; and they then stripped their vineyards, 
not leaving them so much as a grape or a cluster. 

When this became known to the king of Portugal, the lord 
of the city of Lisbon, he came with all haste with a powerful 
hand ; but on finding there Eobert de Sabul and Eichard de 
Camville, with the fleet of the king of England, he manifested 
towards them a cheerful countenance and a peaceful disposi- 
tion, bearing with patience the injuries done to himself and his 
people. On the day after the king's arrival, the commanders 
of the fleet exacted an oath from all the men of the fleet that 
they would faithfully keep and inviolably observe the before- 
mentioned statutes enacted by the king of England. 

However, in the course of three days, a quarrel ensued be- 
tween the people of Lisbon and some of those who had come 
in the ships, in consequence of which, many persons were slain 
on both sides in a skirmish that ensued, and the noise of the 
people came to the king's ears. On this, the gates of the city 
were immediately closed, and all who had gone from the ships 
into the city, for the purpose of obtaining provisions and drink, 
were taken and thrown into prison, in number seven hundred 
men. Before they were released from the custody of the king, 
the king of Portugal made peace with Robert de Sabul and 
Richard de Camville on such terms as he pleased, that is to say, 
to the following effect : that past injuries should be mutually 
overlooked, and that they should strictly keep the peace to- 
wards the pilgrims throughout all his territories ; and it was 
further agreed that the arms and all other things which had 
been lost in the affray should be given up on either side. 

This having been done, Robert de Sabul and Richard de 
Camville left the city of Lisbon with the fleet of the king of 
England, on the vigil of Saint James the Apostle, being the 
fourth day of the week, and, on the same day, came to the inlet 
where the Tagus falls into the sea. On the same day also, 
William de Forts de Oleron arrived there with thirty great 
ships of the fleet of the king of England ; in consequence 
of which, there were together at the same place one hundred 
store-ships of the king of England, and six great ships laden 
with warriors, provisions, and arms. On the day after the 



150 ANNALS OF EOGES DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1190. 

feast of Saint James the Apostle, being the sixth day of the 
week, Robert de Sabul, Richard de Camville, and William de 
Forts de Oleron left the port of Lisbon with the fleet of the 
king of England, and passed by a great mountain which pro- 
jects into the sea, and is called Espichel, as also the port of 
Dalchatht, 62 and Palmella, and Sinnes, formerly a sandy tract 
of land extending into the sea ; they then passed the port of 
Deordunite, and then a great and lofty mountain which ex- 
tends into the sea, and is called Cape Saint Vincent ; on which 
the body of Saint Vincent lay many ages entombed, until it was 
transferred to the city of Lisbon. 

After this, they passed the port of Silva, which at that 
time was the most remote city of the Christians in those parts 
of Spain. They next passed a city of the pagans, which is 
called Santa Maria de Hayrun; and it is worthy of remark why 
this city is called Santa Maria de Hayrun. Hayrun is the 
name of the place in which the city was founded, while the 
Christians who built it gave it the other name, and, in memory 
of Mary, the blessed Mother of God, they placed a stone image 
of her on the walls. After this, when the pagans prevailed 
over the Christians, they gained possession of this place, and, 
on finding the image standing upon the walls, they cut oif its 
head, feet, and arms, in contempt of the faith of Christ and 
of Saint Mary, and threw it at a distance into the sea. On 
this being done, the sea and land became unproductive, and 
famine prevailed in that land to such a degree, that nearly every 
thing, men and animals, died of hunger ; upon which, all the 
elders of the people, and the youths, from the highest to the 
lowest, weeping day and night, and doing penance in sackcloth 
and ashes, recalled to mind the image whose head, hands, and 
feet they had cut off, and said : " We have sinned, we have 
acted unrighteously, we have done iniquitously> inasmuch as 
we have cut off that head, and those hands and feet. For 
what evil had they done ? Let us, therefore, seek them, and 
let us put them in their places, that thus, at least, God may 
turn away His wrath from us, and from this city." Thus saying, 
they threw their nets into the sea, where they had thrown the 
head, and hands, and feet of the image, and, drawing them upon 
land in their nets, they placed the head on the neck, the hands 

62 It is hardly necessary to say, that many of the places here mentioned 
cannot be recognized, as heing no longer in existence, even if the names 
were correctly given in the text, which is far from being the case. 



A.D. 1190. THE FLEET ENTERS THE STEA1TS OF AFEICA. 151 

on the arms, and the legs on the thighs, and soldered them with 
gold and silver of the finest and purest quality ; after which, 
they placed the image in an honored locality, and it is held in 
great veneration even to the present day. Immediately upon 
this, the famine ceased, and the earth yielded her increase. 

After this, they passed the castle which is called Merell, and 
then the port of Hodiene ; they next passed the port of Calice, 62 
and then a mountain, which is called Montaluc. They then 
passed a sandy piece of land projecting into the sea, which is 
called Cape Almilan, and then a castle and port, the name of 
which is Saltis ; after which, they arrived before the Port of 
Seville, the name of which is Windelkebir ; between Seville 
and the Port there is a castle midway, which is called Captal. 

They now came to the Straits of Africa, and passed through 
these Straits on the first day of August, being the feast of 
Saint Peter ad Yincula, and the fifth day of the week. Here 
the Mediterranean Sea begins, which Sea is so called, because 
it is surrounded by land on every side, with the exception of 
one inlet and one outlet ; the one of which is called the Straits 
of Africa, and the other the Arm of Saint George, 63 at the city 
of Constantinople. It is also worthy of remark, that, from 
the entrance to the Straits of Africa, as far nearly as Ascalon, 
on the right-hand side of the ship [as it sails], lie the territories 
of the pagans ; and on the opposite side, from the entrance of the 
Straits of Africa as far as the great mountain which is called 
Muncian, 64 is Saracenic Spain, which you leave behind to the 
left of the ship. It is also worthy of observation, that, accord- 
ing to calculations made by mariners, the entry to the Straits 
of Africa, from one shore to the other, is not more than six 
miles in width, on each side of which there is a large moun- 
tain, the one in Spain, called Calpe, the other in Africa, oppo- 
site to it, called Atlas. At the entrance of these Straits there 
are several cities in Africa near the sea-shore, the names of 
which are Bethe, Dudenardi, Esparte, Thange, Cacummin, 
Muee, Botoos, and Seep, 55 which is the most noble of all the 
cities of Africa. In Spain, on. the opposite side, are several 
cities and castles, the names of which are Beche, Dudemarbait, 
Leziratarif, Gezehakazera, 66 the island of Jubaltaria, 07 Mertell, 

62 Now Cadiz. 6 3 The Bosphorus, or Straits of Constantinople, 

were so called from the church of Saint George, which was built on the 

shore in the suburbs of Constantinople. 64 Probably Montserrat, 

Perhaps Ceuta. <* By this and the preceding name, Algeziras 

and Tarifa are probably meant, c ? Gibraltar. .. 



152 ANNALS OF ROGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1190. 

and Swail, a castle of the Moors. At the foot of the mountain 
of Jubaltaria are two fine cities, one of which is called Alentia, 
and the other Jubalar. 

Next to these comes the city of Magga ; 67 and after the fleet 
of the king of England had passed the above-named cities of 
Spain, it next passed the city of Salamame, 68 and then Vilages, 
a large city enclosed with a wall, in the circuit of which there 
are one hundred and sixty towers of stone. It next passed a 
great and lofty mountain, which is called the Cape of Melich, 
and then a castle called Munaca. 69 It next passed a noble city 
which is called Almeria, where the valuable and fine silk is 
manufactured, which is called silk of Almeria ; and then a 
great and lofty mountain that extends into the sea, and is called 
Cape Alrneria. It then passed Carthagena, a fine city, situate 
on the sea-shore ; next after which came Penisecle, a fine and 
handsome castle. The fleet then passed a sandy piece of land 
projecting into the sea, called Alascerat ; 70 after which came a 
piece of land projecting into the sea, which is called Cape Mar- 
tin. It next came before a large city which is called Denia, 
and then before the port of Valentia. It deserves to be known 
that Yalentia is a fine city, distant seven miles from the en- 
trance to its harbour. It then passed the castle of Baiane, and 
then the castle of Peniscola on the sea-shore, which is the last 
castle belonging to the pagans in Spain on this side of the sea. 

They then passed a great and lofty mountain projecting into 
the sea, which is called Muncian ; this mountain divides the 
territories of the pagans from those of the Christians, and here 
begins the territory of the king of Arragon. Near this moun- 
tain, among the mountains, and at a distance from the sea, 
is situate a fine city, the name of which, is Cervera ; and at 
the foot of the same mountain, on the sea- shore, stands a castle, 
which is called Amposta, in the territory of the kingdom of 
Arragon, and occupied by the Hospitallers. Here also is a 
great river of fresh water, which has the name of Ebro, and a 
noble city called Tortosa ; which stands upon that river, and is 
distant from the entrance to the harbour thirty miles. 

After this, they passed a populous city on the sea-shore, called 
Taragutia, 71 the see of an archbishop, and near it a great 
mountain extending into the sea, called Cape Salut, beneath 
which mountain lies a good harbour. They next came before a 

67 Probably Malaga. 68 Perhaps the place now called Salobrena. 

w Now Alinuaiecar. 70 Probably Alicant, 7l Tarragona. 



A.D. 1190. THE FLEET AREIVES AT MARSEILLES. 153 

great episcopal city, situate on the sea-shore, the name of which 
is Barcelona. They then passed a castle situate on the sea- 
shore, called San Felice, where there is a good harbour. 
They next passed the territory of count Ponce, opposite a 
fine city, the name of which is Ampurias, where there is a good 
harbour. They then passed a great mountain projecting into 
the sea, which is called Cape Castiglione, where there is a 
good harbour, called Port Castiglione, and as you go up the 
river, there is a castle called Castiglione. They next passed a 
harbour, fine and large, the name of which is Cadakis, and 
then a great mountain extending into the sea, which is called 
Cape de Creus, at the foot of which there is a good harbour. 
They then passed a fine castle situate on the sea- shore, which 
is called Cockeliure, 72 where there is a good harbour called 
Port Yendres. 

They next passed some sand-banks extending into the sea, 
called Cape Leucare, which make a conspicuous landmark, on 
which, near the sea- shore, is a fine episcopal city, the name of 
which is Narbonne, and a monastery, called Saint Mary de Her. 
They thenpassed a projection of the land into the sea, which 
is called Brescou ; after which they came to the territory of the 
count de Agde, passing a fine city situate on the sea-shore, 
the name of which is Agde. They then passed near Villeneuve, 
the episcopal see of Magalona, near which is the port of Mont- 
pellier, the name of which is Lates. They next passed an 
island called Odur, which lies at the mouth of the Rhone, going 
up which river you come to a fine archiepiscopal city, which 
is called Arles-le-Blanc ; and still higher up the same river, 
you come near to Saint Gilles, and still higher again, you 
come to the fine city which is called Lyons sur Rhone. 

They then came to Marseilles, which is twenty miles dis- 
tant from the mouth of the Rhone, and is a city subject to the 
king of Arragon. Here were the relics of Saint Lazarus, the 
brother of Saint Mary Magdalene and of Martha, who held 
the bishopric of this place, after Jesus had raised him from 
the dead. In this city there is a fine harbour, able to contain 
many ships of a large size, almost shut in by high hills, 
and on one side of it rises the episcopal city ; opposite to 
which, on the other side of the harbour, is the abbey of Saint 
Victor, in which a hundred black monks serve God ; and here, 
72 Now Collioure. 






154 A2TNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEtf. A.D. 1190. 

as they say, are the hundred and forty bodies of the Innocents 
who were slain for Christ, as also the relics of Saint Victor and 
his companions, the rods with which our Lord was scourged, 
the jaw-bone of Saint Lazarus, and one of the ribs of Saint 
Laurence the Martyr. Between Marseilles and this abbey, 
not far from the high road, is a monastery, in which is kept 
the arm of Saint Margaret the Virgin ; and near the abbey 
of Saint Victor are two lofty hills, one of which is called Mount 
Eoland, and the other Mount Hospinel. 

It is worthy of remark, that from Marseilles to Acre is 
only fifteen days' and nights' sail, 73 with a fair wind ; but in 
such case you must go straight through the main sea, so that 
after the hills of Marseilles are lost out of sight, land will not be 
seen either on the right hand or on the left, if you keep straight 
onward in your course, until the land of Syria is seen ; and 
if on the right side of the ship any land should chance to be 
seen, it is the territory of the pagans, while if land should be 
seen on the left side of the ship, it is the territory of the Chris- 
tians. It is also as well to be known, that there are many 
islands belonging to the Saracens between the Straits of 
Africa and Marseilles, one of which is called Majorc, 75 and 
another Eniuce, 76 both of which are tributary to the king of 
Arragon, the island of Majorc paying him a yearly tribute of 
three hundred silken cloths of Almeria, while the island of 
Eniuce pays him a yearly tribute of two hundred silken cloths 
of like quality. 

The Division of tlie Kingdoms on the sea-coast. 

In the first place, it ought to be known that the whole land 
extending along the sea-shore from England to Spain, namely, 
Normandy, Brittany, and Poitou, belongs to the dominions of 
the king of England; and this extends as far as the port which 
is called Huartz, 77 which divides the territories of the count 
of Bayonne from those of the king of Navarre. The territories 
of the king of Navarre begin at the port of Huartz, and extend 
to the river which is called Castre, and which divides the ter- 
ritories of the king of Navarre from those of the king of Castille. 
The territories of the king of Castille begin from the river 
Castre, and extend as far as the mountains of Sora, which 

73 " Scinglaturae ad bonum ventum :" qy. whether this word may not 
be a misprint for some such word as " schiplaturaj." 

76 Majorca. 76 Probably Iviza. 7 ' Qy. Ustaritz. 



A.D. 1190. THE TEBHITOKIES ON THE SEA-COAST. 155 

divide the territories of the king of Castille from those of the 
king of Saint Jago. The territories of -the king of Saint Jago 
begin from the mountains of Sora and extend to the river 
Mina, 78 which divides the territories of the king of Saint Jago 
from those of the king of Portugal; while the territories of the 
king of Portugal begin at the river Mina, and extend beyond 
the city of Silva. 

After you come to the city of Silva, the land of the pagans 
begins, along the sea-coast of Spain, and subject to the domi- 
nion of the emperor of Africa, which extends as far as the great 
mountain known by the name of Muncian. In Saracenic 
Spain there are four powerful kings : one of whom is called the 
king of Cordres, or Corduba, 79 respecting which Lucan says, 80 
"Corduba was my birth-place, Nero caused my death; the 
wars I sang which the father 80 * and the son-in-law rivals, did 
wage." A second is called the king of Gant; 81 while the 
third is styled the king of Murcia, and the fourth is the king 
of Valentia, whose territories extend as far as the mountain 
called Muncian. This mountain divides the land of the Pagans 
from the land of the Christians, that is to say, from the ter- 
ritories of the king of Arragon; and the territories of the king 
of Arragon begin at this mountain called Muncian, and extend 
beyond the city of Nice. 

At the city of Nice begin the territories of the emperor of 
the Romans, in which there is a fine city called Vintimiglia ; 
from this the territory of the emperor extends along the sea- 
shore as far as Gaeta, in Apulia, the territory of the king of 
Sicily. This land is also called the principality of Capua. It 
also deserves to be mentioned that midway between Marseilles 
and Sicily there are two large islands ; Sardena 82 is the name of 
the larger one, while the other is called Corzege. 83 There are 
also many islands round Sicily, some of which are burning 
islands. 64 In this sea, in the neighbourhood of Sardena and 
Corzege, are fish, resembling cuttle-fish, which, coming forth 
from the sea, fly in the air, and when they have flown about 
the distance of a furlong 85 they descend again to the sea ; 
there are also many falcons there flying after these fish, and pur- 
78 Minho. 79 Cordova. 

80 " Corduba me genuit ; rapuit Nero, praelia dixi, 

Quae gessere pares, hinc socer, inde gener." 

The name of Lucan is omitted by an oversight in the note to p. vi of the 
Preface to Vol. I. *o* Caesar and Pornpey. Probably Jaen. 

Sardinia. ** Corsica. M The Lipari islands.' 

K A " stadium," in the text, which is rather more. 



156 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. 1190. 

suing them, in order to feed upon them. A- person who 
has seen this has borne witness to the same, and his testi- 
mony is true, 86 for he himself was sitting at table in a ship 
high out of the water, when one of these flying fish fell on 
the table before him. It is also worthy of remark that one 
of the islands in the vicinity of Sicily, which is larger than 
the rest, is called Mount Gebel, 87 and used to burn with such 
an intense heat that it dried up a great part of the sea in 
its vicinity and burned the fish ; but it has now for some time 
ceased to burn, through the merits and prayers of Saint Agatha 
the Virgin and Martyr. For one day, when the fire was 
coming forth from the crater of Mount Gebel more furiously 
than usual, and had approached the city of Cattanna, where 
rests the holy body of Saint Agatha, a multitude of the pagans, 
flying to her sepulchre, carried her veil before them facing the 
fire ; on which the flames returned to the sea, and, parching 
it, dried it up for nearly a mile, and scorched the fish, many 
of which were half burnt, and there are to this day many 
fish there of the same kind, which are called the fish of 
Saint Agatha. If any of these fish happen to be taken by a 
fisherman, they are immediately let go, out of respect to Saint 
Agatha, and to the praise and glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who is always wonderful and glorious in His saints. 

Accordingly, Robert de Sabul, Richard de Camville, and 
William de Fortz de Oleron, passing with the fleet of Richard, 
king of England, between Africa and Spain, after many tem- 
pests which they suffered on the voyage, arrived at Marseilles on 
the octave of the Assumption of Saint Mary, being the fourth 
day of the week. Not finding their master the king there, 
they made a stay of eight days, for some necessary repairs to 
the fleet ; after which they set out in pursuit of the king, and 
on the feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, being the 
sixth day of the week, arrived at Messina, in Sicily. 

On the Lord's day following, Philip, king of France, arrived 
there, it being the sixteenth day before the calends of Octo- 
ber ; on which, Margarete, the admiral, Jordan de Pin, and 
the other governors of the city, received him with all due 
honor, and assigned him the palace of Tancred, king of Sicily, 
for his abode,. Now when king Richard heard that his fleet 
had arrived at Messina, he left Salerno on the thirteenth 

M He no doubt alludes to what we call flying-fish. 
87 lie prohahly means Stroraboli. 



A.D. 1190. PROGRESS OF KING EICHAED. 157 

day of September ; and, passing an archiepiseopal city called 
Amalfi, and another archiepiseopal city called Cosenza, arrived 
on the eighteenth day of September at a city and castle called 
Escala. Near this castle is a small island, where are said to 
have been the schools of Lucan, and there is still a fine cham- 
ber beneath the ground, in which Lucan used to study. 

The night following the king slept in a village, the name of 
which is Lacerart, in the priorate of Monte Cassio. On the 
nineteenth day of September the king passed through the 
priorate which is called Saint Michael de Josaphat, to another 
priory of the same order, which is called Santa Maria de 
Fosses, where there is a castle called Saint Luke. On 
the twentieth day of September the king, passing by a castle 
which is called Lamante, came to a town called Saint Euphe- 
mia. On the twenty-first day of September the king came 
to Melida, and was there honorably received and entertained 
at the abbey of the Holy Trinity. Here there is a tower 
of wood close by the abbey, by means of which Eobert Guiscard 
attacked and took the castle and town of Melida. 

On the twenty-second day of September, the king of Eng- 
land, departing from Melida with a single knight, passed through 
a certain small town, and, after he had passed through, turned 
towards a certain house in which he heard a hawk, and, enter- 
ing the house, 87 took hold of it. On his refusing to give it up, 
numbers of peasants came running from every quarter, and 
made an attack on him with sticks and stones. One of them 
then drew his knife against the king, upon which the latter 
giving him a blow with the flat of his sword, it snapped asunder, 
whereupon he pelted the others with stones, and with difficulty 
making his escape out of their hands, came to a priory called 
Le Baniare ; but, making no stay there, he crossed the great 
river 88 which is called Le Faro de Meschines, and passed the 
night in a tent near a stone tower which lies at the entrance 
of the Faro, on the Sicilian side. At the entrance of the Faro, 
near Labinaria, lies that peril of the sea which is called Scylla, 
and at the outlet of the same river is another peril of the sea 
which is called Charybdis. 

On the twenty-third day of September, Richard, king of 
England, arrived at Messina, in Sicily, with many busses and 
galleys, in such state and with such a noise of trumpets and 
clarions, that alarm seized those who were in the city. The king 

W For a churl to keep a hawk was contrary to the rules of chivalry. 
* He means the Straits of Messina. 



158 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1190. 

of France and his people, and all the chief men of the city of 
Messina, together with the clergy and people, stood on the shore, 
admiring what they saw and heard respecting the king of 
England and his might. On his landing, he immediately 
held an interview with Philip, the king of France; after 
which conference, the king of France, on the same day, im- 
mediately, embarked on board of his ships, intending to pro- 
ceed towards the land of Jerusalem; but after he had got 
out of harbour, on the same day, the wind shifted, and with 
sorrow and reluctance he returned to Messina. 

The king of England, however, proceeded to the house of Re- 
ginald de Muhec, where a lodging was prepared for him, in the 
suburbs of the city, among the vineyards. On the twenty- 
fourth and twenty-fifth days of September the king of England 
went to the lodging of the king of France, to hold a conference 
with him, and the king of France visited the king of England. 
In the meantime, Eichard, king of England, sent his envoys 
to Tancred, king of Sicily, and delivered from his custody his 
sister, Joanna, the former queen of Sicily. On the twenty- 
eighth day of September the king of England went to meet his 
sister Joanna, who the same day arrived at Messina, from 
Palermo, with some gallies sent by king Tancred. 

On the twenty-ninth day of September, that is to say, on 
the day of Saint Michael, the king of France went to the 
lodgings of the sister of the king of England, and saw her and 
offered her his congratulations. On the thirtieth day of Septem- 
ber the king of England crossed the river del Faro, and took 
a place which is extremely well fortified, called Le Baniare, 
and on the first day of October brought his sister Joanna to 
that place, and, leaving her there with some knights and 
a considerable number of men-at-arms, returned to Messina. 
On the second day of October the king of England took posses- 
sion of a monastery of the Griffons, a very well fortified place, 
lying in the middle of the river del Faro, between Messina and 
Calabria. Having expelled the monks and their servants, he 
placed in it the provisions which had come from England and his 
other territories, and garrisoned it with some knights and others. 

When the citizens of Messina saw that the king of England 
had placed knights and men-at-arms with his sister in the castle 
of Le Baniare, and had taken possession of the monastery of the 
Griffons, 'they had suspicion of him, believing that he would 
seize the whole of the island, if he could: consequently 
they were disposed to be easily excited against him. Ac- 



A.D. 1190. PROGRESS OF KING RICHARD. 159 

cordingly, on the third day of October, a disagreement arose 
between the army of the king of England and the citizens 
of Messina, and to such a pitch did the exasperation on both 
sides increase, that the citizens shut the gates of the city, and, 
putting on their arms, mounted the walls. On the king's 
troops perceiving this, they made a vigorous attack on the city 
gates ; but our lord the king rode to and fro through the army 
on a steed of the greatest swiftness, beating back with a staff 
such of his men as he could reach, trying to restrain them 
from making the attack. However, he was unable so to do ; 
and at last returned to his lodging, where, putting on his 
armour, he went out again to put an end to the affray 
if he possibly could. He then embarked in a boat and re- 
paired to the palace of king Tancred, to consult with the 
king of France on the affair that had taken place. In the 
meantime, however, through the mediation of the elders of the 
city, the discord was allayed ; and arms being laid down on 
both sides, each party returned home. 

On the ninth day of October there came to the king of 
England, Eichard, archbishop of Messina, William, archbishop 
of Montreal, William, archbishop of Risa, Margarite, the ad- 
miral, Jordan de Pin, and many others of the household of 
the king of Sicily, who brought with them Philip, king of 
France, Reginald, bishop of Chartres, Manasseh, bishop of Lan- 
gres, Hugh, duke of Burgundy, Peter, count de Nevers, and 
Geoffrey, count de Perche, and, of the household of the king of 
England, Walter, archbishop of Rouen, and Gerard, archbishop 
of Auxienne, together with many others, in whom they placed 
confidence, for the purpose of making peace between them and 
the king of England. 

Now when the terms of peace had been for some time under 
consideration, and they had nearly come to a conclusion thereon, 
the citizens of Messina, collecting in great multitudes, pro- 
ceeded to the mountains, and waited in readiness, treacher- 
ously to fall upon the king of England; while others made 
an attack on the lodging of Hugh Le Brun. On this, their 
shouts, which were far from subdued, came to the ears of the 
king of England, who immediately leaving the conference 
with the king of France and the other persons above-named, 
ordered all his men to put on their armour, and he, with a 
few followers, climbed a steep hill, which no one could have 
ipposed he could possibly have done, and having, with 



160 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1190. 

great difficulty, reached the top of the hill, there took to flight 
with all possible speed and re-entered the city, the king pur- 
suing them with the edge of the sword. 

On this, the knights and men-at-arms of the king of Eng- 
land bravely attacked the citizens at the gates and walls of 
the city, and, suffering many hard blows from stones, at 
one moment effected an entrance into the city gates, while at 
another they were driven out. Here there were slain five 
knights of the king of England's people, and twenty men-at- 
arms, while the king of France was looking on, and giving 
them no assistance, although they were of one brotherhood with 
him in the pilgrimage. As for the king of France, he and his 
people entered the city, and made their way through them 
in perfect safety. 

However, the men of the king of England at last exercised 
their strength with such effect, that by main force they burst 
open the city gates and mounted the walls in all directions, and so 
having entered the city, they took possession thereof, and imme- 
diately hoisted the banners of the king of England on the for- 
tifications around the walls. At this the king of France 
was greatly indignant, and demanded that the banners of the 
king of England should be lowered, and his own set up ; 
this, however, the king of England would not permit, but 
still, that the wishes of the king of France might be satisfied, 
he lowered his own banners and gave the city into the charge 
of the knights Hospitallers, and the Templars, until every- 
thing should have been complied with that he demanded of 
Tancred king of Sicily. 

Respecting the agreement made between Philip, king of France, 
and Richard, king of England, at Messina. 

On the eighth day of October, the king of France and the king 
of England, before their earls and barons, and the clergy and 
people, made oath upon the relics of the Saints, that the one 
would defend the other in that pilgrimage, both in going and 
returning, with good faith, and the earls and barons swore that 
they would strictly and inviolably observe the same. After this, 
by the advice and consent of the whole of the army of the pil- 
grims, the said kings enacted that all pilgrims who should die 
on their journey on the said pilgrimage, might at their pleasure 
dispose of all their armour, horses, and apparel which they should 



L.D. 1190. ORDINANCES TO BE OBSEBTED ON PILGEIM AGE. 161 

make use of, and of a moiety of their possessions which 
they might chance to have with them on the journey, at 
their own option, provided only they should send nothing back 
to their own country ; while clerks might give such orders as 
to their chapels and all utensils belonging to such chapels, and 
all their books, as they should think fit. The other moiety 
was to be at the discretion of Walter, archbishop of Bouen, 
Manser, bishop of Langres, the Master of the house of the 
knights Templars, the Master of the Hospital, Hugh, duke 
of Burgundy, Eaoul de Coucy,- Drogo de Merlou, Eobert de 
Sabul, Andrew de Chauvigny, and Gilbert de Wascuil ; who 
were to employ the said money towards the relief of the land 
of Jerusalem, as they should think necessary. This also the 
kings in their own persons swore strictly and faithfully to ob- 
serve throughout the whole expedition, on both sides of the 
sea, with regard to all the pilgrims of both kingdoms, both 
those who should come, as well as those who had come al- 
ready. The archbishops and bishops promised on their word 
of truth to observe the same. The Masters of the Temple 
and the Hospital agreed that the same should be observed on 
behalf of their respective orders, while the earls and barons in 
their own persons swore that the same should be observed. 

Further, no man in all the army was to play at any kind of 
game for money, with the exception of knights and the clergy, 
who, in one day and night, were not to lose more than twenty 
shillings ; and if any knight or clerk should lose more than 
twenty shillings in any natural day, as often as such persons 
should exceed twenty shillings they were to pay one hundred 
shillings to the before-named archbishop, bishop, earls and 
barons, who were to add the before-mentioned sums of money 
to the said sums. The kings, however, were to play at their 
good pleasure ; and in the lodgings of the twp kings their 
men-at-arms might play as far as the. sum of twenty shillings, 
with the permission of the kings. Also, in presence of arch- 
bishops, bishops, earls and barons, with their sanction men-at- 
arms might play as far as the sum of twenty shillings. But if 
any men-at-arms or mariners, or others of the lower orders, 
should be found playing of themselves, men-at-arms were to 
be whipped naked three days through the army, unless they 
should be prepared to ransom themselves at the arbitration of 
the persons before -named ; and the same as to other servants 
of a like degree. But if mariners should so play, they were 

VOL. II. M 



162 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1190. 

to be plunged the first thing in the morning into the sea, on 
three successive days, after the usage of sailors, once each day, 
unless they should be able to ransom themselves at the arbitra- 
tion of the persons before mentioned. 

Further, if any pilgrim, while on his journey, should borrow 
anything of another person, he was to pay back what he had 
borrowed ; but as to what he had borrowed before setting out, 
he was not to be bound to make repayment during the pil- 
grimage. 

Further, if any mariner hired for wages, or any men-at- 
arms or any other person whatever, clerks and knights ex- 
cepted, should leave his master while on the said pilgrimage, 
no one else was to receive him, unless the same should be done 
by the consent of his master. And if any one, against the 
will of his former master, should receive him, he was to be 
punished at the discretion of the persons before-mentioned. 
And if any person should rashly attempt anything in contra- 
vention of the statutes thus solemnly enacted, he was to know 
that he thereby rendered himself subject to the excommuni- 
cation of the archbishops and bishops of the whole army ; and 
all transgressors were to be punished as before mentioned, at 
the discretion of the parties before-named, according to the 
nature of each case. 

Itwas also enacted by the said kings,that themerchant in each 
article of merchandize was to be the seller thereof, and that 
no one in the army was to be allowed to buy bread to sell the 
same again ; nor yet flour, unless some stranger should have 
brought the same, and a person should have made bread thereof; 
nor yet fine corn, unless in like manner he should have made 
bread thereof, or should keep it by him to carry beyond sea. 
All dough was entirely forbidden to be purchased ; and all these 
things were forbidden to be bought within a town and within 
a league from a town. 

But if any person should buy fine corn, and make bread of 
the same, he was bound to make profit of but one farthing in 
the measure, 89 besides the bran. 

As to other dealers, in whatever commodity they should deal, 
they were bound in every ten pence to make but one penny profit. 

No person was to ring any money of our lord the king upon 
which the impression should be visible, unless it should be 
broken within the rim. 

b9 The " salina," or " sayraa," was a measure, the capacities of which 
are not known. 









A.D. 1190. KING TANCEED'S ANSWEE TO EJNG EICHAED. 163 

No person was to buy any dead flesh to sell the same again, 
nor yet any living beast, unless he should kill it within the camp. 

No person was to sell his wine at too dear a rate after pro- 
clamation 90 once made. 

No person was to make bread for sale except at one penny the 
loaf, and all dealers were to understand that bread-corn was 
alone to be used within a league of the town. 

Of the money of England one penny was to be given in all 
dealings for four pence of money Anjouin. 

It ought also to be known, that all the above enactments 
were made and ordained by the advice and consent of the king 
of France, the king of England, and the king of Sicily. 

On the third day after the capture of the city of Messina, 
the chief men of that city and of the whole province gave 
hostages to the king of England as pledges that they would 
keep the peace towards him and his people, and freely de- 
liver into his hand the city of Messina, unless Tancred, king 
of Sicily, their master, should publicly make peace with him, 
as to all the points on which he demanded satisfaction. Por 
he had demanded of king Tancred Mount Saint Angelo, with 
the whole earldom and its other appurtenances, on behalf of 
his sister Joanna, which William, the former king of Sicily, 
her husband, had assigned her for her dower, as also a gilded 
chair for the said Joanna, according to the custom of the 
queens of that kingdom ; and for his own use a gilded table 
twelve feet in length, and a foot and a half in breadth : also, 
a large tent of silk, of such size that two hundred knights 
might sit at table beneath it, and two gilded tressels to sup- 
port the said gilded table, besides four - and - twenty cups, 
and as many dishes, of silver, and sixty thousand measures 91 
of corn, as many of barley, and as many of wine, and a hun- 
dred armed galleys, with all their equipments, and victuals 
for the galley- men for two years. All these things the king 
of England demanded for his own use, as being the heir of 
king Henry, for whom the above-named king of Sicily had 
provided all the things above mentioned, and had bequeathed 
the same to him on his last illness. 

Tancred, king of Sicily, made answer to him to the follow- 
ing effect : "I gave to your sister Joanna ten hundred thou- 
sand pieces of money, arising from lands, in satisfaction of 

90 This " conclamatio" was probably a proclamation made for regula- 
tion of the prices. 91 Salonse. 

M2 



164 ANJfALS OF EOGEB DE H.OVEDES". A.D. 1190. 

her dower, before she left me, and as to the rest of your 
demands, I will do whatever I shall feel myself bound to do, 
in conformity with the customs of this kingdom." Accord- 
ingly, by the advice of prudent councillors, the king of Sicily 
gave to the king of England twenty thousand ounces of gold, 
in satisfaction of the dower of his sister, and another twenty 
thousand ounces of gold, by way of compromise for all the 
other particulars before mentioned, which he had demanded 
of right as the bequest of William, king of Sicily, deceased, 
and agreed that a marriage should be had between Arthur, 
duke of Brittany, his nephew, and a daughter of king Tan- 
cred. These concessions being made on either side, Richard, 
king of England, wrote to Tancred, king of Sicily, to the 
following effect : 

The treaty of peace made 'between Richard, king of England, and 
Tancred, king of Sicily. 

" To Tancred, by the grace of God the illustrious king of 
Sicily, and of the dukedom of Apulia and the principality of 
Capua, Richard, by the same grace, king of England, duke of 
Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, health in Him 
who bestows health upon kings. Whereas, while on our 
pilgrimage, the Lord inspiring us thereto, we were passing 
through your lands for the purpose of aiding the land of Je- 
rusalem, which, its sins so demanding, the incursions of the 
pagans have in a great measure overrun, and the sword of the 
enemies of Christ laid waste, we were compelled to make some 
stay at your city of Messina, the inclemency of the winds, and 
of the sea, and of the season, preventing us from setting sail, 
on which, a dissension chancing to arise between our people 
and the citizens of the said city, great loss resulted to both 
parties both in property and men : in consequence whereof, 
it seemed probable to many that our brotherly love and affec- 
tion might receive some check : we have therefore taken due 
care to observe the purpose and intention of our pilgrim- 
age, and have resolved that both by ourselves, and by our 
dearly-beloved and faithful friends, as also by your venerable 
archbishops, to wit, Richard, archbishop of Messina, William, 
archbishop of Montreal, William, archbishop of Risa, and 
Richard, son of the venerable man Walter, your chancel- 
lor, and other excellent men delegated on your behalf, the 
bonds of inviolate peace should be drawn still closer between 



A.D. 1] 90. TREATY BETWEEN THE KINGS OF ENGLAND AND SICILY. 165 

us ; the tenor of which should be preserved to last to future 
ages by being reduced to writing. Therefore, we have pro- 
mised to you, and to your realm, and to all lands under your 
dominion, that we will, both by land, and sea, both of our- 
selves and of our people, observe a lasting peace, all questions 
whatsoever being set at rest, which, by our envoys to you, we 
had raised, both as to the dower of the queen, our sister, as 
also other matters ; this, also, being added thereto, that, so 
long as we shall stay in your kingdom, we will be everywhere 
in readiness for the defence of your territories, and give you 
our assistance, whoever may wish to invade the same, or wage 
war against you. To the tenor and form of this treaty of 
peace, which it is our wish and our purpose, with unbroken, 
faith, to observe towards you and your people, we have, by 
Walter, archbishop of Rouen, Gerard, archbishop of Auxienne, 
John, bishop of Evreux, Bernard, bishop of Bayonne, Jordan de 
Humez, our constable, William de Courcy, Richard de Camville, 
Gerard Talbot, Robert de Sabul, Guido de Croum, Guarine Fitz- 
gerald, Bertram de Verdun, William Chamberlain de Tanker - 
ville, Robert de Newburgh, Hugh Bardolph, Wigain de Cher- 
bourg, Gilbert de Wascuill, Hugh le Bruin, John de Filler, 
Amauri de Montfort, Andrew de Chauvigny, William de Ports 
de Oleron, Geoffrey de Rancune, Ainauri Torel, and many others 
of our household, made oath, upon our soul, in presence of the 
before-named archbishops appointed by you for the said purpose, 
and others of your illustrious men,to confirm and ratify the same, 
according to the tenor of the articles therein contained. And 
farther, to the end that this peace and brotherly love may be 
knit together by bonds as multiplied as stringent, the before- 
named principal men of your court treating thereon on your 
behalf, and the Lord so disposing, we have agreed that a mar- 
riage shall be contracted, in the name of Christ, between 
Arthur, the excellent duke of Brittany, our nephew, and, if 
we shall chance to die without issue, our heir, and your 
daughter ; so that when she shall, by the will of God, have ar- 
rived at marriageable years, and you shall have sent her to such 
place as shall have been agreed upon by either side, our said 
nephew shall, within fifteen days from the time of his meeting 
her, be espoused to her as his lawful wife ; or if it shall please 
your highness that she shall be married before she arrives at 
marriageable years, our said nephew shall so do according to 
your pleasure therein, if the Supreme Pontiff shall grant a 



166 AETNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEtf. A. J). 1190. 

dispensation for the same. And as it is our wish that such a 
dower shall be assigned to her as shall bent an illustrious lady 
and the daughter of a mighty king, we do engage, on behalf 
of our said nephew, that such a dower shall be provided for her 
out of the dukedom of our said nephew, and the same we have 
caused to be sworn at the present time by our faithful servants 
before named, and do engage that the same shall be given by 
our said nephew ; and we admit that we have received for the 
use of our nephew, from your mightiness, a sum for the said mar- 
riage, that is to say, twenty thousand ounces of gold ; this also 
being a part of the agreement, that if, which may heaven pre- 
vent, either shall die in the meantime, or if, through the fault 
of our nephew, or of ourselves, or of his people, the said mar- 
riage shall not take place, then, in such case, we or our heirs 
will, without any demur thereto, repay to you or to your heirs 
the above-mentioned sum of money in full. Moreover, as to the 
said matters, that is to say, the treaty of peace which we have 
ratified and confirmed with you, and as to repayment of the 
said sums of money, in case from the before-named causes 
intervening the said marriage shall not take place, we do give 
our lord the pope and the Church of Rome as our sureties ; to 
the end that if, which may God forbid, the said peace should 
chance to be violated on our part, the Church of Borne shall 
have power, by stringent measures, to coerce both ourselves 
and our territories. In like manner, also, he shall have full 
power to compel ourselves and our nephew to contract the said 
marriage, or in case, by reason of the causes before-mentioned, 
the said marriage should not take place, to compel us, or our 
heirs, or territories, to repay the said sum of money. That 
this, also, we will do, the Roman church being our surety, we 
have bound ourselves by the oaths of the persons above named, 
according to the tenor of the words contained in the instru- 
ment which we have sent to you, sealed with our seal. More- 
over, if, in case of our dying without heirs [our issue], he shall 
succeed to our throne by hereditary right, then we do assign to 
her from our kingdom the following dower, that is to say, the 
ancient and customary dower of the queens of England." 

The form of the treaty made upon oath between Richard, king 
of England, and Tancred, king of Sicily. 

"I, M"., do swear upon these Holy Gospels of God, that my 
lord Richard, king of England, shall from this hour forward 






A.D. 1190. LETTEE OF KING EICHAED TO POPE CLEMENT. 167 

preserve with the lord Tancred, king of Sicily the dukedom 
of Apulia and the principality of Capua, and his realm, and 
all the lands under his dominion, lasting peace, hoth himself and 
his, by land and by sea ; and that, so long as my said lord shall 
be in the kingdom of king Tancred, he shall give him his assist- 
ance in defending his territories wheresover he shall happen to 
be in the territories of the lord Tancred, king of Sicily, and what 
person soever may attempt to invade, or make war, against 
the same ; and that my lord shall, with his own hand, swear 
to observe this same treaty of peace, if the lord, king Tan- 
cred, shall, in like manner, with his hand, swear to observe the 
said treaty of peace. And if, at any time, which may heaven 
prevent, my lord shall attempt to break the said peace, I will 
place myself in the custody of the said lord, the king Tancred, 
wheresoever he shall think fit ; and all these things my lord 
Eichard, king of England, and I myself, will observe in good 
faith, and without fraud and evil intent ; so help us God, and 
these Holy Gospels of God, and the relics of the Saints. Amen." 
It is also worthy to be remarked, that the archbishops, 
bishops, and other subjects of king Tancred swore to the same 
effect, upon his soul, that he and his people would keep the peace 
towards Richard, king of England, and his people, by sea and 
by land, so long as they should be in his territories ; and if the 
said Tancred, king of Sicily, and his people, should not keep 
the peace, then the said archbishops, and others, who had 
taken that oath on behalf of king Tancred, would place them- 
selves in the custody of the king of England wheresoever he 
should think fit. It is also to be observed, that king Tancred 
gave to Eichard, king of England, another twenty thousand 
ounces of gold in satisfaction of all questions which he had 
raised, both as to the dower of his sister, the queen, as also 
concerning all his other demands ; and, to the end that king 
Tancred might be made more secure as to all the covenants 
above mentioned, Eichard, king of England, wrote to the Su- 
preme Pontiff to the following effect : 

The Letter of Richard, king of England, to pope Clement, relative 
to the peace made between him and king Tancred. 

" To his most reverend lord and most holy father Clement, 
by the grace of God, Supreme Pontiff of the Holy Apostolic 
See, Eichard, by the same grace, king of England, duke 
of Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, health and 



168 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1190. 

sincere dutifulness in the Lord. The actions of princes are 
blessed with more prosperous results when they receive strength 
and favour from the Apostolic See, and are directed by com- 
munication with the Church of Rome. Wherefore, we have 
deemed it proper to transmit to the knowledge of your Holi- 
ness the matters which have been lately arranged between our- 
selves and the lord Tancred, the illustrious king of Sicily, by 
public treaty, which indeed was suggested by necessity. We 
have then established with him brotherly love and lasting con- 
cord, and the same, by the oaths of our nobles, archbishops, 
bishops, and very many illustrious men, we have promised that 
we will with inviolate fidelity observe towards him and his peo- 
ple, and all the territories of his dominions. And for the further 
purpose of binding this treaty of peace and friendship with a 
still more stringent tie, we have thought proper to make a con- 
tract of marriage between Arthur, the excellent duke of Brit- 
tany, our most dearly-beloved nephew, and heir, if we shall 
chance to die without issue, and, with the will of God, his illus- 
trious daughter ; and, by the bounty of the Lord, the same shall 
be brought to a due consummation when the illustrious damsel 
shall have arrived at marriagable years, or when it shall have 
pleased the said lord, the king Tancred, for her, before she has 
arrived at marriageable years, to be given in marriage to our 
nephew, if the Holy Church of Rome shall, in like manner, 
think fit to grant a dispensation for the same. And, further, 
the sum of money which for the said marriage we have re- 
ceived for the use of our nephew from the said lord, the king 
Tancred, namely, twenty thousand ounces of gold, in case, 
which heaven forbid, by reason of the death of either, or 
through the fault of ourselves, or of our nephew, or of his 
people, the said marriage shall not take place, we, or our heirs, 
are bound on our part by oaths made to that effect to repay in 
full to the lord the king Tancred, or his heirs. To the end, 
therefore, that the terms of the said treaty of peace so con- 
cluded, and full acquiescence in the marriage thus contem- 
plated, may, with all due integrity, be secured on the part of 
ourselves and our nephew, in such manner as we have upon 
oath promised to the lord the king Tancred, we do earnestly 
entreat your Holiness, and the Holy Church of Rome, that the 
Holy See will undertake to be surety on our behalf towards 
the lord the king Tancred and his heirs, for our constant ob- 
servance of the peace thus established between us, and for the 






A.D. 1190. SCYLLA AND CHAEYBEIS. 169 

due fulfilment of the said contract of marriage ; or, in case, 
from the reasons before mentioned, the said marriage should 
not take place, for the repayment of the said sum of money. 
And that, with due confidence the Church of Rome may un- 
dertake conjointly with you to share the burden of the said 
surety, we do upon the testimony of these present letters grant 
to yourselves, and to the Holy Church of Rome, free power 
with all stringency to coerce ourselves and our heirs and ter- 
ritory, if either we shall contravene the terms of the said treaty 
of peace, or if, the marriage, from the causes before mentioned, 
not taking place, we, or our heirs, shall refuse repayment of 
the said sum of money. Your Holiness well knows how to show 
due regard to the honor of us both ; and that, if through the 
mediation of the Church of Rome, the advantages of peace 
and of the intended marriage shall be duly served, numerous 
benefits will at a future day ensue therefrom. Witness our- 
selves, on this eleventh day of November, at Messina." 

However, before this treaty of peace was fully concluded 
and ratified between the king of England and the king of 
Sicily, Margarite, the admiral, and Jordan de Pini, members 
of the household of the king of Sicily, to whom he had given 
charge of the city of Messina, left it by night, taking with 
them their families and the substance which they possessed in 
gold and silver. The king of England, however, on their de- 
parture, seized their houses, and galleys, and other possessions, 
into his own hands. 

After this, the king of England caused a wide and deep 
trench to be cut through the middle of the island on which is 
the monastery of the Griffons, in the middle of the river del 
Faro, where his treasures and provisions were stored : which 
trench ran right across the width of the whole island, from 
one shore to the other, and terminated in Charybdis. 

It is worthy of remark, that in this river, called the Faro di 
Messina, are those two most noted perils of the sea, Scylla 
and Charybdis, the one of which, namely, Scylla, is at the 
entrance of the Faro, near the priory of Le Baniare, and the 
other, namely, Charybdis, is near the outlet of the Faro ; for 
the purpose of knowing which, a tower of stone was erected in 
the above-named island near the trench made by the king of 
England. It is also to be observed, that Scylla is always vomit- 
ing forth and casting its waves on high, and consequently it is 
necessary that those who pass should keep themselves at a 



170 ANNALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1 1 DO. 

considerable distance, for fear lest they should be overwhelmed 
by the fury of the tide. On the other hand, Charybdis is 
unceasingly drawing towards it and sucking in the waves ; 
wherefore, those who pass by, ought to take care that they are 
not sucked in by it. Still, some incautious persons, while 
trying to avoid Scylla, fall into Charybdis. 

The king of England, while the final completion of the 
treaty of peace between him and king Tancred was being 
delayed, built a strong castle for himself on the brow of a lofty 
hill outside of the walls of the city of Messina, which they 
called Mate Griffon. The Griffons, before the arrival of the 
king of England, were more powerful than any of the inhabit- 
ants of those parts, and held in extreme hatred all the people 
who lived beyond the mountains, so much so, that they thought 
but very little of killing them, and there was no one to help 
them. But from the time that the king of England came 
there, their mischievous exploits were brought to a termina- 
tion, and, their power being crushed, they became more con- 
temptible than any other of the inhabitants of that land; 
for, hoping that they could do to the king of England as 
they had been able to do to others in days of yore, they fell 
into the pit which they themselves had dug, and became out- 
casts in the land. 

On the other hand, the English nation was held in the 
highest esteem in the kingdom of Sicily. Thus was fulfilled 
the prophecy which was found inscribed in ancient characters 
on tables of stone near a vill of the king of England, the name 
of which is Here ; which Henry, king of England, gave to 
William Eitz- Stephen, and where the said William built a 
new house, on a pinnacle of which was placed the figure of a 
stag ; which is supposed to have been done in order that the 
prophecy might be fulfilled, which said 

92 TO)an ti)u $ttfy$ in &eu Ijevt prmt ; 
Cijan Sulen ISngUa in tf)m be $ttttcti. 
Cfyat fyan Sal into ^rlanH altolate toatc, 
Cijat otfyer into futile mitt prutie be Scut, 

i;e tfjvfttot into fKf$a$ni ijfltt alle TOrcfe* jrtlvtdjtgen. 
After this, the king of England, in his love for God and for 

93 Verbatim as in the original. These lines are evidently corrupt. They 
seem to refer to the erection of the figure of the hart, the expedition to 
Ireland, and the feats of king Richard in Apulia and Sicily. The release 
of the right to wreck is perhaps alluded to in the last. 



A.D. 1190. FAMINE AMONG THOSE WHO BESIEGED ACEE. 171 

the salvation of his soul, abandoned all claims whatsoever on his 
part for ever to wreck throughout the whole of his territories, 
and enacted that every shipwrecked person who should reach 
shore alive should freely and quietly have all his property. 
And if a person should die on board ship, then his sons or 
daughters, or brothers or sisters, were to have his property, 
according to the degree in which they should be able to prove 
themselves his nearest heirs. But if the person so dying 
should have neither sons nor daughters, nor brothers nor sis- 
ters, then the king was to have his chattels. This release of 
right to wreck, Richard, king of England, made and confirmed 
by his charter in the second year of his reign, at Messina, in 
the month of October, in the presence of Walter, archbishop 
of Rouen, Gerard, archbishop of Auxienne, John, bishop of 
Evreux, Bernard, bishop of Bayonne, and many others of the 
clergy and laity of the household of the king of England, and 
the charter was delivered by the hand of Master Roger Mal- 
chien, the king's vice-chancellor. 

In the same year, more than a hundred thousand pagans who 
were in the kingdom of Sicily, and servants of king William, 
after his death indignantly refused to serve under king Tan- 
cred, both because Henry, king of the Germans, had laid claim 
to the throne of Sicily, as also because Richard, king of Eng- 
land, entering the kingdom of Sicily, had taken possession of 
a great part thereof. They consequently retired to the moun- 
tainous parts with their wives, sons, daughters, and cattle, 
and there lived, attacking the Christians, and doing them con- 
siderable injury. 

However, when they heard that a treaty of peace and a 
final reconciliation had been made between the king of England 
and king Tancred, they returned into the service of king Tan- 
cred, and after giving him hostages as sureties that they would 
keep the peace, came back to their homes, and cultivated the 
land as they had cultivated it in the time of king William, 
and so became the servants of king Tancred. 

In the same year, after his father, Frederic, emperor of the 
Romans, had lost his life by drowning, Conrad, duke of Suabia, 
was made king of the Germans and Alemannians, and the 
other nations subject to his father, and repaired to the siege 
of Acre with a great army ; immediately on which a great 
famine arose among those besieging Acre, and increased to 
such a degree, that a loaf of bread which used to be sold before 



172 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOTEDEN. A.D. 1190. 

their arrival for one penny, was soon after sold at the price of 
sixty 93 shillings. Upon this, great numbers of the army died 
of famine, as one horse-load of corn was being sold for sixty- 
four marks, English money ; and in consequence, the principal 
men present at the siege were obliged to feed on horse-flesh, 
eating it as a delicacy. 

Now when the famine had increased to an extraordinary 
degree of severity, the clamour of the people reached Hubert 
Fitz- Walter, bishop of Rouen, 94 and the other bishops in the ex- 
pedition, on which they made a collection of money to relieve 
the necessities of the poor, and the Lord gave such increase to 
the sums so collected, that they sufficed for the sustenance of 
all who were in want, until such time as God, the giver of all 
good things, looking from on high, sent them an abundance of 
corn, wine, and oil ; for the third day after the collection was 
distributed among the poor, there came to Acre ships laden 
with corn, wine, and oil, and made so plentiful a market, 
and on such moderate terms, that a measure of wheat which 
before was sold for two hundred besants, was shortly after to 
be had for six. 

In the same year, on the day of Saint James the Apostle, 
ten thousand youths of prowess and well armed, came forth 
from among the troops besieging the city of Acre, in spite of 
the prohibition of the king, the Patriarch, and the leader of 
the army, with the intention of engaging with Saladin and 
his army; but Saladin, on seeing them, retreated with his 
army, leaving behind his tents and provisions. On this, the 
young men entered the tents of the pagans, and ate and drank 
of what they found therein ; after which they carried away 
with them whatever they could find of value, and loaded 
themselves therewith ; but, when they were returning towards 
the force besieging Acre, Saladin and his army fell upon them 
and put them to the edge of the sword, and they were nearly 
all slain by the pagans ; a few of them, however, leaving their 
loads behind, escaped by the aid of Ralph de Hautereve, arch- 
deacon of Colchester. 

In the same year, Sibylla, queen of Jerusalem, wife of 
Guido of Lusignan, and his two daughters, departed this 
life at the siege of Acre ; upon whose death, Conrad, Marquis of 
Montferrat, lord of Tyre, seeing that there was no nearer heir 
to the throne of Jerusalem than Milicent, the wife of Amfrid 

93 Another reading says " forty." 
9A Clearly a mistake for " Salisbury." 






A. D. 1190. THE EING OF ENGLAND'S FLEET EEPAiRED. 173 

de Tours, sister of the said Sibylla, held a conference with the 
Patriarch Heraclius before mentioned, and the mother of the 
lady before named, and all the chief men of the army of the 
Christians, and demanded that the sister of the deceased queen 
should be given him to wife, promising that for the future he 
would faithfully and zealously promote the interests of the 
army of the Christians, and would from that time forward 
hold no communication whatever with Saladin. On this, the 
mother of the lady, the Patriarch, and a considerable number 
of the chief men of the army, yielded assent to his requests, 
and, effecting a divorce between the said lady and Amfrid de 
Tours, her husband, gave her in marriage to Conrad ; who 
immediately laid claim to the kingdom of Jerusalem against 
Guido, in right of his wife ; upon which Guido offered to abide 
by the lawful decision of the court of the kings of France and 
England, who were shortly about to arrive ; but Conrad, being 
unwilling to wait so long a time, usurped all power in the 
kingdom, and banished king Guido. 

In the same year, while Philip, king of the Franks, and 
Richard, king of the English, were staying at Messina, in 
Sicily, in the month of December, on the fourteenth day before 
the calends of January, being the fourth day of the week, 
loud thunder was heard at Messina, and many and terrible 
flashes of lightning were seen ; a thunderbolt also fell in one 
of the galleys of the king of England and sank it, striking 
the walls of the city of Messina, of which it levelled a 
great part. The knights also and men-at-arms of the king of 
England, who were keeping guard in the monastery of the Grif- 
fons, in which were the treasures of the king of England, 
asserted as a truth that they saw a ball of fire on a pinnacle of 
that monastery, not burning but sending forth a light, which re- 
mained there as long as the tempest raged, and after that ceased 
the ball of fire disappeared. On their expressing surprise at 
this, and making careful enquiries what it could possibly mean, 
the Griffons there serving God made answer with one accord, 
that this always happened whenever a storm arose. 

The king of England in the meantime, while he was staying 
at Messina, caused all the ships of his fleet to be hauled ashore 
and repaired, as many of them had become damaged in con- 
sequence of being eaten away by worms. For in the river 
Del Faro there are certain thin worms, which in the language 
of the people are called "Beom," whose food is every kind 



174 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1190. 

of -wood. "Whenever these have once adhered to any kind 
of wood, they never leave go thereof, except through main 
force, until they have pierced right through ; they make narrow 
straight holes when they have effected an entrance, and then 
from gnawing away the wood they become so increased in size 
and bulk, that in coming forth they make wider holes. In the 
mean time, Richard, king of England, caused stone engines and 
other engines of war to be prepared, for the purpose of taking 
the same to the land of Jerusalem. 

In the same year, William, bishop of Ely, legate of the 
Apostolic See, chancellor of our lord the king and justiciary 
of all England, oppressed the people entrusted to his charge 
with heavy exactions. For in the first place he despised all 
his fellows whom the king had associated with him in the 
government of his kingdom, and disregarded their advice. In- 
deed, he considered no one of his associates in the kingdom his 
equal, not even John, earl of Mortaigne, the king's brother. Ac- 
cordingly, he laid claim to the castles, estates, abbeys, churches, 
and all the rights of the king as his own. On the authority 
also of his legateship, he came to take up his lodging at 
bishoprics, abbeys, and priories, and other houses of the reli- 
gious orders, with such a vast array of men, horses, hounds, 
and hawks, that a house where he took up his abode for only a 
single night, was hardly able within the three following years 
to recover its former state. From the clerks and laity he also 
took away their churches, farms, lands, and other possessions, 
which he either divided among his nephews, clerks, and ser- 
vants, or else, to the loss of the owners, retained possession of 
them himself, or squandered them away to supply his extraor- 
dinary expenses. 

Did not this wretched man consider that he should one day 
have to die ? Did he not think that the Lord would demand of 
each an account of his stewardship, or honorable conduct in his 
government ? But well is it said as to such men as this : 
" Nothing is more unendurable than a man of low station when 
he is exalted on high. On every side he strikes, while on every 
side he fears ; against all does he rage, that they may have an 
idea of his power ; nor is there any beast more foul than the 
rage of a slave let loose against the backs of the free." 94 

9i " Asperius hum ill nihil est cum surgit in altum, 

Cuncta ferit, dum cuncta timet, desaevit in omnes, 
Ut seposse putent ; nee bellua tetrior ulla, 
Quain servi rabies iu libera terga furentis." 



A. D. 1190. RESTORATION MADE TO THE DUKE OF SAXOKY. 175 

In the same year, on the third day after the feast of Saint 
Michael, about four thousand armed Saracens came forth from 
the city of Acre, and burned four of the stockades with Greek 
fire ; but they were manfully repulsed by the soldiers of the 
army, and lost twenty Turks who were slain, and many 
wounded. After this, at the feast of Saint Martin, the Sara- 
cens again sallied forth from the city of Acre, and made an 
attack upon the Christians, who manfully withstood them. 
Baldwin de Carun, Walter de Oyri, and Baldwin de Dargus, 
valiantly withstood their attack, until count Henry and Geof- 
frey de Lusignan had come up with the Templars, and com- 
pelled the pagans to give way with such a mighty charge, 
that they lost in their flight forty Turks who were slain, and 
many wounded. 

After this, between the feast of Saint Andrew and the Na- 
tivity of our Lord, the wholo army of the Christians was in 
arms, for the purpose of making an assault upon the city of 
Acre, and the Germans and English drew their scaling-ladders 
to the trenches, that they might place them against the walls ; 
on which the pagans went out of the city by the postern gates, 
and took their scaling-ladders from the Germans, and drove 
the English away from the trenches, and then fastened ropes 
to the scaling-ladder of the English, with the intention of 
drawing it into the city ; but Ralph de Tilly, Humphrey de 
Yeilly, Robert de Lanlande, and Roger de Glanville, mounted 
the scaling-ladder of the English, and four times extinguished 
the Greek fire that was thrown down ; and Ralph de Tilly 
coming nearer than the others, cut asunder the ropes with his 
sword, and so rescued the scaling-ladder from the hands of 
the pagans. Shortly after, between the feast of Saint Andrew 
and the Nativity of our Lord, the famine already mentioned 
began in the army of the Christians, and continued until the 
Purification of Saint Mary. 

In the same year, Henry, king of the Germans, on hearing 
of the death of Frederic, emperor of the Romans, his father, 
restored to Henry, duke of Saxony, all that his father had 
taken from him, and, by way of addition thereto, gave him 
ten most excellent castles. He also did the like to all others 
from whom his father had taken anything away, restoring to 
each person what was his own. All his subjects therefore 
being now reconciled to him, he sent his envoys to pope Cle- 
ment, and the cardinals and senators of the city, demanding 



176 ANNALS OP EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1190. 

the Roman empire, and promising that he would in all things 
maintain the laws and dignities of the Eomans nnhurt. On this, 
pope Clement, having with due deliberation held council with 
the cardinals and senators and Roman people, respecting the 
demand of the king of the Germans, granted the king what 
he asked for, saving always the dignities and customs of the 
Romans, and appointed for him as the time for coming to 
Rome the following Easter ; but before he arrived there, pope 
Clement died. 

In the same year, David, brother of William, king of Scot- 
land, took to wife Matilda, sister of Ranulph, earl of Chester. 
In this year also, a dispute again happened between Geoffrey, 
archbishop elect of York, and Bucard, the treasurer of the 
same church, in consequence of which the archbishop elect 
excommunicated the before mentioned Bucard, who went to 
pope Clement, and was deemed worthy by him to be absolved 
therefrom; while with the Supreme Pontiff he threw such 
difficulties in the way of the business of the archbishop elect 
of York, that the Supreme Pontiff would neither confirm his 
election nor allow him to be consecrated. In addition to this, 
the Supreme Pontiff conferred on Hugh, bishop of Durham, 
the privilege of not making any profession or submission 
throughout his life to Hugh, the archbishop elect of York, 
not even though he should be consecrated to the archbishopric ; 
on the ground that the said bishop of Durham had once 
already made profession to the church of York, and to Saint 
William, at that time archbishop of York, and his Catholic 
successors. 

In the same year, Richard, king of England, the Divine 
grace inspiring him thereto, being sensible of the filthiness of 
his life, after due contrition of heart, having called together 
all the archbishops and bishops who were with him at Messina, 
in the chapel of Reginald de Moyac, fell naked at their feet, 
and did not hesitate to confess to God, in their presence, the 
filthiness of his life. For the thorns of lustfulness had de- 
parted from his head, and it was not the hand of man who 
rooted them out, but God, the Father of Mercies, who wisheth 
not for the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his 
wickedness and live, looked upon him with the eyes of mercy and 
gave him a heart to repent, and called him to repentance, for he 
received the penance imposed by the bishops before named, and 
from that hour forward became a man who feared God, and left 



A.D. 1190. INTERPRETATION OF SAINT JOHN'S VISION. 17' 

what was evil and did what was good. happy the man whc 
so falls as to rise with greater strength still ! happy th( 
man who after repentance does not relapse into faultiness an$ 
a course of ruin ! 

In the same year, Eichard, king of England, hearing, by 
common report and the relation of many persons, that there was 
a certain religious man in Calabria, of the Cistercian order, 
called Joachim, abbat of Curazzo, who had a spirit of prophecy 
and foretold to the people things to come, sent for him and 
willingly listened to the words of his prophecy, and his wisdom 
and learning. For he was a man learned in the Holy Scrip- 
tures, and interpreted the visions of Saint John the Evan- 
gelist, which Saint John has related in the Book of Revelation, 
which he wrote with his own hands ; in hearing which, the 
king of England and his people took great delight. 

The following was one of the visions of Saint John the 
Evangelist : " The kings are seven in number ; five are fallen, 
and one is, and the other is not yet come." 9i> And elsewhere in 
the Revelation there is another vision of the same Evangelist. 
" A woman clothed with the sun, 96 and the moon beneath her 
feet ;" which signifies the Holy Church, the sun of justice. 
Also, " the woman was clothed with the sun, and the moon was 
under her feet, and upon her head was a crown of twelve stars, 
and, being with child, she was in pain to be delivered ; and, 
behold ! a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, 
and seven crowns upon his head : and his tail drew the third 
part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth ; 
and he stood before the woman who was about to be delivered, 
to devour her child as soon as it was born. And the woman 
brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a 
rod of iron, and her child was caught up unto the Lord, and to 
His throne. And the woman fled into the wilderness of Egypt, 
where she had a place prepared of God, that they should feed 
her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days." 97 

Now of this vision the following is the interpretation, ac- 
cording to Joachim, abbat of Curazzo. " The woman clothed 
with the sun, and the moon under her feet," signifies the Holy 
Church, the sun of justice, who is Christ our God, shadowed 
forth and typified under that name; under his feet is the 
world, always to be trodden under foot with its vices and 

Fts. And " upon her head was a crown of twelve stars." Now 
>J5 Rev. xvii. 10. S(i Rev. xii. 1. ' Rev. xii. 1, 6. 

70L. II. N 



178 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1190. 

the head of the Church is Christ, His crown is the Catholic 
faith which the twelve Apostles have preached. " The woman 
was in pain to be delivered." So the Holy Church, which 
ever rejoices in new offspring, suffers pain from day to day, to 
the end that she may gain souls for God, which the devil 
attempts to snatch away and to drag with himself down to 
hell. " And behold ! a great red dragon, having seven heads 
and ten horns." Now this dragon signifies the devil, who is 
properly said to have seven heads. For all the heads of the 
devil are replete with iniquity, and he uses the figure 7 as 
something finite for what is infinite ; for the heads of the devil 
are infinite in number ; that is to say, those who are perse- 
cutors of the Church, and the wicked. Of these, although 
they are infinite in number, the said Joachim, in his explana- 
tion, made mention of seven principal persons who were per- 
secutors of the Church, whose names were as follow : Herod, 
Nero, Constantius, Mahomet, Melsermut, Saladin, and Anti- 
christ. 

" Saint John also says in the Book of Revelation, ' There are 
seven kings ; five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet 
come : ' which the said Joachim thus explained. The seven 
kings are Herod, Nero, Constantius, Mahomet, Melsermut, 
Saladin, and Antichrist. Of these, five have perished ; namely, 
Herod, Nero, Constantius, Mahomet, and Melsermut ; one is, 
namely, Saladin, who is now oppressing the Church of God ; 
and, together with it, the Sepulchre of our Lord, and the Holy 
City of Jerusalem and the land on which stood the feet of our 
Lord are kept in his possession ; but he shall shortly lose the 
same. On this, the king of England asked the question, ""When 
shall this take place?" To which Joachim made answer, 
" When seven years shall have elapsed from the day of the 
capture of Jerusalem." Upon which, the king of England 
remarked, ""Why, then, have we come so much too soon?" 
^/When Joachim made answer, " Your arrival is very neces- 
I sary, inasmuch as the Lord will give you the victory over His 
enemies, and will exalt your name beyond all the princes of 
[the earth." 

"The words then follow, "One of them is not yet come," 
which is Antichrist. Now as to this Antichrist, Joachim said, 
" He is already born in the city of Borne, and will be elevated 
to the Apostolic See ; and it is respecting this Antichrist that 
the Apostle says, ' He is exalted, and strives against every 



A. D. 1190. INTERPRETATION OF SAINT JOHN'S VISION. 179 

thing that is called of God.' And then shall the wicked one 
be revealed whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with the breath 
of His mouth, and shall destroy by the dazzling brightness of 
his approach." On this, the king turned to him and said, " I 
thought that Antichrist was to be born in Antioch, or at 
Babylon, of the descendants of Dan, and was to reign in the 
Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem, and was to walk in that 
land in which Christ walked, and was to reign therein three 
years and a half, and was to dispute against Elias and Enoch, 
and was to slay them, and was afterwards to die, and after his 
death the Lorof was to give sixty days for repentance, during 
which those persons might repent who had wandered away 
from the paths of truthfulness, and had been seduced by the 
preaching of Antichrist and his false prophets." 

" It then proceeds, " And there are ten horns." Now the 
ten horns of the devil are heresies and schisms, which heretics 
and schismatics oppose to the ten precepts of the law and 
the commandments of God. " And upon his head were seven 
crowns." By the crowns are signified the kings and princes 
of this world, who are to believe in Antichrist. "And his 
tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven." This refers 
to the great number of persons who shall believe in him. 
"And did cast them to the earth." By the name of stars he 
calls the lower orders of men who are to believe in Antichrist ; 
and he mentions the third part of the stars of heaven by reason 
of the great multitude of men who shall believe on him. 
11 And he did cast them to the earth;" that is to say, he sent 
all those to the bottomless pit who had perished in believing 
on him. " And he stood before the woman, who was about to 
be delivered, to devour her child as soon as it was born." The 
devil ever lies in wait for the Church, that he may carry off 
her offspring, and, after so carrying it off, devour it. He is 
well said " to stand ; " inasmuch as he never turns aside for 
evil, but always stands steadfast in wickedness and inflexible 
in the crafty wiles of his deceit. Or, according to another 
interpretation, his tail will signify the end of this world ; at 
which time certain wicked nations shall arise, which shall be 
called Gog and Magog, and shall destroy the Church of God, 
overthrow the Christian race, and then forthwith shall come 
the day of judgment. 

" But in the days of this Antichrist there shall be many Chris- 
tians who shall live in the caverns of the earth, and in the 

N 2 



180 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1190. 

solitary places of the rocks, and shall preserve the Christian 
faith in the fear of the Lord, until the consummation of Anti- 
christ ; and this is meant where it is said : " The woman fled 
into the wilderness of Egypt, where she had a place prepared 
of God, that they should feed her there, a thousand two hun- 
dred and sixty days ; and her man child shall rule all nations 
with a rod of iron." This is especially our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who after His Passion and Eesurrection, has ascended into 
heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty, 
and shall come to judge the living and the dead, and the world 
by fire ; of whom, if we are followers, and shall continue to 
obey His commands, we shall be caught up into the air to meet 
him, and shall always be with him." 

But although the said abbat of Curazzo gave these opinions 
in relation to Antichrist, still "Walter, archbishop of Rouen, 
and the archbishop of Apamia, Gerard, archbishop of Auxienne, 
John, bishop of Evreux, Bernard, bishop of Bayeux, and other 
ecclesiastical men of great learning in the Holy Scriptures, 
endeavoured to prove the contrary ; and although they brought 
forward many arguments on both sides, with strong indications 
of truthfulness, the dispute is still undecided. For the an- 
cients, when making mention of Antichrist in their writings, 
have written to the following effect : 

" Those persons who wish to know something about Anti- 
christ, ought first to mark why he has been so called. The 
reason is, because he will be the opposite of Christ in all 
things, and will do what is contrary to Christ. Christ came 
in humility, he will come in pride. Christ came to raise the 
humble and to justify sinners ; on the other hand, Antichrist 
will cast down the humble, and will magnify sinners, will 
exalt the unrighteous, and will always teach those vices which 
are opposed to virtues, will destroy the law of the Gospel, will 
recall to the world the worship of devils, will seek his own 
glory, and will call himself " the Almighty God." This Anti- 
christ will therefore have many to serve him in his wicked- 
ness, of whom many have already preceded him in the world; 
such as Antiochus, Nero, and Domitian ; in our times too we 
know of many Antichrists. Whatever person, whether lay- 
man, whether monk, or whether canon, lives contrary to the 
laws of righteousness, and impugns the rules of his order, and 
blasphemes that which is good, he is Antichrist and a minister 
of Satan. But now as to the origin of Antichrist." What 



A.D. 1190. DESCRIPTION OF ANTICHRIST. 181 

I am saying, I am not coining out of my own imagination, or 
inventing ; for in reading over books with care, I find all these 
things there written. 

According to what our authors say, Antichrist shall be born 
after the example of the Jews, namely, of the tribe of Dan, 
according to the prophecy that says : "Dan shall be a serpent 
by the way, an adder in the path ;" 98 for like a serpent shall 
he lie in the way, and be in the path, that he may smite those 
who walk in the path of justice, and may slay them with the 
venom of his malice. He shall also be born from the inter- 
course of a father and mother, just like other men, and not, as 
some say, of a virgin alone. But still, in sin shall he be 
wholly conceived ; in sin shall he be begotten, and in sin shall 
he be born. At the very moment of his conception, the devil 
shall at the same time enter the womb of his mother ; and by 
means of the Devil will he be cherished and protected in the 
womb of his mother, and the power of the Devil will always 
be with her. And just as the Holy Ghost came upon the 
Mother of 'our Lord, and overshadowed her by his efficacy, and 
filled her with his divine power that so she might conceive by 
the Holy Ghost, and that what should be born might be sacred 
and holy ; so also the Devil shall descend upon the mother of 
Antichrist, and shall fill her entirely, surround her entirely, 
hold her entirely, possess her entirely, within and without, to 
the end that, the devil working through man, she may con- 
ceive ; and what shall be born shall be entirely noxious, entirely 
evil, entirely wicked. 

In consequence hereof, this man is also called " the son of per- 
dition ;" because, so far as he possibly can, he shall bring man- 
kind to perdition, and last of all he himself shall come to per- 
dition. Behold ! now you have heard how he shall be born, hear 
also the place where he shall be born. For, as our Lord and 
Redeemer in His foresight provided Bethlehem as the place 
where He should deign to assume humanity in our behalves, 
and be born, so the Devil knows of a fitting place for that 
wicked man who is called Antichrist, from which the root of 
all evils may take its rise, that is to say, the city of Babylon. 
For in this city, which was formerly a renowned and glorious 
city of the Gentiles, and the capital of the kingdom of Persia, 
Antichrist will be born, and it is said that he will be nourished 
and brought up in the cities of Bethsaida and Chorazin ; to 
9 * Gen. xlix. 17. 



182 AITOALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1190, 

which cities our Lord speaks in terms of censure, saying: 
" Woe unto thee, Bethsaida ! woe unto thee, Chorazin !" 

Antichrist will also have magicians, sorcerers, diviners and 
enchanters, who, the Devil so inspiring them, will nurture him 
and educate him in all iniquities and falsehood, and in the 
foul art, and evil spirits shall be his guides, associates, and 
sole companions. Then shall they come to Jerusalem, and all 
Christians whom he shall not be enabled to convert to his own 
ways, he will slay with various torments, and will prepare to 
make his abode in the holy Temple. The Temple also which 
was destroyed, and which Solomon dedicated to God, he shall 
restore to its former state, and shall circumcise himself, and 
shall lyingly assert that he is the son of Almighty God. Kings 
and princes also will he first make converts of, and then 
through them, of other persons ; while he will travel over the 
places where our Lord Christ walked, and will first lay waste 
what the Lord so rendered glorious. Then, throughout the 
whole world will he send forth his messengers and his preachers. 
And his preaching and power shall extend from sea to sea, 
from east to west, from north to south. Many signs therefore 
will he give, great and unheard-of miracles ; he will cause fire 
to come in a dreadful manner from heaven, trees to blossom in 
a moment and then to wither away, the sea to be aroused and 
suddenly to be tranquillized, the natural forms of things to be 
changed into various shapes ; the courses and tides of rivers to 
be changed, the air to be agitated with winds and commotions, 
besides innumerable other things of wondrous nature. The 
dead shall even be raised in the sight of men, so that, if pos- 
sible, even the elect may be led into error. For when they 
shall behold signs so great and of such a nature, even those 
who are perfect and the elect of God, shall be in doubt, whether 
or not this is Christ, who, according to the Scriptures, was to 
come at the end of the world. 

But he shall cause persecution in every clime against the 
Christians and all the elect ; and shall upraise himself against 
the faithful in three ways ; that is to say, by terror, by gifts, 
and by miracles. To those who believe *in him he will give 
abundance of gold and of silver ; those whom he shall not be 
able to corrupt with bribes he will conquer by terror : those 
whom he shall not be able to conquer by terror, he will at- 
tempt to lead astray by signs and miracles ; and those upon 
whom by signs and miracles he can make no effect, he will 



A. U. 1190. OPINIONS OF LEAHNED MEN ON ANTICHEIST. 183 

torment, and, in the sight of all, destroy by a cruel death. 
Then shall there be tribulation, such as has not been upon the 
earth from the time when nations began to be, until that time ; 
then shall those who are in the field flee to the mountains, 
and he who shall be above shall not come down into his house, 
to take anything away therefrom. 

Then shall every faithful Christian who shall be found, 
either deny God, or die by the sword, or by the fire of the 
furnace, or by serpents, or by beasts, or by some other kind 
of torment, if he shall persist in the faith. This terrible and 
fearful tribulation shall continue throughout the whole world 
three years and a half. Then shall the days be shortened on 
account of the elect ; for if the Lord should not shorten the 
days, all flesh would not be saved. 

The time also when Antichrist shall come, as well as when 
the day of judgment shall begin to appear, the Apostle Paul 
points out in his Epistle to the Thessalonians, where he says, 
" "We beseech you by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ ;" s 
and he reveals in the passage where he says, " Except there be 
a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of 
perdition." 1 We know also that after the kingdom of the 
Greeks, as also after the kingdom of the Persians, each of 
which, at its own season, gained great glory, and flourished 
amid great power, at length, after other kingdoms as well, the 
kingdom of the Romans began, and that it was more mighty 
than all the former kingdoms, and held all the kingdoms of the 
earth in subjection to it, and all nations and peoples were 
tributary to the Eomans. Hence it is that the Apostle Paul 
says that Antichrist will not come into the world, " Except 
there be first a falling away;" that is, unless all the kingdoms 
of the world should first revolt from the Roman empire to whom 
they were before subject. This time, however, has not come 
as yet ; for although we see the Roman empire in a great 
measure destroyed, still, so long as the kings of the Franks 
hold dominion, who are bound to uphold the empire of Rome, 
the dignity of Rome will not entirely perish, for by its kings 
will it be upheld. 

Some, indeed, of our learned men assert that one of the kings 

of the Franks will hold the Roman empire afresh, and in all its 

integrity, who will exist at a very late period of time ; and he 

himself will be the greatest and the last of all the kings, and 

69 2 Thess. ii. 1. 2 Thess. ii. 3. 



184 ANNALS OF EOGEH EE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1190- 

after he shall have happily ruled over his own kingdom, shall 
come at last to Jerusalem, and shall lay down his sceptre and 
his crown on the Mount of Olives. This will be the end of the 
empire of the Romans, and of the Christians, and immediately, 
according to the words of Saint Paul the Apostle quoted above, 
they say that Antichrist will come, and then will be revealed 
Antichrist, the man of sin, who, though he shall be but a 
man, shall still be the source of all sinfulness and the son of 
perdition, which means the son of the Devil, not, indeed, by 
nature, but by reason of imitation ; for in everything will he 
fulfil the wishes of the Devil ; because the fulness of the dia- 
bolical power, and of the whole of his evil disposition, shall 
corporeally find an abode in him, in whom will be all the trea- 
sures of wickedness and iniquity stored away, and who shall 
strive against Christ, that is to say, shall be opposed to Him, 
and all his members. " And he is exalted," meaning that he 
is elated with pride ; " above everything that is called God," 
which means " above all the gods of the Gentiles ;" Hercules, to 
wit, and Apollo, Jupiter, and Mercury ; above all those whom 
the pagans suppose to be divinities Antichrist shall be raised ; 
for he will make himself greater and more powerful than, them 
all. And not only above these will he be raised, but above 
everything that is worshipped ; above the Holy Trinity even, 
which alone ought to be worshipped and adored by all crea- 
tures he shall so raise himself, that he shall sit in the Temple 
of the Lord, and show himself as though he were a God. For, 
as we have said above, being born in the city of Babylon, he 
shall come to Jerusalem, and shall circumcise himself, and 
shall say to the Jews, " I am the Christ who was promised to 
you again and again, who have come for your salvation, to the 
end that I may gather together and defend you who are dis- 
persed." 

Then will all the Jews resort to him, thinking that they are 
receiving God, whereas they will be receiving the Devil. But 
even in the Temple of God shall Antichrist sit, that is to say, 
in the Holy Church, making martyrs of all the Christians ; and 
he shall be exalted and shall be magnified, because in him shall 
be the Devil, the source of all wickedness, who is also king 
over all the sons of vanity. But in order that Antichrist may 
not come suddenly and unexpectedly, and at the same moment 
deceive the whole of mankind with his errors, and so bring 
them to ruin before his rising, two great prophets shall be 



A.D. 1190. WHEKE ANTICHRIST SHALL BE SLAIN. 185 

sent into the world, Enoch and Elias, who, against the attacks 
of Antichrist, shall fortify the faithful of God with Divine 
arms, and shall provide them, and. shall strengthen and prepare 
the elect for battle ; and they shall teach and preach for three 
years and a half. The sons also of Israel, such as shall at that 
season be found, these two great prophets and teachers, shall 
turn to the grace of the faith, and on the side of the elect shall 
render them insuperable by the force of a whirlwind of such 
mighty power. Then shall be fulfilled that which the Scrip- 
ture says, " Though the number of the children of Israel be as 
the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved." 2 After they 
shall have fulfilled the time of their preaching three years and 
a half, then shall the persecution by Antichrist begin to rage, 
and against them the first thing of all shall Antichrist take up 
arms, and shall slay them, as we read in the book of Eevelation ; 
" And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast 
that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against 
them, and shall overcome them and kill them." 3 Then, after 
these two shall have been slain, he shall persecute the rest 
of the faithful, that so he may make them either glorious mar- 
tyrs or apostates, and then shall those who believe in him 
receive the impression of his mark on their foreheads. 

But as we have spoken thus at large about his rise, let us 
now say what end he is to have. Now, this Antichrist, the son of 
the Devil, and the most vile contriver of all wickedness, shall, for 
three years and a half, as already mentioned, harass the whole 
world with great persecutions, and shall with various punish- 
ments torment all the people of God ; and after he shall have 
slain Elias and Enoch, and shall have crowned the rest with 
martyrdom, who remain in the faith, at last shall come upon 
him the judgment of God, as Saint Paul writes, saying, " Whom 
the Lord Jesus shall consume with the spirit of His mouth ;" 4 
or else the Lord shall kill him there with the power of his 
command, or Michael, the Archangel, shall slay him with the 
might of the Lord ; for he shall be slain by the might of 
some angel or Archangel. They say also that Antichrist shall 
be slain on a mountain in Babylon, upon his throne, in that 
place opposite to which the Lord ascended into heaven. But 
you should know that after Antichrist shall have been slain, 
the day of judgment will not come immediately, the Lord will 
not come immediately to judge us ; but, as we understand from , 
2 Rom. ix. 27. 3 Rev. xi. 7. 4 2 Thess. ii. 8. 






186 A.KXALS OF B.OGER DE HOVTDEJf. A.D. 1190. 

the book of Daniel, the Lord will give a day to the elect, that 
they may perform penance, because they have been led astray 
by Antichrist. But after they shall have duly performed this 
penance, there is no one who knows how long a space of time 
shall intervene before the Lord shall come to judge mankind ; 
but it remains subject to the determination of God at what 
hour God shall judge the world, inasmuch as before the world 
began He pre-ordained that it should be judged. 

John the Apostle and Evangelist, one of virgin purity and 
the chosen of the Lord, and more beloved than the rest, asked 
the Lord as to the end of the world, and the Lord made answer, 5 
" The sun shall be turned to darkness, and the moon to blood, 
and from the trees blood shall drop ; the stones shall send forth 
voices, the people shall be aroused, and Antichrist, that is, the 
Devil, shall reign, and shall work miracles and great signs in 
the people ; no one shall be able to escape from him. He shall 
be born of a woman who is a harlot of the tribe of Dan in 
Israel. All those who believe in him he shall mark with his 
mark on the forehead, and no one shall be able to blot out the 
work of his hands. He shall be brought up in Chorazin, and 
shall afterwards dwell in the city of Bethsaida ; and in a few 
days both all those whom he shall kill, as also those who shall 
die under his power of famine and thirst, shall be the elect 
of God ; he will raise the false ones who are dead, 6 he will 
turn back rivers in their course, he will pluck up trees by the 
roots, and will turn the branches to the earth, and their roots 
upwards, and by his diabolical arts make them blossom. 
Many he will lead astray. On the day on which he shall be 
born, all who dwell in the four quarters of the world will 
know that he has been born ; the Scripture bearing witness 
thereto, which says, " In every house the carcase of one dead 
man shall be a sign." 7 

Then in his time shall the father slay the son, and the son 
the father, and the brother the brother, and the faithful shall 
be found wanting in all things. Women shall be menstruous, 
and shall not hide themselves from men ; the churches shall be 
destroyed, the priests shall mourn, no memorials will be preserved 

6 It need hardly be said that this answer, given to Saint John, only ex- 
isted in the author's imagination, or was conveyed in some monkish legend. 
It is probably based on Rev. vi. 12. 

6 This seems to be the meaning of " suscitabit falsos mortuos." 

7 Probably alluding to the words of Gen. xii. 30. 



A.D. 1190. NAMES OF THOSE WHO DIED AT ACBE. 187 

of the places where the bodies of the Saints have rested ; people 
shall adore profane idols, like pagans, and Jews, and Saracens. 
Nation shall arise against nation, and one kingdom against 
another, and there shall be great earthquakes in divers places, 
and pestilence and famine, and the stars shall fall down upon 
the earth; rivers shall be changed into blood, and all the 
waters which are below the heavens. 

In his reign two prophets, namely, Enoch and Elias, shall 
wage war against him, who are now sorrowing in Paradise 
at the contemplation of death, and Antichrist shall slay them, 
and they shall lie dead in the streets of the city during three 
days and three nights, and on the fourth day they shall rise 
again to life everlasting. At the last, Almighty God, who 
wishes that all should be saved, shall send Michael, the Arch- 
angel, having a sharp two-edged sword in his hands, that is to 
say, the sword of the Holy Spirit, and shall slay him, and shall 
cleave him into two parts from head to foot, that so the world 
may not be destroyed, but may be renewed for the better ; 
three years and six months shall it thus be in the bringing of 
the world to a state of perfection. 8 

In the same year, Richard, king of England, gave to his 
nephew Otho, son of his sister Matilda, formerly duchess of 
Saxony, the earldom of Evreux, and although many would 
have received him and have done to him homage and fealty, 
still many resisted him, declaring that they would not with- 
draw from their fealty to the king, before they had spoken to 
him face to face. In consequence of this, our lord the king 
gave to the said Otho the earldom of Poitou by way of ex- 
change for the earldom of Evreux. 

The names of the nobles who died this year at the siege of Acre. 
Queen Sibylla, the wife of Guido, king of Jerusalem, and her 
two daughters, Heraclius, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, Baldwin, 
archbishop of Canterbury, the archbishop of Nazareth, the 
archbishop of Besan9on, the archbishop of Arles-le-blanc, the 
archbishop of Montreal, the bishop of Sidon, that is to say, of 
Saeta, the new bishop of Acre, the bishop of Baruth, the bishop 
of Saint George, the bishop of Saint Abraham, the bishop of 

8 It is not improbable tbat tbis wearisome and nonsensical piece of 
jargon may have formed part of one or more sermons on the subject of 
Antichrist ; and, in the enthusiasm of our chronicler, been deemed worthy 
of a place in his compilation. 



188 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1190. 

Tiberias, the abbat of the Temple of our Lord, the abbat of 
Mount Sion, the abbat of Mount Olivet, the abbat of Forde, 
the prior of Saint Sepulchre, Ralph de Hautereve, archdeacon 
of Colchester, Roger le Abbe. Frederic, emperor of the Ro- 
mans, died on the journey to the land of Jerusalem, being 
drowned in the river which is called Salef, and Conrad, his 
son, duke of Suabia, died at the siege of Acre ; Robert, earl of 
Leicester, also died in Romania, in going to the land of Jeru- 
salem ; the Landgrave of Germany died in Romania while 
returning home ; John, constable of Chester, also died at Tyre, 
in the land of Jerusalem : Rotrod, count of Perche, also died 
at the siege of Acre, the count de Puntif, Theobald, earl of 
Blois, and Stephen, count de Sancerre, his brother ; William, 
count de Ferrers, the duke Bertold of Germany, Roger, earl 
of Apulia, and Jocelyn, earl of Apulia, as also the count de 
Brenes and his brother Andrew, who was slain. Among the 
slain were also Ingelram de Fenes, Louis de Arseles, Hugh de 
Hoiry, "Walter de Moy, Guido de Dancy, Odo de Gunesse. The 
butler of Santstlir was taken by the pagans, as also the mar- 
shal of count Henry, Reginald de Magny being slain. 

In the same year, there died besides the above at the siege of 
Acre, the viscount of Touraine, the lord de Wancy, Gilbert de 
Tileres, Florence de Angest, Jocelyn de Montmorenci, the 
viscount of Chastel Heraud, Anselm of Montreal and all his 
household, the viscount of Chatillon and his mother, John, 
count of Vend6me, JEstellan de Ypres, Geoffrey de la Bruyere, 
Robert de Boives, Adam, chamberlain of the king of France, 
Adam de Leun, Boves de Juvemry, William de Pinkim, 
Roger de Polebare, and Robert, the constable, seneschal of 
earl William de Mandeville. Ranulph de Glanville, justiciary 
of England, also died at the siege of Acre, as also Bernard the 
younger, of Saint Valery, Richard Clare, Guido de Chatillon, 
Walter de Kime, son of Philip de Kime, John de Lamburne, 
and Walter de Ros, brother of Peter de Ros. 

In the same year, Sancho, king of Portugal, gave his daughter 
Tarsia in marriage to Alphonso, king of Saint Jago, his ne- 
phew ; he had by her three sons, and though pope Celestinus 
used all possible endeavours that they might be separated, he 
still adhered to her in spite of God and the prohibition of our 
lord the pope for a period of five years ; accordingly, our lord the 
pope Celestinus placed the said king of Saint Jago under an in- 
terdict, and so he remained for five years. In the meantime, 



A.D. 1190. THE EMPEKOE'S ANSWER TO HIS DAUGHTER. 189 

however, Alphonso, king of Castille, arose against the said 
king of Saint Jago, and compelled him to relinquish his wife, 
the daughter of the king of Portugal, and hy the persuasion of 
pope Celestinus, for the sake of peace, gave him his own 
daughter to wife. 

In process of time, the daughter of Boyac El Emir Amimoli, 
emperor of Africa, having heard from common report of the 
prowess of Sancho, king of Navarre, brother of Berengaria, 
queen of England, fell in love with him to such a degree, that 
she greatly longed to have him as her husband. When she 
was unable any longer to conceal her designs, she told her 
father, the emperor, that she would hang herself unless Sancho, 
king of Navarre, would have her for his wife ; on which her 
father made answer, " How can that be effected, seeing that you 
are a pagan 9 and he a Christian ?" To this his daughter made 
answer, " Indeed I am quite ready to embrace the Christian 
faith, and to live conformably to their laws, if I only have the 
king of Navarre for my husband, a thing which, my dear father, 
can easily be brought about by you. For all stand in awe of 
you, and extend their arms to you; still, there is need of 
blandishment; away with all fury and intimidation; send 
entreaties and gifts to this man, that by such means you may 
gain him for me. ' Believe me, 'tis a noble thing to give.' 10 
Send also to his mother and sister, and the rest of his family, 
bounteous presents, in order that they may allow him to assent 
to your proposals. ' The prey that's sought by many hands is 
speedily obtained.' " u 

On this, her father made answer : " ' While you were guile- 

fless, I loved your body and your mind ; now, is your beauty 
blemished by the vices of your disposition.' la What to do I 
know not, for I am in difficulties on every side. For if the 
king of Navarre shall fail to return your passion, then you 
will hang yourself. I will therefore attempt to prevail upon 
him by entreaties and various presents, that so I may gain him 
in some way or other as a husband for you. Still, I would much 
rather that you would take a husband of our own nation." The 

9 " Follower of Mahomet," he would be more likely to say. 

" Crede mihi res est ingeniosa dare." A singular thing, for a Maho- 
medan lady to quote Ovid. 

11 A quotation from Ovid 

44 Fit cito per multas pneda petita manus." 

12 From Ovid 

" Donee eras simplex, animum cum corpore amavi, 
Nunc mentis vitio luesa fig-ura tua est." 



190 ANNALS OF EOGEE BE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

answer of the damsel to this was-, " ' May I be rather devoured 
by the yawning earth, I pray, or burned by the gleaming 
flames of the hurled thunderbolt, 13 than that I should take 
any man for my husband but the king of Navarre.' " 

Accordingly, the emperor of Africa sent envoys to Sancho, 
king of Navarre, by whom he begged that he would come to him, 
for the purpose of marrying his daughter, and he would give 
him as much money as he should desire, besides the whole of 
the land that lies between the extremities of the territory of 
the king of Portugal and the mountain of Muncian, which 
divides the territories of the Pagans in Spain from those of 
the king of Arragon. But while the king of Navarre was on 
the way to him, Boyac El Emir Amimoli, emperor of Africa, 
died ; so that when the said king of Navarre arrived in Africa 
he found the emperor dead, and the son of the emperor as yet 
but a little child, and not fit to govern the kingdom ; while 
there were many competitors with him for the empire. 

On the king of Navarre coming to him, fully expecting that 
he should receive the damsel before-mentioned as his wife, the 
boy who was to reign said to him, that if he was ready to 
assist him and to serve him in his endeavours to obtain the 
empire, he would give him his sister in accordance with the 
promises of his father ; but if not, he would place him in con- 
finement, from which he should never be released. Seeing 
himself thus placed in a dilemma, he chose to serve under him 
rather than be placed in confinement ; in conformity with the 
maxim of Saint Augustin ; " When a person is shut up within 
walls that he may not escape, let him precipitate himself from 
the part where the wall is lowest." Accordingly, the Lord 
granting it, and Sancho, king of Navarre, using his best en- 
deavours, the son of the Emir Amimoli within three years 
subdued all his adversaries, and became emperor. In the mean- 
time, Alphonso, king of Castille, and the king of Arragon, in- 
vaded the territories of the said king of Navarre, one of them 
on one side, the other on the other ; in consequence of which, 
Alphonso, king of Castille, took from him twenty-four towns, 
and the king of Arragon eighteen. 

In the year of grace 1191, being the second year of the reign 
of king Richard, the said king Eichard, and Philip, king of 
the Franks, were together at Messina, in Sicily, on the day of 

13 Devorer ante precor subito telluris hiatu, 
Aut rutilo missi fulminis igne cremer." 



A.D. 1191. THE KING ATTACKS WILLIAM DE BAILEES. 191 

the Nativity of our Lord, which fell on the third day of 
the week. On the same day, after dinner, the Pisano and 
Genevese seditiously made an attack upon the galleymen of 
Bichard, king of England, and a slaughter took place on both 
sides. The noise of this accordingly reached the ears of the 
king of England, who was still sitting at table in his castle 
of Mate Griffon ; and on this day there were feasting with 
him Eeginald, bishop of Chartres, Hugh, duke of Burgundy, 
William count de Nevers, "William count de Juvigny, Geof- 
frey count of Perche, and many others of the household of the 
king of France. The tables being instantly set aside, all these 
persons arose, and went out with the king fully armed, for the 
purpose of putting an end to the fight, which, however, they were 
unable to do ; but, night coming on, the parties were separated 
from each other till the morning. On the following day, when 
the people had assembled in the church of Saint John of the 
Hospital, to hear Divine service there, a certain Pisan, drawing 
his knife, slew one of the galleymen of the king in the church ; 
on which a conflict took place a second time between the 
Pisans and the galleymen, and multitudes were slain on both 
sides. Upon this, the king of France and the king of England 
came with a large body of armed men, and made peace be- 
tween them. 

After this, in the month of February, on the day of the 
Purification of Saint Mary ever a Virgin, being Saturday, 
after dinner, Richard, king of England, and many of his house- 
hold, and some of the people of the household of the king of 
France, assembled after their usual manner, outside of the 
walls of the city of Messina, to view the games of the people ; 
and when they were returning home, as they passed through 
the middle of the city, they met a peasant coming from the 
country with an ass laden with reeds which they call " canes ;" 
of which the king of England and the others who were with 
him each took one, and engaged with one another. It so 
happened that the king of England and William de Barres, 
one of the bravest knights of the household of the king of 
France, engaged with each other, and broke their reeds, 
while the head-piece of the king of the English was broken by 
a blow from William de Barres ; at which the king being en- 
raged, made an attack upon him with such violence that it 
made him and his horse stumble ; but, while the king was 
trying to throw him to the ground, the king's saddle slipped, 






192 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

on which he dismounted in all haste, and another horse was 
brought him, stouter than the first. Mounting it, he again 
made an attack upon William de Barres and tried to throw him 
down, but was not able, as he kept fast hold of the horse's 
neck, on which the king uttered threats against him. 

Upon this, Robert de Breteuil, son of Eobert, earl of Leicester, 
whom the king the previous day had girded with the sword of 
his father's earldom, was for laying hands on William de Barres 
that he might help his master, but the king said to him, " Hold, 
and leave me and him alone." After William and the king 
had contended for a considerable time, both in words and deeds, 
the king said to him, "Away with you hence, and take care 
that you never appear in my presence again, for at heart I 
shall for everlasting be the enemy of you and yours." Upon 
this, William de Barres departed from the king's presence grieved 
and in confusion, in consequence of the king's indignation, and 
went to his lord the king of France, to ask his advice and as- 
sistance upon the matter that had thus happened on the road. 

On the next day the king of France came to the king of Eng- 
land, on behalf of William de Barres, with humble entreaties on 
his part, asking for peace and mercy on behalf of William de 
Barres, but the king refused to listen to him. On the third 
day after this, William de Barres took his departure from 
the city of Messina ; for his lord, the king of Prance, was un- 
willing to keep him any longer with him, contrary to the wish 
and prohibition of the king of England. However, after a 
considerable time had intervened, and the time for embark- 
ing was drawing nigh, the king of France and all the arch- 
bishops, bishops, earls and barons, and chief men of the 
army, again came to the king of England, and, falling at his 
feet, asked for peace and mercy on his part on behalf of Wil- 
liam de Barres, showing the losses and inconveniences that 
might result in consequence of the absence of a knight of such 
character and prowess; and after great difficulty they ob- 
tained from the king of England that the said William might 
return in peace, and the king of England would do no harm to 
either him or his, or make enquiry about them so long as they 
should be in the service of their lord. 

After this, the king of England made present of many ships 
to the king of France and his own people, and distributed 
his treasures with such profuseness among all the knights 
and men-at-arms of his whole army, that it was said by 



A. D. 1191. THE KING OF ENGLAND PROCEEDS TO CATANIA. 193 

many that not one of his predecessors had ever given so muck 
in a whole year, as he gave away in that month. And cer- 
tainly we have reason to believe that by this munificence he 
gained the favour of Him who sends his thunders, as it is 
written : " God loveth a cheerful giver." 15 

In the same month of February, the king of England sent 
his galleys to Naples, to meet queen Eleanor his mother, and 
Berengaria, daughter of Sancho, king of Navarre, whom he 
was about to marry, and Philip, earl of Flanders, who was 
coming with them. However, the king's mother and the 
daughter of the king of Navarre went on to Brindisi, where 
Margarite, the admiral, and other subjects of king Tancred, 
received them with due honor, and showed them all considera- 
tion and respect. The earl of Flanders, however, came to 
Naples, and finding there the galleys of the king of England, 
embarked in them and came to Messina, and in many matters 
followed the advice and wishes of the king of England ; at 
which the king of France being enraged, prevailed upon the 
earl to leave the king of England and return to him. 

In the mean time, a serious difference happened in England 
between the king's chancellor and John, earl of Mortaigne, the 
king's brother, and the other principal men of the kingdom ; 
which increased to such a pitch that they all wrote to the king 
relative to the state of his kingdom, and the excesses that the 
said chancellor was guilty of toward the people of his king- 
dom. Accordingly, when the king heard of the excesses and 
annoyances that the chancellor was guilty of towards his 
people, he sent to England from Messina, Walter, archbishop 
of llouen, and William Marshal, earl of Striguil, with com- 
mands to the chancellor that in all business of the kingdom 
he should have the said archbishop of Rouen, and William 
Marshal, Geoffrey FitzPeter, William Bruere, and Hugh Bar- 
dolph, as his associates and witnesses. On their arrival in 
England, these persons did not dare deliver their letters to the 
chancellor, fearing lest they should rather incur his hatred, 
than derive honor therefrom. For the chancellor set at nought 
all the king's commands, and would have no one an equal with 
himself, or any associate in the kingdom. 

On the first day of the month of March, Richard, king of 
England, left Messina, and proceeded thence to the city of 
Catania (where rests the most holy body of Saint Agatha the 
15 2 Cor. ix. 7. 

VOL. II. 






194 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

Virgin and Martyr), for the purpose of holding a conference 
with Tancred, king of Sicily, who had come thither to meet 
him. Accordingly, king Tancred, on hearing of the approach 
of the king of England, went forth to meet him, and with the 
greatest reverence and the honor due to his royal excellency 
received and introduced him into the city. As they were going 
together towards the tomb of Saint Agatha the Martyr, at the 
entrance of the church, they were met by the clergy and people, 
praising and blessing the Lord who had united them in the 
bonds of such brotherly love. After having offered up his 
prayers at the tomb of Saint Agatha, the king of England 
entered the palace of king Tancred, together with him, and 
stayed there three days and nights. 

On the fourth day the king of Sicily sent to the king of 
England many presents of great value, consisting of gold and 
silver, horses and silken cloths ; but he would receive nothing 
from him except a little ring, which he accepted as a token of 
their mutual esteem. On the other hand, the king of England 
gave to king Tancred that most excellent sword which the 
Britons called " Calibum," and which had been the sword of 
Arthur, once the valiant king of England. King Tancred 
also gave to the king of England four large ships, which they 
call "ursers," and fifteen gallies; and when the king of 
England left him, he escorted him back to Taverni, two long 
days' journey from the city of Catania. 

On the following day, when the king of England was pre- 
paring to take his leave, king Tancred gave him a certain 
document, which the king of Erance had sent to him by the 
duke of Burgundy, and had therein stated that the king of 
England was a traitor, and had not kept the treaty of peace 
which he had made with him, and that if king Tancred was 
willing to go to war with the long of England, or to attack him 
by night, he and his people would give him aid against the 
king of England, for the purpose of destroying his army. 

On this, the king of England made answer, " I am not a 
traitor, nor have I been, nor will I be ; the peace which I made 
with you I have in no way broken, nor will I break it so long 
as I live ; and I cannot easily bring myself to believe that the 
king of France did send you this about me, as he is my liege 
lord, and my sworn associate in this pilgrimage." To this 
king Tancred made answer and said, " I give you the letter 
which he himself sent me by the duke of Burgundy; and 



A.D. 1191. AGEEEMENT BETWEEN RICHAUD AND PHILIP. 195 

if the duke of Burgundy denies that he brought me that 
letter on behalf of his lord the king of Prance, I am quite 
ready to make proof of the same against him by one of my 
captains." Upon this, with the letter so received at the 
hands of king Tancred, the king of England returned to Mes- 
sina. 

On the same day, the king of France came to Taverni, and 
had an interview with king Tancred, and after remaining with 
him one night, on the next day returned to Messina. The 
king of England, being aroused to anger against the king of 
France, showed him a countenance neither joyous nor be- 
tokening peace, but sought an opportunity of withdrawing 
from him with his people. Consequently, the king of France 
made enquiry why this was done ; on which the king of Eng- 
land, by Philip, earl of Flanders, informed him of every word 
that the king of Sicily had said to him about the king ; and, 
as a proof of the fact, showed the letter already mentioned. 
On this becoming known to the king of France, having a bad 
conscience on the matter, he at first held his peace, not know- 
ing what to say in return. At length, however, having re- 
covered his self-possession, he said : 

" Now do I know of a truth that the king of England is 
seeking pretexts for speaking ill of me, for these words are 
forged and false. But he has invented these evil charges 
against me, I suppose, that he may get rid of my sister Alice, 
whom he has sworn that he will marry ; but let him know this 
for certain, if he does put her aside and marry another woman, 
I will be the enemy of him and his so long as I live." On 
hearing this, the king of England made answer, that he would 
on no account whatever take his sister to wife ; inasmuch as 
the king of England, his own father, had been intimate with 
her, and had had a son by her ; and he produced many wit- 
nesses to prove the same, who were ready by all manner of 
proof to establish that fact. 

When this became known to the king of France, through 
the information of many persons, by the counsel of the earl of 
Flanders and others of his faithful advisers, he acquiesced 
therein; and that all disputes between him and the king of 
England, both on this point as well as on all others, might 
be put an end to, he released the king of England from his 
promises and oaths, and all covenants which he had entered 
into with him as to being united in marriage with his sister 

o 2 



196 ANtfALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1191. 

Alice : and, in consideration of this treaty, the king of Eng- 
land promised that he would pay yearly, for the next five 
years, two thousand marks sterling; of which, at the beginning 
of the treaty, he paid to the king of France two thousand 
marks. Also, when they should have returned to their own 
territories, the king of England was to deliver to the king of 
France his sister Alice, and Gisors and all the other places that 
the king of France had granted him as a marriage portion with 
his sister. Also, by virtue of this treaty, the king of France 
gave to the king of England leave to marry whomsoever he 
should choose ; and granted to him, and conferred the same by 
his charter, that the dukedom of Brittany should always belong 
to the demesne of the duke of Normandy, and that the duke 
of Brittany should always be a liegeman of the duke of Nor- 
mandy, and be answerable to him as his liege lord, and the 
duke of Normandy should be answerable to the king of France 
both as to the dukedom of Brittany as well as the dukedom of 
Normandy. Accordingly, on that day the king of France and 
the king of England were made friends, and confirmed all those 
covenants with good faith, and upon oath, with the testimony 
of their seals. 

In the same month of March, on the third day before the 
calends of April, being Saturday, Philip, king of France, left 
the port of Messina with all his fleet ; and on the twenty- 
second day following, that is to say, the Saturday in Easter 
week, he arrived with his army at the siege of Acre. The 
king of England, however, and his army remained at Mes- 
sina after the departure of the king of France. On the same 
day also on which the king of France left Messina, queen 
Eleanor arrived there, the mother of Eichard, king of England, 
bringing with her Berengaria, daughter of Sancho, king of 
Navarre, whom the said king of England was to marry : on 
the fourth day after which, the said queen Eleanor again re- 
turned on her way to England, with the intention of passing 
through Home, to treat of the business of Geoffrey, the arch- 
bishop elect of York ; for, through her the king of England 
sent word to the Supreme Pontiff, and humbly entreated him 
to confirm the election of the said Geoffrey and consecrate him 
archbishop of York, or else to allow him to be consecrated by 
some one else. On the departure of queen Eleanor, the daughter 
of the king of Navarre remained in the charge of the king of Eng- 
land, with Joanna, queen of Sicily, the sister of the said king. 






A.D. 1191. TUSCULANUM IS RESTORED TO THE ROMANS. 197 

In the month of April, on the fourth day before the ides of 
the said month, being the fourth day of the week, pope Cle- 
ment the Third departed this life, and was succeeded by Jacinto, 16 
cardinal deacon of the church of Saint Mary in Cosmedim ; 
and on the vigil of Easter he was ordained priest, and on 
Easter day, which fell on the eighteenth day before the calends 
of May, was consecrated Pontiff of Rome, by Octavianus, bishop 
of Ostia, being called pope Celestinus the Third. On the day 
after his consecration, our lord the pope went from the Late- 
ran to the church of Saint Peter, where he was met by 
Henry, king of Germany, with his wife Constance, and a 
large body of men-at-arms. The Romans, however, shut the 
city gates, and guarded them with a strong hand, and in arms, 
and would not allow them to enter. 

Accordingly, our lord the pope, before the door of the church 
of Saint Peter, upon the steps, received the oath of the said 
king of the Germans, that he would faithfully preserve the 
Church of God, and the rights of the Church inviolate, and 
would observe strict justice, and would, if anything should be 
taken thence, replace the patrimony of Saint Peter in its former 
integrity, and would restore to him Tusculanum. 17 Our lord the 
pope then led them into the church, and anointed him emperor, 
and his wife empress. The pope sat in the pontifical chair, 
holding the imperial crown of gold between his feet, and the 
emperor, baring his head, received the crown, and in like man- 
ner the empress received her crown, at the feet of our lord the 
pope. Our lord the pope also suddenly struck the crown of 
the emperor with his foot, and overturned it on the ground, 
signifying thereby that he possessed the power of casting him 
down from his throne if he should show himself unworthy ; 
but the cardinals, immediately picking up the crown, placed it 
on the head of the emperor. 

In order that the reason may be known why our lord the 
pope Celestinus restored to the Romans their city of Tusculanum, 
we must repeat a few circumstances that had previously tran- 
spired. When the lord Clement, the bishop of Palestrina, was 
elected and consecrated Supreme Pontiff, according to custom, 
at Pisa, where Gregory the Eighth, of pious memory, had de- 
parted from this world unto the Lord, the- said lord Clement, 
without delay, sent his envoys to the citizens of Rome, repru- 

w The Italian form of the Latin name " Hyacinthus." 
17 Now Frascati. 



198 AXXALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

senting that a most strict treaty of peace ought again to be en- 
tered into between them. For a dispute had arisen with refer- 
ence to Tusculanum, which is a city that belongs to our lord the 
pope, about ten miles distant from Eome, and which the Eomans 
were attacking incessantly in war, that they might render 
it subject to themselves. By means, also, of these conflicts 
that took place between Eome and Tusculanum, more than five 
thousand Eoinans had in one day fallen by the sword, and, from 
the time of pope Alexander to that of the said Clement, these 
disputes had lasted between the Church and the Eomans. The 
envoys, on coming to the city, entreated the Eomans, like af- 
fectionate sons, to turn their hearts to their spiritual father, 
and most dutifully make it their care to receive him, on his 
return to them, as a kind father, and represented that it was 
befitting that they should be, as it were, but one for the future. 
To this the Eomans made answer, to the following effect : 
" This, inasmuch as it is holy and becoming, with ardent de- 
sire we greatly wish to be done, without any delay whatever, 
even more than our lord and father does, and like true and 
humble sons ; but still, only on condition that, equally with 
ourselves, he shall wish reparation to be made for our losses, 
and our injuries and affronts to be avenged, which, in conse- 
quence of the war with Tusculanum, we have in the times of 
our fathers endured, and do still endure ; and shall be ready, if 
there shall be necessity for so doing, to send his soldiers at his 
own expense, if peace cannot be made between us on terms 
honorable to this city, for the subjection of Tusculanum ; an 
agreement being entered into in writing for a yearly tribute to 
be paid by Tusculanum to our city. He must also promise that, 
in case there is a refusal on their part to make peace with us on 
the terms before-mentioned, if at any future time he shall be 
able to get Tusculanum into his power, he will be ready to give 
it up to us, for the purpose of our wishes already expressed 
being complied with.'* 

Accordingly, on these and some other liberties being at 
length conceded by that said pope Clement to the Eomans, the 
said Clement came to the city, of which he was a native ; and 
as the lord Clement did not find himself able, in conformity 
with the above^stated request made by the Eomans, to render 
Tusculanum subject to them, he made severe attacks upon that 
place, exposing it to the assaults of the Eomans. Yet, although 
he enjoyed the papacy for nearly four years, he was unable to 



A.D. 1191. TUSCULANTTM DESTROYED. 199 

bring this war with the Romans to a conclusion ; although the 
Romans, posting themselves in ambush, took nearly the greater 
portion of the people of Tusculanum prisoners, outside of their 
fortifications, and slew them with various pains and tortures. 
For some of those whom they took prisoners they put to 
death at once, while others, first deprived of their feet, others 
with their eyes put out, and others with their hands cut off 
and hung from their necks, they sent back home : yet all these 
evils they most resolutely affirmed they would endure, in pre- 
ference to being subjected to the severity of the Romans. 

After the death of Clement, when the lord Jacinto, the car- 
dinal priest of Saint Mary in Cosmedim, afterwards called 
Celestinus, was elected Supreme Pontiff in his stead, and 
Henry, the then king, was hastening to Rome, having been 
invited by pope Clement for that purpose, to receive the crown 
of the empire, the Romans, before the said king had arrived 
at the citj r , entreated the lord Celestinus, before he anointed 
the said king emperor, to prevail upon him to restore to them 
the city of Tusculanum, which was under his control ; (for its 
people had betaken themselves to him, and had entreated his 
protection, from the time that the above-named Clement had, 
as already mentioned, left them to the mercy of the Romans). 
They asserted to the said pope, with the greatest energy, that 
this was the method by which Tusculanum would fall again 
into their hands, and that he was bound by the compact already 
mentioned so to do ; and this was accordingly conceded to 
them. 

Upon this, envoys from our lord the pope were sent to the 
king, and most strongly urged him that, as the treaty before- 
mentioned had been made relative to Tusculanum between the 
Supreme Pontiff and the Romans, necessity consequently de- 
manded that Tusculanum should be given up to our lord the 
pope. Upon the king finding this to be the case, and per- 
ceiving that, otherwise, great difficulties might easily be thrown 
in the way of his coronation, he freely granted the request 
of our lord the pope as to the delivery up to him of Tuscu- 
lanum ; and, accordingly, the king having been crowned em- 
peror, on the following day Tusculanum was delivered by the 
said emperor to our lord the pope, and, on the third day after, 
was, by the said pope and the citizens of Rome, levelled with 
the ground ; so much so, that not one stone remained standing 
upon another. 



200 ANEALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDE2T. A.D. 1191. 

In the meantime, in the month of April, Richard, king of 
England, destroyed and levelled with the ground his castle 
called Mate Griffon, before departing from Messina, in confor- 
mity with the promise he had made to king Tancred : and on 
the fourth day of the week, before the Supper of our Lord, he, 
with the whole of his army, and his fleet, sailed ont of the 
harbour of Messina, with a hundred and fifty large ships and 
fifty-three galleys, well armed ; but, on the day of the Pre- 
paration 18 of our Lord, about the ninth hour of the day, a 
dreadful wind arose from the south, and dispersed his fleet. 
The king, with a portion of the fleet, arrived at the island of 
Crete, and afterwards at the island of Rhodes. A large buss, 
however, in which were the queen of Sicily and the daughter 
of the king of Navarre, with many of the king's household, 
and two other busses, while the tempest was raging, reached 
the island of Cyprus, the king being ignorant as to what had 
been the fate of these busses. 

After the tempest had abated, the king sent some galleys in 
search of the busses on board of which was the queen, his 
sister, and the daughter of the king of Navarre, and they found 
them outside of the harbour of Limezun ; but the other two 
busses which had accompanied them, and had arrived before 
the harbour of Limezun, had gone down, having on board many 
knights and men-at-arms of the king's household; among 
whom, sad to tell! Master Roger Malchen, the king's vice- 
chancellor, was drowned ; the king's seal, however, which he 
wore suspended from his neck, was found. Upon this, Isaac, 
emperor of Cyprus, laid hands upon the property of those who 
were wrecked, and took and threw into prison all the persons 
who toad escaped from the shipwreck, and seized their money; 
and. in a spirit of more than diabolical cruelty, he would 
not allow the buss on board of which were the queen of 
Sicily and the daughter of the king of Navarre to enter the 
harbour. 

On the king of England being informed of this, he came 
with all haste to their assistance, with a great number of 
galleys and a vast fleet of ships, and found them outside the 
harbour of Limezun, exposed to the winds and waves. Being 
greatly enraged at this, he sent messengers to the emperor of 
Cyprus, a first, second, and third time, begging and asking 
with humble entreaties that, out of regard for the love of God, 
18 . parasceues Domini." The day after Good Friday. 



A.D. 1191. THEKIXG OF FRANCE ATTACKS THE EMPEROR ISAAC. 201 

and respect for the Cross, the giver of life, he would allow His 
pilgrims, whom he was keeping captive in chains, to depart 
unhurt, and restore to them their property, and give up to him 
the property of such of his subjects as had heen drowned, that 
with the same he might perform service to God for their souls : 
to which, however, the emperor haughtily made answer, and 
said that he would neither give up the pilgrims nor the property 
of the drowned. 

The king, upon hearing that this wicked emperor would do 
nothing for him unless forced so to do, commanded the whole 
of his army to take up their arms, and, being fully armed, to 
follow him, saying to them : " Follow me, that we may avenge 
the injuries which this perfidious emperor has done to God and 
to ourselves, who thus, against the justice and equity of God, 
keeps our pilgrims in chains ; and fear them not, for they are 
without arms, and better prepared for flight than for battle ; 
whereas we are well armed, and to him who wields arms, he 
yields up everything who denies him what is his right. We 
are also bound to fight manfully against him, in order to deliver 
the people of God from perdition, knowing that we must either 
conquer or die. But I have full confidence in God, that He 
will this day grant us the victory over this perfidious emperor 
and his people." 

In the meantime, the emperor with his people had taken up 
their position in every direction on the sea-shore ; but a few 
only of them were armed, and they were nearly all utterly un- 
skilled in the art of warfare ; however, they stood on the shore, 
armed with swords, and lances, and staves ; and having in 
front of them logs and beams, and benches and chests, as a 
defence. When the king of England and his people had 
armed themselves, they disembarked from the great ships into 
boats and galleys, and, rowing on, made for shore with exceed- 
ing swiftness ; on which the archers, landing first, made way 
for the others. After landing, the king leading the way, with 
one accord they made an attack upon the emperor and his 
Griffons, 19 and Uke a shower upon the grass did the arrows 
fall upon those who fought ; but after the combat had lasted a 
considerable time, the emperor and his people took to flight : 
upon which the king of England pursued them with the edge 
of the sword, and, making a great slaughter of them, took pri- 

19 This seems to have been the name given by the people of the west of 
Europe to the Greeks of Byzantium. 



202 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

soners many of those who offered resistance ; and had not the 
night come on, in all probability, on that day the king would 
have taken the emperor prisoner. But, as the king and his 
people were on foot, and did not know the paths across the 
mountains by which the emperor and his men took to flight, 
they returned with a great booty to the city of Limezun, which 
the Griffons had deserted ; and found in it an abundance of 
corn, wine, oil, and flesh meat. 

On the same day, after the victory gained by the king of 
England, his sister, the queen of Sicily, and the daughter of 
the king of Navarre, entered the harbour of Limezun with the 
rest of the king's fleet. The emperor, however, collecting his 
men, who had been dispersed in the valleys among the thickets 
there, on the same night pitched his camp about five miles 
from the army of the king of England, affirming, with an oath, 
that he would the next day give battle to the king. On the 
king being informed of this by means of his spies, long before 
daybreak he had himself and his troops fully armed, and, going 
forth without any noise, came up to the army of the emperor, 
and found his people buried in sleep. 

Upon this, he rushed into their tents with a loud and ter- 
rible shout, on which, aroused from their slumbers, they be- 
came as though dead men, not knowing what to do or whither 
to fly ; for the army of the king of England came upon them 
like ravening wolves, and made immense havoc among them. 
The emperor, however, with a few of his people, made his 
escape in a state of nudity, leaving behind him his treasures, 
horses, arms, and tents of extreme beauty, together with his 
imperial standard, embroidered all over the surface with gold, 
which the king of England immediately determined to present 
as an offering to Saint Edmund, the king and glorious Martyr. 
Accordingly, the king of England, having gained a complete 
victory, returned to Limezun, a mighty triumpher over his 
foes. 

On the third day after this, there came to the king of Eng- 
land, in the isle of Cyprus, Guido, king of Jerusalem, Geoffrey 
of Lusignan, 20 his brother, Amfrid de Tours, Raymond, prince 
of Antioch, and Boamund his son, the earl of Tripolis, and 
Leo, the brother of Eupin de la Montaigne, and, offering to the 
king their services, did homage to him, and swore fealty to him 
against all men. On the same day, the emperor of Cyprus, 
20 V. r. Lenizant. 



A.D. 1191. KZN T G BICHAED PTIEST7ES THE EMPEEOE. 203 

seeing that he was entirely destitute of all valour and effica- 
cious aid on the part of his troops, sent envoys to the king of 
England with suppliant entreaties, and offered him peace on 
the following terms, namely ; that he would give him twenty 
thousand marks of gold in satisfaction of the monies that had 
heen lost 21 in his ships, and would set at liberty those persons 
who had been taken after the shipwreck, together with their 
property, and would himself attend him personally to the land 
of Jerusalem, and remain with him in the service of God and 
of himself, together with one hundred knights, and four hun- 
dred Turcopole horsemen, and five hundred foot soldiers well 
armed ; in addition to which he would give him his daughter, 
who was his sole heir, as a hostage, and deliver up to him his 
castles by way of security, and would swear to observe his 
fealty to him and his for ever, and hold his empire of him. 

These terms being accordingly agreed to on both sides, the 
emperor came to the king of England, and, in presence of the 
king of Jerusalem, and the prince of Antioch, and his other 
barons, did homage to the king, and swore fealty to him. He 
also made oath that he would not leave him until all things 
had been performed that had been so covenanted. Accord- 
ingly, the king assigned tents to the emperor and his people, 
and appointed knights and men-at-arms to keep guard over 
them. On the same day, however, after dinner, the emperor 
repented that he had made such terms with the king of Eng- 
land, and while the knights, whose duty it was to keep guard 
over him, were taking their mid-day nap, by stealth he took 
his departure, and then sent word to the king that, thence- 
forth, he would not be on terms of peace or concord with him ; 
a thing that, as it appeared, greatly pleased the king. 

Por he, like a wary and circumspect man, immediately gave 
a part of his army to Guido and the prince of Antioch, and 
the others who had come to him, and commanded them to 
follow the emperor, and take him prisoner if they possibly 
could; while the king himself, dividing his galleys into two 
parts, gave one half of them to Robert de Turnham, and com- 
manded him to surround the island on one side, and if he 
should find any ships or galleys, to take them ; which was 
accordingly done : while the king, with the remaining portion 

21 The reading is more probably " submersorura," and not " submer- 
sarum ;" alluding to the money of which the bodies of the drowned had 
been plundered. 



204 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

of his galleys, surrounded the other side ; and he and Robert 
took all the ships and galleys they could find in the vicinity of 
the island. On this, the garrisons of the cities, and castles, and 
harbours, deserted them in every direction, wherever the king 
and the said Robert came, and, taking to flight, concealed 
themselves in the mountains. After this was done, the king 
and Robert de Turnham returned to Limezun ; and king Guido, 
and those who were with him, being unable to accomplish 
their object, rejoined the king. In the meantime, the subjects 
of the emperor nocked from all quarters to the king of Eng- 
land, and acknowledged themselves his subjects, and held their 
lands of him. 

One day, when the above-named emperor was sitting at 
dinner, and his nobles with him, one of them said to him, 
" My lord, we advise you to make peace with the king of Eng- 
land, that the whole of your nation may not be destroyed ;" 
on which the emperor, being greatly enraged at these words, 
struck at him with a knife which he was holding in his hand, 
and cut off the nose of the person who had given him this 
advice; whereupon, after dinner, the person who had been 
struck, left him to go to the king of England, and became his 
adherent. 

On the fourth day before the ides of May, 22 being the Lord's 
day and the feast of Saint Nereus, Saint Achilleus, and Saint 
Pancratius the Martyrs, Berengaria, daughter of the king of 
Navarre, was married to Richard, king of England, at Lime- 
zun, 23 in the island of Cyprus, Nicholas, the king's chaplain, 
performing the services of that sacrament ; and on the same 
day the king caused her to be crowned and consecrated queen 
of England by John, bishop of Evreux, he being assisted in 
the performance of the ceremony by the archbishops of Apamea 
and Auxienne, and the bishop of Bayonne. 

After the celebration of the nuptials, the king of England 
moved onward his army, and a fine city was surrendered to 
him, which is called Mchosis ; and when the king had arrived 
with his army before an extremely well fortified castle, which 
is called Cherin, and in which was the emperor's daughter, 
she went out to meet the king, and fell upon the ground be- 
fore his feet, and surrendered to himjjae fiMtia" imploring 
his mercy| on which the king took_compassion on her, and 

22 The twelfth of May. 23 This place is called Limesol at the 

present day. 



A.D. 1191. THE KING CONFIRMS THE LAWS OF THE CYPEIOTES. 205 

sent her to the queen. After the king had moved onward 
in his march, the castle was surrendered to him which is 
known by the name of Baffes, as also the castle called Buffevent, 
the castle called Deudeamur, and the castle called Candare ; 
after which all the cities and fortresses of the empire were 
surrendered to him. The wretched emperor, in the mean- 
time, concealed himself in an extremely well fortified abbey, 
called Cap Saint Andrew ; but, upon the king coming thither 
for the purpose of taking him, jhe emperor went forth to meet 
him, and throwing himself at his feet, placed himself at his 
mercy for both life and limb, no mention being made of the 
kingdom, as he knew that eveiy thing was now in the hands 
and power of the king ; but his only request was, that he 
might not 24 be placed in fetters and manacles of iron ; on which 
the king listened to his request, and delivered him into the 
charge of Ealph Fitz-Godfrey, his chamberlain, and ordered 
fetters and manacles of silver and gold to be made for him. 
All these things took place in the island of Cyprus in the" 
month of July, on the first day of that month, being Saturday, 
and the vigil of Pentecost. 

All these matters being brought to a conclusion, the king of 
England sent the emperor, with his guards, to the city of 
Tripolis, and gave the island of Cyprus into the charge of 
Richard de Camville and' Robert de Turnham. On the same 
day, that is to say, on the vigil of Pentecost, Philip, earl of 
Flanders, died at the siege of Acre, and the king of France, his 
liege lord, seized all his treasures and property, and kept them 
in his own possession, and from that hour sought an excuse 
for withdrawing from the siege of Acre, and returning to his 
country, that he might subjugate the earldom of Flanders. 
On the same day also, that is to say, on the vigil of Pentecost, 
the queen of England and the queen of Sicily, the sister of the 
king of England, and the daughter of the emperor of Cyprus, 
arrived before Acre with the greater part of the fleet of the 
king of England. 

In the meantime, the king of England received from all the 
inhabitants of the island a moiety of all their goods, and con- 
firmed for them the laws and institutions which they had in 
the time of Manuel, the emperor of Constantinople. After 
this, on the fourth day of the week of Pentecost, the king of 
England left the island of Cyprus with his galleys, and on 
81 " Non" is omitted in the text, evidently by mistake. 



206 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOYEDEff. A.D. 1191. 

the following day arrived at Tyre, in the land of Sulia. How- 
ever, the garrison of Tyre would not allow him to enter Tyre, 
saying, that the king of France and Conrad, marquis of Tyre, 
had forbidden his entrance into the city ; consequently he was 
obliged for that night to lie in tents outside of the walls of 
Tyre. 

On the following day, being the sixth day of the week of 
Pentecost, when he was on his way towards Acre, he saw at 
sea before him a large buss laden with troops, and decked 
out with the banners of the king of France and his associates ; 
on which he sent two galleys to it and enquired whose ship 
it was, and whence it came. They made answer, that they 
were subjects of the king of France, and had come from An- 
tioch, with the intention of going to the siege of Acre ; on 
which those who had been sent returned with this answer to 
the king of England ; when the king replied, " If they are 
subjects of the king of France, go and tell them to wait and 
speak to me." "While they were on their road back, the men 
in the buss, being conscience-stricken, as in reality they were 
all pagans, armed themselves, and received the messengers of 
the king in a most hostile manner, discharging arrows against 
them and Greek fire. Upon the king observing this, he came 
nearer, and said to all who were about him, " Give chase 
to them, and overtake them, and if you capture them, all 
their property shall belong to you; but if they get away, 
you will forfeit my regard for ever." Upon this, they all, 
with one accord, made an attack upon the buss, and pierced 
it on every side with the beaks of their galleys, on which, the 
water effecting an entrance, it went to the bottom. "When the 
pagans found that they were beginning to sink, they threw 
their arms into the sea, and breaking the vessels, poured forth 
the Greek fire, and leaving the ship, leaped naked into the 
sea ; on which the king's galley-men slew some of them, and 
took many alive ; for there were in this buss one thousand four 
hundred pagans, whom Saladin had chosen from all the pagans, 
for the purpose of sending them to the city of Acre. These 
being thus conquered and slain, the king distributed all their 
property among his galley-men. 

On the following day, which was Saturday, in the week of 
Pentecost, he arrived at the siege of Acre, and distributed 
many of the pagans, whom he had taken in the ship, among 



A.D. 1191. THE TWO KINGS ARE ATTACKED WITH A MALADY. 207 

the king of France and the chief men of the expedition. But 
when the pagans, who were in the city of Acre, heard that 
the pagans in the buss had been most of them drowned, and 
that the king 'of England, the mighty triumpher over them, 
had come to the siege, having entertained great hopes of them, 
they dreaded him exceedingly, and from day to day sought 
opportunities for surrendering the city to him, on condition 
that they might depart therefrom with safety to life and limb. 
The king of France, however, who on the Saturday in Easter 
week had come to the siege, had before the arrival of the king 
of England erected a stone tower and prepared his stone engines 
and covered ways, and other engines of war, and placed them 
in suitable positions ; but he effected nothing with them, as 
he was awaiting the arrival of the king of England, who imme- 
diately upon his coming erected his own engines of war. 

The Pisans and the Genevese at this period came to him and 
made offer of their services ; on which he retained the Pisans 
and declined the offer of the Genevese, because they had sworn 
fealty to the king of France and the marquis Conrad; the 
Pisans, however, did homage and fealty to the king of Eng- 
land ; on which the king of England, by his charter, confirmed 
their liberties and customs which they had previously enjoyed 
in the land of Jerusalem. On the third day after the arrival 
of the king of England, the king of France dismissed all the 
servants whom he previously had for the purpose of keeping 
guard over his engines of war, on which the king of England 
took into his service those whom the king of France had dis- 
missed ; the consequence of which was, that the pagans in the 
city, finding that the engines of the king of France were left 
without guards, burned them. 

After this, both of the kings were attacked with a malady 
known by the name of " Arnaldia," in which they were nearly 
reduced to the point of death, and lost all their hair. How- 
ever, by the mercy of God, it came to pass that they both re- 
covered from this sickness, and became stronger and more 
hearty than ever in the service of God. On king Guido making 
complaint to them that the marquis Conrad had violently and 
unjustly deprived him of the revenues and rights of his king- 
dom, they placed the revenues arising from articles sold in 
market and the revenues of the port of Acre in the hands of 
the Templars and the Hospitallers, for them to collect and take 



208 AXNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEff. A.D. 1191. 

rare of, until it had been determined which of them was of 
right entitled thereto. 

Geoffrey of Lusignan, the brother of king Guido, also ac- 
cused the marquis Conrad of breach of faith, and perjury, and 
treason, against the king, his brother, and against the army of 
the Christians, and gave his pledge that he would make good 
the accusation. Conrad, however, being conscience- stricken, 
declined to take his trial, but made his way through the crowd, 
and left the place, the people crying after him, and saying, 
" He is a traitor who refuses to take his trial." However, no 
person laid hands upon him, for fear lest there might chance 
to be a tumult among the people. On this he went to Tyre, 
and a dissension immediately ensued between the kings on ac- 
count of them, the king of France, as far as he possibly could, 
taking the part of Conrad, and the king of England that of 
king Guido ; in consequence of which, quarrels and strifes often 
arose between the kings. A considerable time after, the king 
of France sent for Conrad and made him chief in his house- 
hold and his confidential adviser, and in consequence of his 
advice and counsel, the king of France did many things against 
God and the salvation of his soul ; for he even received pre- 
sents from Saladin, and became friendly with him. 

The next thing was, that the king of France made demand 
of half of the isle of Cyprus and of all the things that the 
king of England had gained on his way to Acre ; as a counter- 
poise to which, the king of England demanded of the king of 
France one half of Flanders, one half of all the property of the 
earl of Flanders, and of the other vassals of his who had died 
at the siege of Acre, as also one half of Tyre, which Conrad 
had presented to him. But the demands of both were frivo- 
lous and invidious, for the agreement made between them was 
only that they should halve between them all that they should 
acquire in the land of Jerusalem. This same agreement they 
now renewed in the presence of the leaders and the principal 
men of the expedition, and confirmed the same by their charters 
and oaths, appointing the Templars, and the Hospitallers, and 
other prudent men in whom they placed confidence, to receive 
and halve between them all they should take ; after which 
they became reconciled. 

In the meantime, Saladin, the leader of the armies of the 
pagans, frequently sent to the king of France and the king oi' 



A.D. 1191. THE CHRISTIANS ARE FOREWARNED AT ACRE. 209 

England pears, Damascene plums, and abundance of other 
fruits of his country, besides other little presents, that this way 
at least he might render them disposed to make peace with 
him. For he had often made them offers of peace and concord, 
both in consequence of his apprehensions of the sons of Nou- 
reddin, who had laid claim against, him to the whole of the 
territories of their father which Saladin had seized and retained 
in his possession, and had, with the aid of the lord Musse, 
their uncle, lately entered the territory of Saladin, and taken 
possession of it as far as the great river Euphrates ; as also 
because he wished to rescue his people who were being be- 
sieged in the city. However, he would not entirely come to 
terms with the kings, for he wished to retain in his hands the 
city of Jerusalem and the Crag of Montreal, while the kings 
refused to make any agreement with him on those terms. In 
consequence of this, the stone engines of the kings and of the 
other chieftains, never ceased hurling stones against the walls 
of the city and its fortifications, and the miners of the kings 
did not cease day or night undermining the city walls. 

In the month of June, on the Lord's Day, being the vigil 
of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, and the twenty- 
seventh day of the moon, at the ninth hour of the day, there 
was an eclipse of the sun, which lasted three hours ; so much 
so, that the sun was obscured, and darkness came over the 
earth, and the stars appeared in the heavens ; when the eclipse 
had passed, the sun was restored to its former brightness. 

In the city of Acre there was a man, a worshipper of God, 
though in secret from fear of the pagans, who frequently sent 
letters to the armies of the Christians, written in Hebrew, 
. Greek, and Latin, and by them signified to the Christians all 
the circumstances and intentions of the pagans ; in consequence 
of which, the Christians, being often forewarned, avoided 
the stratagems of the pagans. However, it was a cause of 
great vexation to the Christians that they did not know this 
man, nor yet his name, though in all the letters that he sent 
he declared that he was a Christian, and in his writings he 
always commenced with, " In the name of the Father, and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen." However, it is a 
thing greatly to be wondered at, that, neither before the taking 
of the city nor yet after it was taken, he thought fit to discover 
himself to the Christians. 

VOL. n. p 



210 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

In the same month of July, the Christians filled up a great 
part of the fosse, that they might plant their ladders against 
the walls. On the pagans seeing this, who were being besieged, 
they offered to surrender to the kings their city, with their arms' 
and provisions, on condition of safety to life and limb, and 
leave to depart. However, the kings were not willing to take 
it in this way, but demanded of them the Holy Cross, and the 
whole of the land of Jerusalem, in the same state it was in 
before the capture of king Guido. Saladin, however, would 
not agree to these terms. 

In the same month of June, Kichard de Camville, whom 
the king of England had appointed one of his justiciaries in 
the island of Cyprus, was taken ill, and, without asking leave, 
came to the siege of Acre, where he died. After his decease, 
the Griffons and the Armenians, who had not yet made peace 
with the king, appointed a new emperor to rule over them, a 
monk of the family of the emperor Isaac. But Robert de Turn- 
ham, the only one of the king's justiciaries remaining in the isle 
of Cyprus after the death of Richard de Camville, collected a 
large army and engaged with the new emperor, and, defeating- 
him and his people, took him prisoner, and hanged him on a 
gibbet. 

In the same month of June, Ralph Eitz-Godfrey, to whom 
the king had given charge of the emperor of Cyprus, departed 
this life, and was buried at Tripolis ; after whose death, the 
king gave the emperor into the charge of the Hospitallers, 
who took him to the castle of Margant, and there placed him 
in confinement. 

In the same month of June, the miners of the king of Eng- 
land undermined the foundations of the walls of the city of 
Acre, the pagans who were inside being in ignorance thereof ; 
and, placing logs of wood beneath, they set them on fire ; on 
which a great part of the walls fell down. 

In the meantime, the stone engines of the king of Prance, the 
Templars, and the Pisans, had made a great breach in the wall, 
near a tower which is called Maledetta, and the people of the 
king of Erance ran towards the breach, hoping, by force, to 
effect an entrance into the city. However, the pagans met 
them with a strong hand, and drove them back ; and, as the 
way was steep and narrow, many of the people of the king of 
Erance were there slain. The Idng of England, however, and 
his men were keeping guard in the meantime over the outer 



A. D. 1191. THE KINGS BEJECT THE OFFER OP SUBMISSION. 211 

trenches, which lay* between the army of the Christians and 
that of Saladin ; for an agreement had been made between the 
kings that, whenever one of them should be making an assault 
upon the city, the other should in the meantime keep strict 
guard over the outer trenches, in order that the army of Saladin 
might not be able to do any injury to those making the assault, 
by attacking them in the rear. This arrangement was also 
made between the kings, because in every affair in which the 
said kings and their people had united, they were less success- 
ful than they would have been if they had acted separately, 
for the king of France and his men looked contemptuously on 
the king of England and his people, while he and his people 
did the same to the others. 

In the month of July, on the third day of that month, 
being the fourth day of the week, a great part of the walls 
of the city of Acre fell down, near the tower before-men- 
tioned: upon which, Alberic Clement, the marshal of the 
king of Prance, ran with a large body of armed men towards 
the wall, with the standard of the king of France, the mar- 
quis Conrad running with the rest towards the wall ; on reaching 
which, they planted their ladders for the purpose of scaling. 
The said Alberic then mounted the wall: but the pagans, 
throwing over him an iron hook, dragged him within the 
walls, and slew him, and crushed forty more with stones : on 
which, Conrad with his people retreated, as he and they were 
unwilling to discharge either stones or arrows against the 
enemy, and the pagans against him and his people ; besides 
which, the pagans who had come for the purpose of defending 
the walls, remained, in the same spot waving the banner of 
Conrad himself, which he had given them as a sign of peace, 
in the sight and to the admiration of all. 

On the day after this, the chief men who were in the city, 
namely, Mestoc and Karakois, came to the king of France and 
the king of England, and offered them the city, and the arms, 
and gold, and silver that belonged to themselves and all the 
others who were in the city, in return for leave to depart with 
safety to life and limb. However, the kings declined to accede 
to these terms ; but required, as the price of their ransom, all 
the territory that Saladin and the other pagans had taken from 
the Christians since the time that Louis, king of the Franks, 
was at Jerusalem, as well as the Holy Cross, and the Christians 
whom thev kept in captivity. 

p 2 



212 AKNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

To this Mestoc and Karakois made answer, "These exor- 
bitant demands we cannot comply with, except with the assent 
and will of our lord Saladin, and our other principal men. 
But give us a truce of three days, and allow us to go to our 
principal men, that we may confer with them on the nature of 
your demands." Accordingly, giving hostages as a security 
for their return, they went to Saladin, but, on informing him of 
the demands of the Christians, could not prevail upon him to 
give anything for their ransom ; and so, in confusion, they took 
their departure and entered the city. On the following night, 
at about midnight, Saladin made an assault upon the guards 
of the outer trenches, with the intention that while the Chris- 
tians were giving their attention to the defence of the trenches, 
the pagans who were in the city might more easily escape 
by flight. But the kings, forewarned of this by a message 
from the man of God before-mentioned, who was in the city, 
placed guards around the walls, so that there was no safe egress 
for any of the pagans. 

Upon this, a great alarm was raised throughout the army 
of the Christians, who, on being aroused from their sleep, 
quickly snatching up their arms, hastened to the trenches, 
and, making an attack upon the pagans, slew multitudes of 
them, and put the rest to flight. On the fifth day of the month 
of July, being the sixth day of the week, a breach in the 
walls was again set fire to, which had been made by the men 
of the king of England ; and, on the following night, the 
bastions fell, with a great part of the walls, leaving a wide gap. 
On the day after this, the king of England and his army, 
having armed, approached with the view of making an as- 
sault on the city ; on which the pagans immediately made a 
signal that they wished to make peace with them : whereupon, 
laying aside their arms, the Christians returned to their camp, 
and Mestoc, Karakois, Hessedin, and Ordich came out of the 
city for the purpose of having an interview with the kings, 
and offered them the city, with all the other articles above- 
mentioned. 

After the kings and they had conferred upon the matter for 
a considerable time, leave was given them to go to Saladin and 
return. Accordingly they went, and prevailed upon Saladin 
to offer to the kings the city of Jerusalem, and the Holy Cross, and 
all the cities and castles which he had taken after the capture 
of king Guido, and to repair and place them in the same state 



A. D. 1191. APPEARANCE OP THE YIEGIN MAH.Y. 213 

in which they then were ; on condition, however, that the said 
kings should either go with him, or send with him six thousand 
knights and twenty thousand foot soldiers, to defend his terri- 
tories against the lord Musse and the sons of Noureddin, who 
had conquered his uncle Thekedin in battle, and taken posses- 
sion of all his territory, although they had permitted them to 
depart uninjured. However, the kings declined to do this, and 
the pagans before-named entered the city disconsolate and in 
confusion; their friends, however, deserting Saladin, loaded 
him with censures. 

On the seventh day of the month of July, being the Lord's 
day, the king of France and his army made an assault upon 
the city, near the tower called Maledetta, at the same spot at 
which they had previously so done, but lost forty men, and 
were able to effect nothing whatever. On the eighth day of the 
month of July, Saladin burned Caiaphas, and destroyed the 
vineyards in its vicinity. On the following night, when many 
of the knights and men-at-arms of the Christian army were 
watching before the tower of Maledetta, a light from heaven 
shone around them, in which appeared to them the blessed 
Virgin Mary, the Mother of Christ ; on which, from fear, the 
guards were exceedingly alarmed, and became as though dead 
men. But the blessed Virgin benignantly comforted them, 
saying, "Be not terrified, for the Lord has sent me hither for 
your safety. As soon as the day shall have dawned, go and 
tell your kings, in the name of Jesus Christ my Son and Lord,, 
and in my name, to cease levelling the walls of this city, as, on 
the fourth day from this, the Lord shall deliver it into their 
hands." At the same hour also at which the Mother of Christ 
was speaking to the guards, a great earthquake took place in 
the city, and so terrified the pagans, that they wished rather 
to die than to live. In like manner shall the Lord, when He 
shall come to judgment, appear gentle to the good, and terrible 
to the wicked. After the Virgin Mary had thus spoken, she 
was severed from before their eyes, and with her the light 
departed which had shone around them. 

Accordingly, in the morning the guards related to the kings 
and the chief men of the army the vision which they had seen 
and the words which the Mother of the Lord had spoken unto 
them ; and immediately all the words which she had spoken 
were spread throughout the army, and there was great rejoicing 
among the people of God. Moreover, on the ninth and tenth 



214 ANNALS OF EOGEK BE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1191. 

days of July, Saladin caused all the vines and fruit-bearing 
trees to be rooted up which were in the vicinity of Acre, and 
all the cities and castles to be destroyed in which he felt no 
confidence as being able to resist the attacks of the Christians. 
On the eleventh day of the month of July, the Pisans , and 
the array of the king of England made an assault on the city 
of Acre, and, having mounted the walls, a Pisan, Leonardus 
by name, was slain ; immediately after which the pagans made 
a signal that they would surrender the city, and make peace 
with the kings on their own terms. Accordingly, the chief 
men of the pagans above-named came to confer with the kings 
as to making peace, and, immediately after the conference, 
returned to the city. 

On the twelfth day of the month of July, being the sixth day 
of the week, Philip, king of France, Richard, king of England, 
and all the principal men of the Christians, assembled in the 
morning at the tent, of the Templars, where they were met by 
the principal men of the pagans besieged in the city; and, with 
the sanction of the army of the Christians, the said kings made 
peace with the pagans on the following terms The pagans were 
to surrender to the said kings the city of Acre, with everything 
therein, and to set at liberty five hundred Christian captives who 
were there. They also covenanted with the kings that they 
would deliver up to them the Holy Cross, and one thousand Chris- 
tian captives, and two hundred Christian knights who were in 
captivity, according as the said kings should make choice from 
among all the captives who should be found in the possession of 
Saladin ; and that they would give for the use of the kings two 
hundred thousand besants. 25 They were also to remain as hos- 
tages in the hands of the kings, upon the understanding that, 
if they should not within forty days then next ensuing comply 
with the terms above-mentioned, they should be at the mercy 
of the kings for life and limb. 

These covenants being made, and these terms being agreed 
to by both sides, and confirmed by oath, the kings sent their 
knights and men-at-arms into the city, and selected one hundred 
of the richest and most noble of the pagans, and placed them in a 
tower under a strong guard ; while the rest they caused to be 
guarded in the houses and streets of the city, and supplied 
them with necessaries, making it a rule that all who should 
receive baptism and embrace the Christian faith should be set 
at liberty. Being influenced, accordingly, by their apprehen- 
25 Roger of Wendover says " seven thousand." 



A. D. 1191. THE WALLS OF ACEE ABE BEPAIRED. 215 

sion of death, many of the pagans received baptism ; but, as 
soon as they possibly could, they forsook the Christian religion 
and betook themselves to Saladin ; on which the kings gave 
orders that, from that time forward, no one should receive bap- 
tism. On Saladin hearing of the peace which had been made 
with the Christians, he pretended that it had not been made 
with his sanction. On the thirteenth day of the month of July, 
the king of France and the king of England divided between 
themselves the city of Acre, and everything that was in it, both 
the pagans as well as the gold and silver, and all other arti- 
cles of property ; on which Drogo de Merlou and a hundred 
knights were named on behalf of the king of France to receive 
his share ; and Hugh de Gurnay and a hundred knights were 
appointed on behalf of the king of England to receive his pro- 
portion. 

On the fourteenth day of the month of July, Saladin with- 
drew himself and his army, and pitched his tents at a place 
called Saphora, and messengers on his part went and returned 
to the kings, with fruits and other presents; by whom Saladin 
made offer to the kings of the whole of the land of Judea, with 
the exception of the Crag of Montreal, which was beyond 
the river Jordan, on condition, however, that they would lend 
him two thousand knights and five thousand men-at-arms, for 
one year, for the purpose of defending his territories against 
the lord Musse and the sons of Noureddin. However, the 
kings declined to accept these proposals on his part. 

On the fifteenth day of the month of July, the kings ordered 
their stone engines and other engines of war tf> be taken down. 
On the sixteenth day of July, messengers came to the kings, 
on behalf of the lord Musse and the sons of Noureddin, and 
made the kings many and ample offers for the assistance of 
their subjects against Saladin. On the same day, Alardus, 
cardinal-bishop of Verona and legate of the Apostolic See, and 
the archbishops of Tours, Pisa, and Aire, Hubert, bishop of 
Salisbury, John, bishop of Evreux, Bernard, bishop of Bayonne, 
the bishop of Tripolis, Philip of Chartres, and the bishop of 
Beauvais, and other bishops of dioceses, consecrated the princi- 
pal churches of the city of Acre, which the pagans had polluted, 
and built altars to the Lord, and celebrated mass thereon. In 
the meantime the kings and the people gave due attention to 
the repair of the walls. On the seventeenth and eighteenth 
days of the month of July, the Pisans, and money-dealers, 26 and 
26 Probably the Lombards. 



216 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191- 

others who followed mercantile pursuits, received dwellings 
within the city, in the open market, which the kings' servants 
allotted to them, on the understanding that they were to pay, 
yearly, the customary and proper rents for the same. 

On the nineteenth day of the month of July, the earls and 
barons, who had been now staying there nearly two years 
besieging Acre, seeing that the kings had put every thing 
that had been taken upon the surrender of the city into their 
own purses, and were willing to give them no share there- 
of, had a meeting beyond the outer trenches, and holding 
a conference there, sent word to the kings that they would no 
longer continue with them, unless they were sharers in the 
gain as they had been in the labour ; on which the kings made 
answer, that they would satisfy their wishes ; but as they 
delayed so doing, many, being compelled by poverty so to do, 
left them. On the twentieth day of the month of July, being 
the feast of Saint Margaret the Virgin, Richard, king of Eng- 
land, made a proposal to the king of Prance that they should 
both make oath that they would remain with their armies 
three years in the land of Jerusalem, for the purpose of sub- 
jugating the land ; to which the king of France made answer, 
that he would make no oath about the matter. 

On the twenty-first day of the month of July, the king of 
England first entered the city of Acre ; on which he and his wife 
and sister took up their abode in the king's palace, while the 
king of France was lodged in the mansion of the Templars. 
On the twenty-second day of the month of July, being the 
feast of Saint Mary Magdalene, the king of France sent to the 
king of England Robert, bishop of Beauvais, Hugh, duke of 
Burgundy, Drogo de Amiens, and William de Merlou, and 
through them asked his sanction to his return to his own coun- 
try ; on which the king of England made this answer to them : 
" It will be a shame and a disgrace for my lord if he goes away 
without having completed the business on which he came 
hither. But still, if he finds himself ailing, or in bad health, 
and is afraid lest he should die here, his will be done." On 
the twenty-third day of the month, when it was spread 
through the army that the king of France was about to de- 
part, the principal men of his army came to him, and besought 
him with tears not in this shameless manner to desert the ser- 
vice of God. On the twenty-sixth day of the month of July, 
by the advice of the king of France, Conrad came to the king 






A.D. 1191. PHILIP GIVES HIS ilOIETY OF ACEE TO CONBAD. 217 

of England, and falling on the ground at his feet, asked his 
forgiveness, on which the king of England put an end to all 
his anger and displeasure against him On the following 
day, also, the king of Prance came, and all the principal men 
of the army, to hear the matters in dispute between king 
Guido and the marquis Conrad. Accordingly, having taken 
their seats, the marquis Conrad arose, and standing in the 
midst of them, demanded the kingdom of Jerusalem in right of 
his wife ; while Guido of Lusignan, who had been king be- 
fore its capture, and escaped from it when it was taken, and 
had commenced the siege of Acre, demanded restitution thereof 
to be made to him, showing that he had done nothing for which 
he deserved to lose his kingdom. After much bandying of words 
on both sides, they each of them submitted themselves to the 
award of the court of the kings, by whose advice and judg- 
ment peace and final reconciliation were effected between them, 
on the following terms : 

In the first place, they both made oath, that is to say, king 
Guido and the marquis Conrad, that they would abide by the 
judgment of the kings, and faithfully observe the same. On 
which, the said kings and the whole army adjudged to the 
said king Guido, for his life, the kingdom of Jerusalem ; on 
the understanding that if he should take a wife and have sons 
or daughters, they should have no right to claim succession to 
the kingdom as of hereditary right. But if the marquis Con- 
rad and his wife, the sister of queen Sibylla, should happen 
to survive him, they should succeed him in the kingdom, and 
their heirs should in succession wield the sceptre and pos- 
sess the same by hereditary right. And, in the meantime, all 
the revenues of the kingdom were to be halved between them, 
the royal dignity excepted, which was to belong to Guido 
alone, so long as he should live. Conrad, also, was to have 
Tyre, Sidon, and Baruth, and to hold the same by hereditary 
right ; while he and his heirs were always to perform the due 
and customary services for the same to the king of Jerusalem. 
Geoffrey of Lusignan, also, the king's brother, was to have the 
earldom of Joppa and Caesarea, and to hold the same by here- 
ditary right ; and he and his heirs were always to perform the 
due and customary services for the same to the king of Jerusalem. 

On the twenty -ninth day of the month of July, Philip, king 
of France, gave to Conrad, marquis of Montferrat, the moiety 
of the city of Acre that belonged to himself, On the same 



218 ANXALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

day, the king of France again asked the king of England to 
agree to his return home, but he could on no terms obtain his 
sanction to his withdrawal, unless he should first swear upon 
the Holy Evangelists that he would well and faithfully protect 
the territories and subjects of the king of England until his 
return, and would inflict no injury or grievance upon them, or 
allow the same to be done by any one else. After this, the king 
of France appointed the duke of Burgundy chief of his army, 
giving up to him a great part of his treasure. Before his de- 
parture, he also gave to Raymond, prince of Antioch, one hun- 
dred knights and five hundred men-at-arms for the defence of 
his territory against the pagans, and gave to each of the knights 
forty marks of silver as his pay from the feast of Saint Michael 
until Easter, appointing Robert de Quincy their governor and 
captain. The king of England also, on the same day, gave to 
the prince of Antioch five great ships, laden with horses, arms, 
and provisions. On the thirtieth day of the month of July, 
the king of France and the king of England divided among 
themselves all the pagans who had been captured at Acre. On 
the thirty-first day of the month of July, that is to say, on the 
last day of that month, on the feast of Saint German, the king 
of France departed from Acre, and, taking with him Reginald, 
bishop of Chartres, and Peter, count de Nevers, went to Tyre ; 
whither he also took Karakois and all the other pagans be- 
longing to him, and made a stay there of two days. 

On the third day of the month of August, the king of France 
left Tyre, giving into the charge of the marquis Conrad all 
his pagan prisoners. On the same day, the king of England 
caused his ships to be laden, saying that he would go to Ascalon 
to lay siege to it, and ordering all to follow him. On the fifth 
day of the month of August, the king of England sent Hubert 
Fitz-Walter, bishop of Salisbury, to Tyre, for the pagans 
whom the king of France had taken thither, in order that he 
might bring them back; but Conrad refused to let them go. On 
his return, he related to the king the answer he had received from 
Conrad, on which the king was enraged, and swore that he 
would personally go to Tyre for the purpose of bringing them 
away by force, unless Conrad should speedily let them go. On 
this, the duke of Burgundy made answer to the king, saying : 
" My lord, allow me to go, and I will bring them back ;" and 
accordingly, he went and brought them back. 

For the day that had been named was now approaching upon 



A.D. 1191. THE CAPTURED PAGANS AKE BEHEADED. 219 

which the pagans were to perform their stipulation, and to be 
set at liberty. However, upon that day, the pagans neither 
produced the Holy Cross, nor the Christian captives, nor yet the 
money which they had promised for the safety of their life and 
limbs : in consequence of which failure, all those pagans were 
sentenced to undergo capital punishment. When this was told 
to Saladin, he sent word to the king of England and the whole 
army of the Christians, that if they cut off the heads of his 
pagan subjects, he himself would strike oif the heads of all 
the Christians whom he had in his power. 

On the fourteenth day of the month of August, being the 
fourth day of the week, on the vigil of the Assumption of 
Saint Mary, the Mother of God and ever a virgin, the king of 
England went beyond the outer trenches and pitched his tents 
near the army of the pagans, and remained there some days, 
having issued orders that all his army should attend him; 
few, however, did so, in consequence of the deficiency of horses 
and arms. On the same day, Saladin sent to the king of Eng- 
land costly presents, and requested him to put off the day on 
which he had proposed to cut off the heads of the pagans ; but 
the king declined to put off the day any longer, or to accept 
the presents of Saladin. On Saladin seeing and hearing this, 
he caused the heads of all the Christians, whom he had in 
his hands, to be cut off ; which was accordingly done on the 
eighteenth day of the month of August, being the Lord's day. 
On the same day, the king of England moved his army, and 
drew near to the army of Saladin, and had an engagement 
with him, on which occasion many fell on both sides both 
killed and wounded, among whom, Peter Mignot, one of the 
household of the king of England, was slain. 

The king of England, although he heard of the death of the 
Christians who had been slain, was still unwilling to anticipate 
the time which he had fixed upon for taking off the heads of 
the pagans. However, on the seventeenth day of the month 
of August, being the third day of the week and the thirteenth 
day before the calends of September, the kingjrf England 
caused all the paganswho belonged to hirn^Jrom tFe "capture 
of Acre to be led out before the army of Saladin, and their 
heads to be struck off in the presence of all. The duke of 
Burgun3y~arso caused the heads oFEe~ pagans to be cut off 
who had belonged to the king of France, both within the city, 

f without, and near the walls of the city. 
' 



220 ANNALS OP BOGEK DE HOVEDES. A.D. 1191. 

Still, the king of England and the duke of Burgundy pre- 
served some of the pagans for their ransom, whose names 
were as follow : Mestoc, Karakois, Hessedin, the son of 
Caulin, Hessedin Jordic, Passelari, Kamardoli, and Kaedin. 
The number of the pagans thus slain was five thousand, all of 
whom the Christians disembowelled, and found much gold and 
silver in their entrails, while they preserved their gall for medi- 
cal purposes. On the twenty-first day of the month of August, 
after the slaughter of the pagans, the king of England delivered 
into the charge of Bertram de Verdun the city of Acre, and the 
queen of England, the queen of Sicily, and the daughter of 
the emperor of Cyprus. On the twenty-second day of the 
month of August, being the fifth day of the week, the king of 
England crossed the river of Acre with his army, and, pitching 
his tents between that river and the sea, on the sea-shore be- 
tween Acre and Cayphas, remained there four days. After 
this, he proceeded along the sea-shore towards Joppa, while 
his ships sailed near him on the sea with his provisions and 
engines of war, in order that if he had any necessity for so doing, 
he might be enabled to return to his ships. Saladin and his army 
in the meantime proceeded along the mountain passes, not far 
from the king's army, that he might impede his passage. 

In the month of September, on the third day after the ex- 
altation of the Holy Cross, when the king of England and his 
army had passed the straits of Merle, and the duke of Bur- 
gundy with the Templars and Eranks was keeping the rear- 
guard, and the king of England had hoisted his standard in 
the midst of them, and had delivered his dragon 27 to Peter de 
Pratelles to carry, against the claim of Robert Trussebut, who 
had claimed to carry the same according to the right of his 
predecessors, Saladin made a fierce attack upon the duke of 
Burgundy and those who were with him. But no Christian 
was slain on that occasion, with the sole exception of Jacques 
de Avennes, who, with a few men withstood Saladin and his 
army ; as the duke of Burgundy took to flight. On this, the 
king of England, hearing the noise in the rear, wheeled about 
and manfully engaged with the army of Saladin, and gained a 
victory over him, slaying three thousand of the pagans ; after 
which he remained there three days. The king then wrote to 
his deputies and friends to the following effect ; 

27 The royal standard. 



A.D. 1191. LETTEE OF RICHARD, KING OF ENGLAND. 221 

The Letter of Richard, king of England, on the departure of the 
king of France from Acre. 

" Richard, by the grace of God, king of England, duke of 
Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, to N., his dearly 
beloved and faithful subject, greeting, Know, that after the 
capture of Acre, and after the departure of my lord the king 
of France from us at Acre, who there basely abandoned the 
purpose of his pilgrimage, and broke his vow, against the 
will of God, to the eternal disgrace of himself and of his 
realm, we took the road to Joppa j and when we approached 
near Assur, Saladin met us with a mighty host of his Sara- 
cens, and made an attack upon us. However, by the mercy 
of God, we lost not a man on this day, with the exception 
of one of extreme valour, and much endeared to the whole 
army by his merits, namely, Jacques de Avennes, who was 
ever ready and devoted, like a stay and support to the army, 
in all holiness and in the sincerity of the faith, for many years 
past, to serve God in the army of the Christians. After this, 
by the will of God, we arrived at Joppa. We fortified that 
city with trenches and a wall, making it our purpose every- 
where, to the very best of our power, to promote the interests 
of Christianity. Also, on a second day, being the vigil of the 
Nativity of Saint Mary, Saladin lost an infinite number of his 
great men, and taking to flight, as though bereft of the benefit 
of all aid and counsel, laid waste the whole of the land of 
Sulia. Further, on the third day before the rout of Saladin, we 
were wounded in the left side with a javelin, but by the grace 
of God have now recovered from the effects thereof. Know, 
also, that by the grace of God, we hope within twenty days 
after the Nativity of our Lord, to recover the Holy City of 
Jerusalem, and the Sepulchre of our Lord, after effecting 
which we shall return home. Witness ourselves at Joppa, on 
the first day of October." 

The Letter of the king of England to the ablat of Clairval, on the 
same subject. 

"Richard, by the grace of God, king of England, duke of 
Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, to the venerable 
man and his most dearly-beloved friend in Christ, the abbat of 
Clairval, health and a succession of continued prosperity. 
After the mournful and universally bewailed loss of the Holy 



222 ANNALS OF KOGEK DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1191. 

City of Jerusalem, the City of the living God, in favour of which 
his name was invoked, the earth was alarmed and trembled, 
because the King of heaven had lost His own land, the land 
upon which His feet had stood. But the blessing of God being 
diffused from the Apostolic See throughout the whole earth, 
the friends of the Cross of Christ, as your holiness is not un- 
aware, vying with each other, pressed onwards to -assume the 
sign of the Cross on their foreheads and on their shoulders, and 
to avenge the injuries done to that Holy Cross. Among these 
and ourselves was divided the task undertaken by us of thus 
serving the living God, on assuming the sign of the Cross for 
the purpose of defending the scenes of His death which had 
been made holy by His precious blood, and which the enemies 
of the Cross of Christ had hitherto disgracefully profaned ; and 
within a short time after the arrival of my lord the king of the 
Franks at Acre, there, by the guidance of the Lord, did we 
also arrive ; shortly after which the noble city of Acre was surren- 
dered to my lord the king of the Franks and ourselves, the lives 
being saved of the Saracons who had been sent for the purpose 
of defending and protecting it, and an agreement being fully con- 
firmed on the part of Saladin that he would give up to us the 
Holy Cross, and one thousand five hundred captives alive, a day 
being appointed for the due performance of the said covenants. 
However, the time having expired, and the stipulation which 
he had agreed to being utterly disregarded, we put to death 
about two thousand six hundred of the Saracens whom we held 
in our hands, as we were bound to do ; retaining, however, a 
few of the more noble ones, in return for whom we trusted to 
recover the Holy Cross and certain of the Christian captives. 
After this, the king of the Franks having returned home, and 
the ruins and breaches in the walls of the city of Acre being 
duly repaired, and the city properly fortified with trenches and 
a wall, we agreed that at Joppa we would promote the interests 
of Christianity and pursue the object of our vow ; and, together 
with ourselves, the duke of Burgundy with the French placed 
under his command, the count Henry with his men, and many 
other earls and barons, and an innumerable body of people, 
determined to proceed. As between Acre and Joppa there 
was a very considerable distance, and a very long road, we 
at length, after much toil, and a severe loss of men, came down 
to Ca3sarea. Saladin, also, on the same march lost a great num- 
ber of his men. After the people of God had taken breath for a 



A.D. 1191. LETTER OP PJCBLABD TO THE ABBAT OF CLAIEVAL. 223 

time at that place, we pursued our intended route towards 
Joppa. Our vanguard having gone before and pitched their 
tents at Assur, Saladin with a mighty host of Saracens made 
an attack upon our rear-guard; on which, by the favouring grace 
of the Divine mercy, he was put to flight by only four battalions 
who faced about against him, and for a whole league was 
pursued in his flight by the entire troops of the Christians ; 
in consequence of which, such a slaughter took place of the 
more noble Saracens whom Saladin had with him, namely, in 
the vicinity of Assur, on the vigil of the Nativity of Saint Mary 
the Virgin, being Saturday, that Saladin had experienced none 
like thereto on any one day in the preceding forty years. We, 
however, by the grace of God, lost not one that day, with the ex- 
ception of one very valiant man, Jacques de Avennes, and much 
endeared to the whole army by his merits, who was ever ready 
and devoted, like a stay and support to the army, in all holiness 
and in the sincerity of the faith, for many years past, to serve God 
in the army of the Christians. After this, by the guidance of 
the Lord, we arrived at Joppa, and strengthened that city with 
trenches and a wall, making it our purpose in every quarter to 
promote the interests of Christianity to the utmost possible ex- 
tent. Since the day of the discomfiture of Saladin above-men- 
tioned, he has not dared to engage with the Christians, but, like 
a lion in his den, has been secretly lying in ambush in the more 
elevated places for the purpose of slaying the friends of the 
Cross like sheep destined for slaughter. Accordingly, on hearing 
that we were marching towards Ascalon with hasty steps, he 
overthrew that place and levelled it with the ground, and has 
now deserted and set at nought the whole land of Syria, as 
though he had been utterly bereft of the benefit of all counsel 
and assistance ; in consequence of which, we consider it to be a 
ground for sanguine hopes, that in a short time, by the bounty 
of God, the inheritance of the Lord will be entirely regained. 
And as the inheritance of the Lord has already in some mea- 
sure been regained, and we have in the recovery thereof en- 
dured all the heat and burden of the day, and have now ex- 
hausted all our money, and not only our money, but our strength 
and body as well ; we do notify unto your brotherhood that we 
are not able to remain in the country of Syria beyond the 
festival of Easter. The duke of Burgundy, with the Franks 
placed under his command, count Henry, with his men, and the 
other earls, barons, and knights, who, in the service of God have 



224 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEJT. A.D. 1191. 

expended their means in behalf of God, will return home, unless 
through the skilful effects produced by your preaching, timely 
provision shall be made for them, in men, by whom the land 
may be peopled and defended, and in money, which they may 
expend more freely in the service of God. Wherefore, falling 
at the feet of your holiness and shedding tears, we do proffer our 
humble entreaties, and do most earnestly beseech you that in 
such manner as becomes your duty and your honor, you will 
make it your endeavour to induce the princes and noblemen 
throughout all Christendom, and the rest of the people of God, 
to give their services to the living God, and to prompt them 
so to do. And therefore, after the said festival of Easter, let 
it be for them to defend and protect the kingdom of the Lord, 
of which we, by the mercy of God, will, by the said time of 
Easter, more fully gain possession. And be it the care of your 
diligence to act with such earnestness in this respect, that no- 
thing may through neglect on your part be lost, of that which 
the common advantage of all Christendom so ardently awaits. 
And for this reason it is that we do at this early period direct 
to your holiness our letters with reference to the interests of 
Christianity ; to the end that we may not be reproached 
with slothfulness and negligence, in case we had in any way 
neglected to forewarn a man of such position and of so holy 
a life on the urgent interests of Christendom. Therefore, in 
such manner as before we had resolved on this expedition, 
you encouraged us and the rest of the people of God to enter 
the service of God, and to restore His inheritance to Him, so 
now as well does the most urgent necessity call upon you, 
with all earnestness to arouse the people of God to act as here- 
inbefore mentioned. Witness ourselves, at Joppa, on the first 
day of October." 

It is also to be observed that, immediately after the rout 
of Saladin, the pagans who were in Ascalon and Joppa 
abandoned those places, not daring to await the arrival of 
the king of England ; accordingly, the king of England found 
them both deserted, and fortified them with castles and trenches. 
Shortly after this, the king of England having gone one day 
to some gardens about a mile from Joppa, to walk there, he 
fell asleep, on which a multitude of pagans surprised him, 
and aroused the king from his slumbers ; immediately on which, 
he mounted his horse, and manfully withstood the Saracens. 
However, William de Pratelles, one of his household, was there 



A.D. 1191. TREATY BETWEEN THE CHANCELLOR AND THE EARL. 225 

taken prisoner, and Reginald, his comrade, was slain ; one also 
of the king's chargers was taken there, and its leader slain, 
and the king only escaped through his prowess. When the 
king was mounting his horse, his belt, enriched with gold and 
precious stones, fell off, which was found by William de Corne- 
burg, and afterwards restored to the king. Saphadin, the 
brother of Saladin, also sent back his' horse to the king, who 
returned to Joppa. After this, the king fortified the castle of 
Planes, and the castle of Maen, and stayed at Joppa till nearly 
the Nativity of our Lord. 

In the meantime, a serious dissension arose in England 
between the king's chancellor and John, earl of Mortaigne, 
the king's brother, relative to the castle of Lincoln, which the 
chancellor besieged, having expelled Gerard de Camville from 
the keepership and the office of sheriff of Lincoln ; which former 
office the chancellor gave to William de Stuteville, and made 
him sheriff as well. But while the said chancellor was be- 
sieging the castle of Lincoln, the castle of Nottingham and 
the castle of Tickhill, which belonged to the king, were sur- 
rendered to earl John, who immediately sent word to the 
chancellor that, unless he quickly gave up the siege, he would 
visit him with a rod of iron. 

Consequently, the chancellor, being alarmed at the com- 
mands of John, earl of Mortaigne, broke up the siege ; and, 
through the mediation of many of the bishops, and other 
faithful servants of our lord the king, they appointed a day 
for an interview, at which an agreement was made between 
them on the following terms : 

" Be it known to all men to whom this present writing shall 
come, that the dispute that has arisen between the earl of 
Mortaigne and our lord the chancellor has been, through the 
mediation of the archbishop of Rouen, and the bishops of 
Durham, London, Winchester, Bath, Rochester, and Coventry, 
and other faithful servants of our lord the king, set at rest ; 
inasmuch as the earl of Mortaigne has restored to our lord the 
king, by the hands of the lord archbishop of Rouen, the 
castles of Tickhill and of Nottingham, to be given into the 
charge of William Marshal and of William de Wendenal ; 
that is to say, the castle of Nottingham to William Marshal, 
and the castle of Tickhill to William de Wendenal ; which 
said castles they shall, having made oath thereto, keep to the 
honor of and in fealty to our ]ord the king, until such time as 

TOL. n. Q 






226 ANNALS OF KOGEE DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1191. 

he shall return ; and when he shall return, then they shall do 
therewith according to his will and command. And if, which 
God forbid, it shall so happen that our lord the king shall 
depart this life during the pilgrimage, then the said per- 
sons shall, without detaining the same or any delay, deliver 
up the before-mentioned castles to the said earl. And if it 
shall so happen that, in the meantime, our lord the chan- 
cellor shall be guilty of any excesses against the said earl, 
and, on being requested to make amends for the same with 
out delay, in conformity with the advice and opinion of the 
said lord archbishop of Eouen and others of the household 
of our lord the king and of his court, shall refuse so to do, 
then they shall restore and give up the said castles to the 
said earl. These other castles also, with the honors thereof 
granted to him by our lord the king, have been delivered into 
the charge of faithful servants of our lord the king ; that is 
to say, the castle of Wallingford has been given up to the lord 
archbishop of Eouen, the castle of Bristol to the lord bishop 
of London, the castle of the Peak to the lord bishop of Coven- 
try, the castle of Bolsover to Eichard of the Peak, and, if the 
said Eichard should decline it, the lord bishop of Coventry is 
to take it, the castle of Eye to Walter Eitz-Eobert, the castle of 
Hereford to earl Eoger Bigot, the castles of Exeter and of Laun- 
ceston to Eichard Eevel ; who have in like manner sworn that, 
as they owe fealty to our lord the king, they will faithfully keep 
the same for his service. And, further, three castles, which 
belong to the crown of our lord the king, have been delivered 
in trust as follows : the castle of Windsor to the earl 01 
Arundei, the castle of Winchester to Gilbert de Lacy, and the 
castle of Northampton to Simon de Pateshull, who have in 
like manner sworn that, as they owe fealty to our lord the 
king, they will faithfully keep the same for his service. It 
has been further agreed, that bishops, abbats, earls, barons, 
vavasors, and freeholders shall not, at the will of justices or 
deputies of our lord the king, be disseised of their lands and 
chattels, 28 but shall be dealt with by judgment of the court of 
our lord the king, according to the lawful customs and assizes 
of the realm, or according to the command of our lord the 
king. And in like manner the lord John shall cause similar 
provisions to be made in his lands. And, if any person 
shall presume to do otherwise, at the prayer of the before- 
23 " Caballis," in the text, is clearly a mistake for " catallis." 



A. D. 1191. TEEATY BETWEEN THE CHANCELLOE AND THE ES.EL. 227 

named earl, the same shall be rectified by the lord archbishop 
of Rouen, if he shall be in England, and by the justices of our 
lord the king, and by those who have thus sworn to keep the 
peace; and, in like manner, at their prayer, the said John 
shall cause due reparation to be made. All new castles built 
after the departure beyond sea of our lord the king on his pil- 
grimage, whether begun or whether finished, shall be razed, 
and no other new ones shall be fortified until the return 
of our lord the king, except in manors demesne of our lord 
the king, if need there shall be, or in case such shall be 
done in the service of some person named by the precept of 
our lord the king, conveyed hither by letter or by some trusty 
messenger. Gerard de Camville shall be reinstated in the 
office of sheriff of Lincoln, and on the same day a proper day 
shall be appointed for him to make his appearance in the court 
of our lord the king, there to abide his trial ; and if in the 
judgment of the court of our lord the king proof can be given 
that he ought to lose that office as also the keepership of the 
castle of Lincoln, then he is to lose the same ; but, if not, he 
is to keep it, unless in the meantime an agreement can be come 
to relative thereto on some other terms. And the lord John is 
not to support him against the decision of our lord the king, 
nor is he to harbour such outlaws, or enemies to our lord the 
king, as shall be named to him, nor allow them to be harboured 
on his lands. But if any person shall be accused of any offence 
committed against our lord the king, it shall be lawful for 
the earl to harbour him in his lands so long as he shall offer 
to make due redress in the court of our lord the king. To main- 
tain and observe this treaty of peace in good faith and without 
evil intent, the said earl, and chancellor, and fourteen barons, 
on the two sides, have made oath at the hand of the said lord 
archbishop of Rouen ; namely, on the part of the chancellor, 
the earl of Arundel, the earl of Salisbury, the earl Roger 
Bigot, the earl of Clare, Walter Fitz-Robert, William de 
Braove, and Roger Fitz-Remfray ; and, on the part of the earl, 
Stephen Ridel, his chancellor, William de Wendenal, Robert 
de la Mare, Philip de Lurcester, William de Kahannes, Gilbert 
Basset, and William de M ontacute . And if within the time of the 
truce anything shall have been taken or intercepted on either 
side, it shall be lawfully returned and made good. And this 
treaty has been made, saving in all things the authority and 
commands of our lord the king ; but so that if, before his re- 

Q 2 



228 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

turn, our lord the king shall be unwilling that this treaty shall 
hold good, the before-named castles of Nottingham and Tick- 
hill shall be restored to the lord John, whatever commands 
our lord the king may give relative thereto." 

In the same year, a short time after the above-mentioned 
treaty of peace made between the chancellor and the earl, 
Geoffrey, the archbishop elect of York was consecrated by 
"William, archbishop of Tours, by command of Celestinus, 
the Supreme Pontiff ; and, immediately after his consecration, 
being unmindful of the oath which he had made to the king, his 
brother, to the effect that he would not return to England till 
after the expiration of three years from the time that the king 
left England, he hastened to return to England. However, on 
his arrival at Witsand, in Flanders, for the purpose of crossing 
over to England, he was forbidden on part of the chancellor 
to presume to return to England, contrary to the tenor of the 
oath which he had taken before the king ; but the archbishop 
refused at his command to abandon his purpose; wherefore, 
the chancellor ordered him to be seized, if he should come into 
England. 

Accordingly, the archbishop of York came over to England, 
and landed at Dover, in the month of September, while the 
servants of the chancellor were standing on the shore for the 
purpose of laying hands on him. Being, however, forewarned 
of this, before he left the ship he changed his clothes, and 
mounting a horse in whose speed he had confidence, fled to a 
monastery of monks in that town. It was about the sixth 
hour of the day, and the monks had begun mass, and the Epis- 
tle was being read, in which they had just come to the passage 
where the holy Apostle says : " He that troubleth you shall 
bear his judgment, whosoever he be ;" 29 and again, in the same 
Epistle, " I would they were even cut off which trouble you," 3 
when the archbishop of York entered the church, putting his 
trust in the Lord ; and he received the same as a pleasing 
omen, referring it to the lasting quiet of his own holy office, 
and the approaching confusion of the chancellor. 

Upon this, the servants of the chancellor whom he had sent 
to apprehend him, besieged the church on all sides, so that he 
could not come forth without falling into their hands ; and one 
day, after the celebration of the mass, while the said arch- 
bishop, clad in his sacerdotal habiliments, was still standing 
29 Gal. v. 10. 30 Gal. v. 12. 



A .'0.1191. THE CHASCELLOE FllOCEEDS TO LONDON. 229 

at the altar, these sinister satellites effected an entrance into 
the church, and laid violent hands upon him, and dragged him 
forth from the church. After dragging him out, or rather tear- 
ing him away therefrom, they vilely and ignominiously led 
him through the mud of the streets, and along the lanes, while 
the people stood shouting after them : " cowards ! why do 
you take him in this manner ? What harm has he done ? He 
is an archhishop, the brother of a king, and the son of a king ! " 

However, not attending to the words of the people, they took 
him to Dover castle, and delivered him into the custody of 
Matthew de Clare, the constable thereof. "When this was told 
to earl John, the brother of the said archbishop, he enquired 
of the chancellor if this had been done by his order, on which 
he admitted that it was, and did not deny it ; whereupon the 
earl gave orders that the archbishop should be set at liberty, 
which was done accordingly. 

On his arrival at London, he made complaint to earl John, 
and the bishops, and other nobles of the kingdom, respecting 
the injuries done to him and his people by the chancellor 
and his men; and the earl gave orders that the chancellor 
should take his trial in the king's court for the injury which he 
had done to his brother the archbishop of York, and to Hugh, 
bishop of Durham. On the chancellor delaying to do this from 
day to day, the earl John, and the archbishop of Rouen, and the 
bishops and principal men of the kingdom, named a peremp- 
tory day for his appearance at Reading : on which day there 
came thither the earl of Mortaigne, and nearly all the bishops, 
earls, and barons of the kingdom ; but though they waited 
there after the peremptory day, expecting the arrival of the chan- 
cellor, he declined to come, or even to send a message. Upon 
this, earl John, and the bishops who were with him, prepared 
to set out for London, that being there met by a more consider- 
able number of persons, they might enjoy the benefit of the 
advice of the citizens of London, what to do as to their chan- 
cellor, who had created this confusion in the kingdom, and re- 
fused to take his trial. 

On the chancellor hearing this, he left "Windsor and has- 
tened to London, and, while on the road, it so happened that 
his household and knights met the knights of earl John, on 
which a sharp engagement took place between them. In this 
affair one of the knights of earl John, by name Roger de Planis, 
lost his life ; however, the earl prevailed, and the chancellor and 






230 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

his men taking to flight, he entered London, and took refuge 
with his people in the Tower of London. Earl John, and nearly 
all the bishops and earls of England, also entered London on 
the same day, namely, the third day after the octave of Saint 
Michael, and, on the following day, the said earl John, the 
king's brother, and the archbishop of Rouen, and all the bishops, 
and the earls, and barons, met the citizens of London in Saint 
Paul's Churchyard, and there made accusation against the said 
chancellor of many offences, and especially the injuries he had 
done to the lord archbishop of York and the lord bishop of 
Durham. 

The associates also of the said chancellor whom the king had 
associated with him in the government of the kingdom, ac- 
cused him of many offences, saying that, despising their advice, 
he had transacted all the affairs of the kingdom according to im- 
pulse and his own will. The archbishop of Rouen also, and 
"William Marshal, earl of Striguil, then for the first time pro- 
duced before the people the sealed letters from our lord the king, 
in which the king had sent orders from Messina that they should 
be associated with him in the government of the kingdom, and 
that, without the advice of them and the other persons so ap- 
pointed, he was not to act in the affairs of the king and the 
kingdom, and that if he should do anything to the detriment 
of the kingdom, or without the consent of the persons before- 
named, he should be deposed, and the archbishop of Rouen 
substituted in his place. 

It seemed good therefore to John, the king's brother, and all 
the bishops, earls, and barons of the kingdom, and to the 
citizens of London, that the chancellor should be deposed, and 
they accordingly deposed him, and substituted in his place the 
archbishop of Rouen, who was willing to do nothing in the 
government of the kingdom except with the will and consent 
of the persons assigned to him as associates therein, and with 
the sanction of the barons of the exchequer. On the same 
day, also, the earl of Mortaigne, the archbishop of Rouen, and 
the other justiciaries of the king, granted to the citizens of 
London the privilege of their commonalty ; and, during the same 
year, the earl of Mortaigne, the archbishop of Rouen, and the 
other justiciaries of the king, made oath that they would so- 
lemnly and inviolably observe the said privilege, so long as the 
same should please their lord the king. The citizens of Lon- 
don also made oath that they would faithfully serve their lord 



A.D. 1191. LETTER OF THE BISHOP OF COVENTEY. 231 

king Richard, and his heirs, and would, if he should die with- 
out issue, receive earl John, the brother of king Richard, as 
their king and lord. They also swore fealty to him against 
all men, saving always their fealty to king Richard, his brother. 
Upon this, the chancellor, being deposed, made oath that he 
would surrender all the castles throughout England, and im- 
mediately surrendered to him the Tower of London ; and he 
delivered it to the archbishop of Rouen, as also Windsor, and 
some other castles, but not all of them. 

On this occasion, Hugh de Nunant, the bishop of Coventry, 
wrote to the following effect : 

The Letter of Hugh, bishop of Coventry, on the deposition of 
William, bishop of Ely, the king's chancellor, 

" The things that are committed to writing are beyond 
doubt bequeathed to posterity, to the end that the page that is 
confirmed by the testimony of a few, may either advise for the 
safety, or redound to the benefit of, many: and may what 
is here set down be considered as an illustration of the truth of 
the same. For many things are committed to writing by way 
of caution, that the same may be done ; and many, again, that 
they may not be done ; that so the church of Christ may profit 
on either side, and may both seek what is to be coveted and shun 
what is to be avoided. For this reason it is our wish that the 
fall of the bishop of Ely should, by letters attesting the same, 
be brought to the notice of all ; to the end that in this illustra- 
tion humility may always find that by which to profit, and 
pride that which to hold in dread. For he was a great man 
among all the people of the west, and, as though gifted with 
a twofold right hand, wielded the power of the kingdom and 
the authority of the Apostolic See, and was in possession of 
the king's seal over all lands, so as to be enabled to govern ac- 
cording to his own will, and of his own power to bring all 
things to completion ; even in the same degree of estimation as 
both king and priest together was he held : nor was there any 
person to be found to dare to offer resistance to his will. For 
he said, and the thing was done, he commanded, and all means 
were discovered. In his hands were the royal treasures, the 
whole of the king's riches, and the entire exchequer, so much 
so that all property whatsoever that swam beneath our skies 
was no longer said to belong to the king, but to him. For 



232 ANNALS OP ROGEK DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1191. 

there was neither that which is hunted for on land, fished for 
in the water, or flying in the air, which was not compelled to 
be at the service of his table, insomuch that he appeared to 
have shared the elements with the Lord ; leaving the heaven of 
heavens alone to the Lord, and reserving the other three to 
advantage by the use or rather abuse and luxurious enjoy- 
ment thereof. All the sons of the nobles acted as his servants, 
with downcast looks, nor dared they to look upwards towards 
the heavens, unless it so happened that they were addressed by 
him ; and if they attended to anything else, they were pricked 
with a goad, which their lord held in his hands, fully mindful 
of his grandfather of pious memory, who being of servile condi- 
tion in the district of Beauvais, had for his occupation to guide 
the plough and whip up the oxen; 31 and who at length, to 
gain his liberty, fled to the Norman territory. The grand- 
children and relatives of this man, even any females whatsoever 
who were akin to him, though sprung from a poor cabin, earls, , 
and barons, and nobles of the kingdom, longed with the greatest 
avidity to unite with themselves in marriage ; thinking it a 
matter for pride, under any title whatever, to acquire the fa- 
vour of his intimate acquaintanceship ; nor was there a churl 
who longed for a field, a citizen who longed for a farm, a 
knight who longed for an estate, a clerk who longed for a 
benefice, or a monk who longed for an abbey, who was not 
obliged to become subservient to his power and influence. And 
although all England, bending the knee, was ever at his ser- 
vice, still did he always aspire to the free mode of life of the 
Franks, and removed his knights and yeomen, and all his house- 
hold, to Oxford ; where, slighting the English nation on all oc- 
casions, attended by a troop of Pranks and Flemings, he moved 
pompously along, bearing a sneer in his nostrils, a grin on his fea- 
tures, derision in his eyes, and superciliousness on his brow, by 
way of fit ornament for a priest. For his own aggrandizement 
and for the glorification of his name, he was in the habit of getting 
up verses that he had picked up by begging, and adulatory jin- 
gles, and enticed jesters and singers from the kingdom of France 
by his presents, that they might sing about him in the streets ; 
and but lately it was everywhere said that there was not such a 
person in all the world. And really, if it had been the time 
of the Cassars, he would with Liberius 33 have had himself styled 

31 This is said in a spirit of caustic malevolence. 
33 A misprint for Tiberius. 



A. D. 1191. LETTER OF THE BISHOP OF COVENTRY. 233 

the living God. But when the king had given him certain 
earls as his associates, in order that at least the more weighty 
concerns of the realm might be managed by their counsels in 
common, he could not at all endure to have any partner 
therein, as he thought that the greater part of his glory would 
be thrown into the shade, if he should stand in need of the 
advice of any mortal being. Therefore he ruled alone, there- 
fore he reigned alone, and from sea to sea was he dreaded as 
though a God ; and were I to say still more, I should not be 
telling a falsehood, because God is long-suffering and merciful ; 
while he, ruling every thing according to his own impulses, 
was neither able to observe justice when acting, nor to endure 
delay in waiting the proper time. Hence it arose that he set 
at nought all the letters and mandates of his lord ; that he might 
not seem to have a superior, nor be supposed to be subject to 
any one, having always made every one act as the servant of 
his own will. Therefore, after England had for a considerable 
time suffered under so heavy a burden and a yoke so insup- 
portable, at length, while groaning at his deeds, she cried 
aloud with all her might. Her cries went up to the Lord, 
and He, rising, looked down on her from on high, who by 
His own might treads under foot the necks of the proud and 
haughty, and exalts the humble by the might of His arm. 
The sun of justice, indeed, may shine upon the good and 
the bad, still the eyes of the overwise it dazzles, and by 
the brilliancy of its light brings forth fruit in the minds of the 
humble. For although this chancellor may perchance have 
read that it is denied us long to dwell on high, 34 and that ' He 
who stands must take care lest he fall,' 35 and that, ' He who 
exalteth himself shall be abased,' 36 and that before a downfall 
the heart is elated ; still, being forgetful of the lot of mankind, 
which never remains in the same condition, and of the volubility 
of the wheel that elevates the lowly man, and, when elevated, 
is wont to depress him, he was never willing to understand that 
he ought to act virtuously ; but meditating iniquity in his bed, 
where he was sleeping with the ministers of wickedness, and 
with youths in his chamber, he added iniquity to iniquity, so 
as by his pride and his abuses, through the just retribution of 
God, to precipitate himself into the powerful hands of the Lord ; 
so that now there was no longer any room for mercy for him, but 

34 Perhaps alluding to Is. xxvi. 5. 35 Alluding to 1 Cor. x. 12. 

36 St. Luke xiv. 11, and xviii. 14. 



234 A2TCTALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

solely for the exercise of power. Nor indeed was there an op- 
portunity for taking compassion on him or sparing him. For 
it was he himself who dictated the sentence against himself, 
who goaded vengeance on, who aimed at crimes so great, that 
he thereby provoked the anger not only of men, but still more, 
of God. For although the Lord can do all things, still He is 
unable to condemn a man who is innocent, or to save one who 
is guilty, nor would He spare him if the guilty man should 
chance to be obstinate in his guilt. For against an obstinate 
mind and the forehead of a harlot may be brought the hard- 
ness of real adamant, so as to be worn away thereby ; for 
nothing is there so strong but that it must give way before 
what is stronger. As, therefore, a man so powerful could not 
be overcome by man, the Father of mercies and the God of all 
consolation came to the aid of the people who supplicated 
God, and supplanting the hand of mercy in his case, hurled 
him down from his power, and brought this accuser, or rather 
destroyer, to such a pitch of giddiness of mind, that he was 
unable to recover or arouse himself therefrom ; but He so hard- 
ened his heart, blinded his mind, and infatuated his counsels, 
that he first besieged the archbishop of York in a church, then 
seized him, and after seizing him, violently tore him away ; after 
tearing him away, strongly bound him ; after strongly binding 
him, dragged him along ; and after dragging him along, threw 
him into prison. And although there was a concourse of 
people who exclaimed, 'What has this righteous man and 
friend of God been guilty of, that he should be taken to prison ? 
his innocent blood is condemned without a cause,' still, pity 
could not listen where pride reigned, and God was not heard 
where the tyrant held sway. For the said archbishop was com- 
ing from the country of Normandy with his pastoral staff and 
mitre, and ring, and superhumeral, which in later times has 
been styled the pall. And although he was the son of king 
Henry, of happy memory, and the brother of king Richard, 
who now reigns, and the brother of John, earl of Mortaigne, 
still, his royal blood could be of no service to him ; and al- 
though he had been recently consecrated, the recent perform- 
ance of that sacrament could not avail him. Consequently, it 
was in public the universal cry of the laity throughout the 
whole island, ' Perish he who hastens on the ruin of all things ! 
that he may not crush all, let him be crushed. If he has 



A.D. 1191. LETTER OF THE BISHOP OF COVENTBY. 235 

done this in a green tree, what will he do in a dry one?" 37 
And behold ! under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, all persons 
meet together from the north^ and from the sea, and from all 
parts of the whole island, and flock in crowds, that the arch- 
bishop may be set at liberty. But the cords of his sins tight- 
ening apace around the chancellor, and his conscience strongly 
accusing him, clad in a coat of mail, he flies from before the faces 
o/ men, and hides himself, and shuts himself with his people in 
the Tower of London. As we entered the city at a late hour, 
many of his household in arms attacked us with drawn swords, 
and slew one of our knights, a noble man, and wounded a 
great number. However, in the morning a council was held 
by nearly all the nobles of the kingdom, in presence of the 
lord John, the king's brother, the archbishops of Rouen and 
York, and the bishops of Durham, London, Winchester, Bath, 
Rochester, Norwich, Lincoln, Hereford, Saint David's, and 
Coventry ; and in the presence of all the people of the city, 
and of the justiciaries of our lord the king, who approved 
thereof, we did, with the assent of all, agree that such a person 
should thenceforth no longer rule in the kingdom of England, 
by whom the Church of England was reduced to a state of igno- 
miny, and the people to want ; for, to omit other matters, he 
and his revellers had so exhausted the whole kingdom, that 
they did not leave a man his belt, a woman her necklace, a 
nobleman his ring, or anything of value even to a Jew. 
He had likewise so utterly emptied the king's treasury, that in 
all the coffers and bags therein, nothing but the keys could 
be met with, after the lapse of these last two years. On the 
third day he positively promised, and gave his word by one of 
his followers, in the presence of all, that he would not leave 
the island until certain castles which he kept in his own hands, 
and had given into the charge of some foreigners, unknown 
and obscure persons, and which were then named, should have 
been fully surrendered by him and given into the charge of 
certain persons named ; for the performance of which he gave 
his brothers and his chamberlain as hostages. He then 
hastened to Canterbury, that there, as became him, he might 
assume the cross of pilgrimage, and lay aside the cross of the 
legateship, which for a year and a half since the death of pope 
Clement, he had wielded to the prejudice of the Church of 
Rome, and to the detriment of that of England. For all the 
37 St. Luke xxiii. 31. 



236 ANlfALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1191. 

churches of England had that cross put to their ransom ; that 
is to say, had compelled them to submit to the extortion of 
fines ; nor was there any one exempt from feeling the blows 
of that cross. And then, besides if by chance it happened that 
he entered the house of any bishop, you will be able to learn 
from him that his entertainment cost him the price of one or 
two hundred marks. After he had remained in the castle of 
Dover some days, unmindful of his profession and of the obli- 
gation of his promise which he had given, forgetful also of his 
brothers, whom, having given as hostages, he was disgracefully 
exposing to peril of death, he determined to set sail, and as he 
did not care to do this openly, he hit upon a new kind of stra- 
tagem, and pretending to be a woman, a sex which he always 
hated, changed the priest's robe into the harlot's dress. Oh 
shame ! the man became a woman, the chancellor a chancel- 
loress, the priest a harlot, the bishop a buffoon. Accordingly, 
although he was lame, he chose to hasten on foot from the 
heights of the castle down to the sea-shore, clothed in a wo- 
man's green gown of enormous length instead of the priest's 
gown of azure colour ; 38 having on a cape of the same colour, 
with unsightly long sleeves, instead of a chasuble, a hood on 
his head instead of a mitre, some brown cloth in his left hand, 
as if for sale, instead of a maniple, 39 and the staff of the huckster 
in his right in place of his pastoral staff. Decked out in such 
guise the bishop came down to the sea-shore, and he who had 
been accustomed much more frequently to wear the knight's 
coat of mail, wondrous thing ! became so effeminate in mind, 
as to make choice of a feminine dress. 40 Having seated himself 
on the shore upon a rock, a fisherman, who immediately took 
him for a common woman, came up to him ; and, having come 
nearly naked from the sea, perhaps wishing to be made warm, 
he ran up to this wretch, and embracing his neck with 
the left arm, with his right began pulling him about, upon 
which he almost immediately discovered 41 that he was a 

38 " Hyacinthina" in the text. 39 The " manipulum," " fanon," 

or " sudarium," was either a napkin or a short sleeve worn over the left 
wrist by the priesthood when officiating. , * " Animum" is probably 
a mistake for " amictum." 41 This passage has been necessarily 

modified in the Translation ; it stands thus in the text " Cucurrit ad 
moustrum, et manu sinistra collum complectens, dextera partes inferiores 
riraatur. Curaque tunicam subito sublevasset, et nimis inverecunde ad partes 
verecundas manum extendisset andacter, femoralia sensit et virum in 
fsminS. certis indiciis agnovit." The story is not told with all these cir- 



A.D. 1191. LETTEE OF THE BISHOP OF COVENTEr. 237 

man. At this lie was greatly surprised, and, starting back, 
iit a fit of amazement, shouted out with a loud voice, ' Come 
all of you and see a wonder ; I have found a woman who 
is a man ! ' Immediately on this, his servants and acquaint- 
ances who were standing at a distance came up, and with 
a gentle kind of violence pushed him back and ordered him 
to hold his tongue ; upon which the fisherman held his peace 
and the clamour ceased, and this hermaphrodite sat waiting 
there. In the meantime a woman, who had come from the 
town, seeing the linen cloth, which, he or rather she, was 
carrying as though on sale, came and began to ask what was 
the price, and for how much he would let her have an ell. 
He, however, made no answer, as he was utterly unacquainted 
with the English language ; on which she pressed the more ; 
and shortly after another woman came up, who urgently 
made the same enquiry, and pressed him very hard to let her 
know the price at which he would sell it. As he answered 
nothing at all, but rather laughed in his sleeve, they began to 
talk among themselves, and to enquire what could be the mean- 
ing of it. Then, suspecting some imposture, they laid hands 
upon the hood with which his face was covered, and pulling it 
backward from his nose, beheld the swarthy features of a 
man, lately shaved, on which they began to be extremely as- 
tonished. Then rushing to the dry land, 42 they lifted their 
voices to the stars, crying out, ' Come, let us stone this monster, 
who is a disgrace to either sex.' Immediately a crowd of 
men and women were collected together, tearing the hood from 
off his head, and ignominiously dragging him prostrate on the 
ground by his sleeves and cape along the sand and over the. 
rocks, not without doing him considerable injury. In the 
meanwhile his servants made an attack two or three times on 
the multitude for the purpose of rescuing him, but were not 
able, as all the populace were inflicting vengeance upon him 
with insatiate eagerness, reviling him, inflicting blows and spit- 
ting upon him ; and after much other disgraceful treatment, 
they dragged him through the whole of the town, and then, 
dragging him, or rather dragging him to pieces, they shut him 
up in a dark cellar with a guard over him, for a prison. Thus 

cumstances by all the chroniclers, and no doubt the bishop of Coventry 
was wishful that it should lose nothing in his way of telling it. The first 
part of this extract is exceedingly improbable. 

42 " Terrain," in contradistinction to the sea-shore. 



238 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

was he dragged who had dragged another, made captive who 
had been the captor, bound who had been the binder, incarce- 
rated who had been the one to incarcerate, that so with the ex- 
tent of the offence the extent of the punishment might seem to 
be commensurate. For he became an object of extreme disgrace 
to his neighbours, of dread to his acquaintances, and was made 
a laughing-stock for all the people. I only wish that he had 
polluted himself alone, the priest, and not the priestly office. 
May, then, the Church of Eome make due provision that such 
great guiltiness may be punished in such a way, that the 
offence of one may not contaminate all, and that the priestly 
authority may not be lessened thereby. And further, may the 
king of England take all precaution to appoint such a person 
over his realm, that by him the royal dignity may be preserved, 
and his authority may suffer no diminution through him ; but 
rather that the clergy and the people may have cause to congra- 
tulate themselves upon his government." 

The Letter of Master Peter of Blois on behalf of William, bishop 
ofEly* 

" To his former lord and friend, Hugh, so called, bishop of 
Coventry and Chester, Peter of Blois, archdeacon of Bath, may 
he remember God with fear. The excesses of a traitorous 
faction this day reveal to what lengths malice may proceed, 
what envy may be guilty of. The bishop of Ely, one beloved 
by God and men, a man amiable, wise, generous, kind, and 
meek, bounteous and liberal to the highest degree, had by the 
dispensations of the Divine favour, and in accordance with the 
requirements of his own manners and merits, been honored 
with the administration of the state, and had thus gained the 
supreme authority. With feelings of anger you beheld this, and 
forthwith he became the object of your envy. Accordingly, your 
envy conceived vexation and brought forth iniquity ; whereas 
he, walking in the simplicity of his mind, received you into the 
hallowed precincts of his acquaintanceship, and with singleness 
of heart, and into the bonds of friendship and strict alliance. 
His entire spirit reposed upon you, and all your thoughts unto 
him were for evil. ' Woe/ says Ecclesiasticus, < to a double 

43 The Editor of the " Pictorial History of England" remarks, respecting 
this letter, " Peter of Blois took Hugh to account for this satire,which was 
evidently intended to put Longchamp in a more ridiculous and degrading 
light than archbishop Geoffrey had been in at the same place, Dover." 



A.D, 1191. LETTER OF PETER BLOIS TO THE BISHOP OF ELY. 239 

heart and to wicked lips, and to the sinner that goeth two 
ways.' 44 The face of the hypocrite veiled the wickedness of 
the conscience within with a kind of pretence of friendship, 
and in secret you were inflicting upon an innocent man the 
injuries caused by a seditious and petulant tongue. Solo- 
mon says, ' Curse the whisperer and double-tongued : for such 
have destroyed many that were at peace.' 45 All his in- 
ward thoughts did he pour forth into your bosom : you he 
looked upon as a second self, and yet you, to find a pretence for 
causing his fall, thought fit to ply him with the adulation of a 
betrayer. Oh detestable treachery ! Judas betrayed with a kiss, 
you with words ; without, you made a show of the regard of an 
attentive Mend, and your tongue was planning treachery. As 
you sat, you spoke against your brother, and in the way of the 
son of your mother did you lay a stumbling-block. ' Woe to 
that man by whom the offence cometh.' 46 This guilty conduct, 
indeed, has branded you with the lasting stain of bad opinion, 
and if by the bounty of nature you had received any commend- 
able points, this fault has done away with them for ever. In 
like manner, Joab acted valiantly on many occasions, but his 
treachery to Amasa and Abner, blackened in him all the glories 
of his valorous deeds. Oh lips of detraction ! Oh tongue of abuse 
and treachery ! What, Lord shall be applied to this treacherous 
tongue ? Would that arrows might be applied thereto, that they 
might pierce it through and through, and that desolating coals 
of fire might consume it; would that thou, Seraph, who with the 
live coal from heaven 47 didst purge the lips of the prophet, 
wouldst with the flames of hell, in purging his whole face and 
tongue, destroy the same, that so we might be able to sing and 
say, ' In cleansing him thou hast destroyed him.' Lips conse- 
crated by the Gospel, are never ceasing to babble forth their lying 
words to the winds. That is entirely devoted to vanity which 
was due and owing to truth. But the man of froward tongue 
will not be guided on the earth ; wherefore, 'let him that stand- 
eth take care lest he fall,' for before ruin the heart is exalted. 
Do you exult, unhappy man, and make it your boast that you 
have supplanted an innocent man ? But know beyond a doubt, 
that he has been thus laid low for both the downfall and the 
uprising of many, for the uprising of himself and of his people, 

44 Ecclus. ii. 12. Our version has it, " Woe be to fearful hearts and 
faint hands." ** Ecclus. xxvii. 31. 

46 St. Matt, xviii. 7. Alluding to Isaiah vi. 6, 7. 



240 AJTCTALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

and for the downfall of yourself and your accomplices. This 
punishment will fall upon your own head. 47 For every deceit 
suffers from its own recoil : from your treachery 48 nought but 
the fruit of sorrow will you gather; and you have commenced the 
web, that you may be wrapped in a double cloak. It is Isaiah 
who says, ' Ye who begin the web and put your trust in the 
darkness of Egypt, await the day of bitterness.' 49 You pub- 
licly make it your boast and vaunt that it was you who created 
this tumult, that it was you who deceived him when not on 
his guard, and that it was you induced the multitude to attack 
with arms an unarmed man, and an innocent man with insidi- 
ousness. "Why boast of your malice, you, who are so powerful 
in your iniquity ? Why vaunt of your malice, which in most 
countries, as your infamous character has become circulated, is 
in the mouths of all classes ? But about you and persons like 
you it may justly be said, ' They rejoice when they have done 
evil, and they exult at things that bring the greatest disgrace.' 
Besides, it is the remark of the wise man, that he ' who rejoiceth 
at the ruin of another, shall be punished ;' 50 and Solomon says, 
* Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth lest the Lord see it, 
and He turn his wrath upon thee.' 51 Indeed, it was always 
the usual accomplishment, and one peculiar to your family, to 
sow the materials for dissension ; and the pestilent branch has 
contracted its evil qualities from the root of the noxious tree. 
Oh evil generation ! Oh provoking race ! ' Oh generation of 
vipers, who hath taught you to nee from the wrath to come?' 52 
Do you think that God will not behold this, and require an 
account thereof? It was for this same reason that the wicked 
man caused the anger of the Lord, ' For he said in his heart, 
he will not require the same.' 53 But, beyond a doubt, the Lord 
will require it ; He will also require to know as to whose mis- 
fortunes you are now boasting ; and at a future day, by the 
bounty of the Lord, he shall breathe again. For wisdom will 
not forsake the righteous man when sold, and in time shall he 
gain respect. It rather befitted the gravity of your rank to 
promote peace among the people, to allay sedition, and espe- 

47 " Faba haec recudetur in caput tuurn." It is not improbable that 
the archdeacon was a reader of Terence. 

48 He puns upon the resemblance between "dolo"and "dolore." 

49 This passage does not appear in our version. It may perhaps allude to 
chap. xix. 9. ^ Alluding probably to Eccl. viii. 7. 51 Prov. xxiv. 17. 18. 

62 St. Matt. Hi. 7. St. Luke iii. 7. * Ps x. 13. 



A n 11Q1 



A.D. 1191. MESSENGERS SENT TO POPE CELESTINTJS. 241 

cially in England, which, receiving you poor enough, amplified 
you with mighty honors. Also, when speaking to those who 
were in the Babylonish captivity, he says : ' Seek the peace of 
the city, in which the Lord hath caused you to be carried away 
captives, for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace.' 54 On 
another occasion I wrote to you, and with salutary warning 
entreated you to abstain from such courses. However, the 
harp of David never fully allayed the madness of Saul ; and 
your hand has been extended to the commission of such deeds 
as these. Therefore, remember, man, if only man you are, re- 
member, I say, your condition ; remember the shortness of 
this life ; remember the strict and dreadful judge ; remember 
the punishment so fearful, so terrible, so interminable, and so 
intolerable, which is reserved for you to everlasting, if you 
desist not from such a course of wickedness." 

In eight days after this, John, earl of Mortaigne, gave orders 
that the chancellor should be liberated from prison, and should 
take his departure. Accordingly, he took his departure, and, 
crossing the sea, landed at Witsand, in Elanders. But while 
he was on his road, some nobles of that country, whom he had 
injured while in England, laid hands upon him, and kept him 
till he had made satisfaction to them. Proceeding thence, he 
arrived at Paris, and gave to Mauricius, the bishop, sixty marks 
of silver, upon condition that he should be received there with 
a procession, which was accordingly done. After this, he 
returned into Normandy ; but, by the command of the arch- 
bishop of Rouen, he was considered there as an excommuni- 
cated person, and in every place to which he came, throughout 
the whole of the archbishopric of Rouen, an end was put to 
Divine service as long as he was staying there. 

On this, he sent messengers to pope Celestinus, and to his 
lord the king of England, informing them, how John, earl of 
Mortaigne, and his accomplices, had expelled him from the king- 
dom; and, complaining of the injuries done him, he demanded 
restitution of what had been taken from him, at the same time 
making offer, on his part, to obey the law, and further stating, 
that if his acts and expenditure should not prove satisfactory 
to his lord the king, he would in all things give satisfaction 
according to his demands. Upon this, the Supreme Pontiff was 
provoked to anger, and wrote, to the following effect, to all 
the archbishops and bishops of England : 
54 Jer. xxxix. 7. 

VOL. n. JL 



242 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

The Letter of pope Celestinus to the prelates of England, in 
behalf of William, bishop of Ely. 

" Celestinus the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his venerable brethren the archbishops and bishops throughout 
the kingdom of England appointed, health, and the Apostolic 
benediction. Whereas our dearly beloved son in Christ, 
Richard, the illustrious king of the English, having assumed 
the cross, and prepared himself for avenging the injuries done 
to the Redeemer, has therein, like a prudent man and one who 
seeks the Lord, considered that the cares of governing his 
kingdom ought to be postponed to the performance of his duty, 
and has left the same under the Apostolic protection : it is, 
therefore, our wish and our duty, with the greatest zeal, to 
preserve the integrity and the rights of his realm, and the 
honor of himself, in the same degree that, trusting in our pro- 
tection, he has exposed his person and his property to the 
greatest danger for the upholding of the holy religion, and is 
known, in obedience to the Creator, to have behaved himself 
in a praiseworthy manner, the Lord dealing with him and 
giving good tokens of success, and most zealously, as is mani- 
fest from his exploits. Therefore, inasmuch as we have heard 
that certain attempts have been made upon his kingdom itself, 
as well as against your venerable father, William, bishop of Ely, 
the legate of the Apostolic See, to whom he has committed the 
government of his kingdom, both by John, earl of Mortaigne, 
and certain other persons, which in themselves contain some 
grounds of suspicion, and, if they are true, are known to re- 
dound in no slight degree to contempt of the Apostolic See, 
we have deemed it our duty at this early period to meet 
such presumption, inasmuch as from delay very great injury 
might possibly accrue to the king before - named and the 
land of Jerusalem, and to ourselves and the Roman Church. 
Wherefore, by these Apostolic writings, we do command the 
whole of you, and in virtue of your obedience enjoin you, that 
if (as has been reported to us) the said earl or any one else has 
dared to lay violent hands on the bishop before-mentioned, or 
to seize him, or to extort from him any oath by means of vio- 
lence, or to keep him in confinement, or in any way to change 
the state of the kingdom from the position in which it was 
placed by his serene highness at his departure, in such case, 
all pretexts and excuses laid aside, you will meet together, 



A.D. 1191. LETTEE OF WILLIAX, BISHOP OP ELY.' 243 

and, with candles lighted and bells ringing, all appeals and 
excuses, and all respect for persons on your part utterly laid 
aside, publicly announce as under the ban of excommunication 
the said earl, and all his counsellors, advisers, accomplices, and 
abettors in the said acts of presumptuous daring. You are 
also to cause them, when thus excommunicated, to be strictly 
avoided by all, both in their own lands as also in others which 
they may have invaded, and you are entirely to forbid the cele- 
bration there of divine service, except penance and the baptism 
of children, all obstacle thereto by appeal being entirely re- 
moved ; until such time as, the said legate having been released 
from confinement as well as from the stringency of his oath, 
and the kingdom having been replaced in the same position in 
which it was left by the said king at his departure, envoys 
shall come to the Apostolic See, with the testimony of letters 
from him and from yourselves as well, for the purpose of ab- 
solution. And know for certain that if, in the execution of 
this our precept, you shall be negligent or remiss, we have 
resolved, with the help of God, to inflict upon you no less a 
punishment than if the said injury had been done to our own 
person, or to one of our brethren. Given at the Lateran, on the 
fourth day before the nones of December, in the first year of 
our Pontificate." 

Upon the authority, therefore, of these letters of the Supreme 
Pontiff, the said bishop of Ely wrote to Hugh, bishop of Lin- 
coln, to the following effect : 

" William, by the grace of God, bishop of Ely, legate of 
the Apostolic See, and chancellor of our lord the king, to his 
venerable brother and most dearly beloved friend, [Hugh], by 
the same grace, bishop of Lincoln, health, and sincere love 
and affection. The more full the confidence that we feel in 
your affection, the greater the constancy we have found in 
you, so much the more confidently do we entrust to your dis- 
creetness, and to that of the Church of God, the interests of 
our lord the king, and our own, to be duly watched over ; 
putting our trust in God as to you, that your brotherly love 
will, in your pontifical character, show all due regard to the 
Apostolic precepts and our own. We do, therefore, in virtue 
of your obedience, enjoin, and, on the strength of the autho- 
rity which has been conferred upon us, command you, that, for 
the purpose of performing the Apostolical mandate issued to 
all the archbishops and bishops of England, as also to all other 
your brethren whatsoever, you will with all speed convene the 



244 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.n. 1101. 

same, to the end that the iniquity of the laity may no longer 
cast a slur on the Church of God and its priesthood, and lest, 
through any tergiversation or dissimulation, their malice may 
be imputed as a crime to yourselves. But as to the order 
which our lord the pope has given with regard to the person 
of John, earl of Mortaigne, we have modified the same, defer- 
ring the occasion until the Lord's day when "l&to mihi" bb is 
sung ; to the end that, if in the meantime he shall think fit to 
repent, we may return thanks to God for the same, and in his 
behalf, in the sight of our lord the pope, and of our lord the 
king of England, the champion of Him who was crucified, 
pour forth our affectionate prayers, that he may be deemed 
deserving of pardon for his offence, and give him our stre- 
nuous aid and all efficacious attention, saving always our 
fealty to our lord the king, and the honor of our priestly 
office. Eut, on the lands of those excommunicated, you are 
to permit the celebration of no Divine service, the baptism of 
children and penance excepted. The names of those who have 
been excommunicated by our lord the pope, and have been 
denounced as such by ourselves, of whose doings the evidence 
is so notorious that it cannot by any equivocation on their part 
be invalidated, are as follows : Walter, archbishop of Rouen, 
Godfrey, bishop of Winchester, Hugh, bishop of Coventry, 
William Marshal, Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, William Bruyere, Hugh 
Bardolph, Richard Malebisse and his brother Hugh, James 
and Simon Fitz- Simon, Simon de Avranches, Roger Fitz- 
Remfray, Gilbert and Rainfrid his sons, Gerard Camville, earl 
of Salisbury, John Marshal, earl of Mellent, Gilbert Basset, 
Thomas Basset, Henry de Yere, Jocelyn Fitz-Remfray, Stephen 
Riddel, chancellor of the earl of Mortaigne ; whom, both as 
bishop and as his legate, we do denounce to you as excommuni- 
cated ; as also Master Benedict, who, contrary to the statutes 
of the king and the kingdom, and against our prohibition, has 
dared to employ the seal of our lord the king, together with John, 
archdeacon of Oxford. In addition to this, we do distinctly 
and in especial order you publicly to denounce, as excommuni- 
cated, Hugh, bishop of Coventry, whom we have solemnly 
excommunicated, not only because in word and deed he has 
disowned the bishop, and because he gave his bodily oath at 
the hand of Baldwin, archbishop of Canterbury, of pious 
memory, as to not holding courts, but also because he has been 

55 Quinquagesima Sunday ; when the introit begins " Esto mihi in 
Deum protectorem:" " Be thou, God, a protector to me." 



A.D. 1191. THE BISHOP OF ELY IS DISGRACED. 245 

manifestly a counsellor and adviser to the entire subversion 
of the realm of England, a disturber of the peace, and a public 
advocate against the royal dignity and interests ; and to cause 
him to be strictly avoided by all, that in future a sheep so 
diseased may not be able to blemish and corrupt the flock of 
the Lord. But Hugh Bardolph, who took no part in our ex- 
pulsion and confinement, we do except from the said sentence 
of excommunication, if, immediately upon being warned, he 
shall surrender the castles of Scarborough, and those throughout 
the whole of Yorkshire and Westmoreland which he holds in 
his hands, to William de Stuteville. You are also to forbid all 
persons in your diocese, under pain of excommunication, to do 
anything in obedience to those who conduct themselves in 
England as though they were justices, or in any way to obey 
a power founded on violence and usurpation. Farewell." 

The said bishop of Ely also wrote to Hugh, bishop of Lin- 
coln, to the following eifect : 

" William, by the grace of God, bishop of Ely, legate of 
the Holy Apostolic See, and chancellor of our lord the king, 
to his venerable brother and friend, by the same grace, bishop 
of Lincoln, greeting. By that authority which has been con- 
ferred upon us, we do command you, and in virtue of your 
obedience enjoin, that you seize and take into your own hands, 
and retain possession of, the archdeaconry and all the revenues 
of John, archdeacon of Oxford, until such time as you shall 
have received commands from the Apostolic See, or from our- 
selves ; inasmuch as with his uncle, the Pilate of Eouen, he is 
disturbing the peace and tranquillity of the kingdom of Eng- 
land, and is seeking to do whatever mischief he possibly can 
to our lord the king and to his realm, as being an enemy of 
the realm and to ourselves. For, by the authority of our lord 
the pope, we have placed him under the ban of excommuni- 
cation. Farewell." 

The said bishop of Ely also wrote to a similar effect to some 
others of the bishops of England ; though not one of them per- 
formed the commands of either the Apostolic See or of him- 
self; as they did not consider him as legate, or as the king's 
chancellor. But the said archbishop of Eouen, and the other 
justices of England, deprived him of his bishopric, and col- 
lected his revenues for the behoof of the king, in return for 
the king's treasures which he had made away with. 

After this, the said justices and all the bishops, earls, and 



246 AKNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEtf. A.D. 1191. 

barons of England joined in a letter, and wrote word to the 
king how his chancellor had laid waste the kingdom of Eng- 
land and his treasures, and how, by the common consent of 
the kingdom, he had been deposed. On the other hand, the 
chancellor wrote to the king, signifying how that his brother 
John had taken possession of his kingdom, and would place the 
crown on his own head, unless he should make haste and return 
with all speed. 

Of the return of Philip, king of France, from Acre, and of his 
journey. 

But now let us return to the king of France, who, in the 
meantime, leaving the object of his pilgrimage unperformed, 
had departed from the land of Jerusalem with fourteen galleys, 
and had passed before the city of Baruth, which was then in 
the hands of the pagans ; but he did not attack them. He next 
passed before the city of Sibelet and before the castles of Bitte- 
rus and of Hesse, and then came to the city of Tripolis, where 
he made a stay of some days. Departing thence, he passed 
before the castle of Arches, the castle of Albe, and Le Culiat, 
a castle of the Hospitallers. He next came to the episcopal 
city of Turcusa. It is worthy of remark, that before Turcusa 
there is an island in the sea, Aredosa by name, for which reason 
Turcusa is called the " Aredosan city." He next came to the 
good harbour of Maureda, departing from which place he passed 
before Margat, a castle of the Hospitallers, where Isaac, em- 
peror of Cyprus, was kept confined in chains. He next came 
to the city of Valentia, then to the city of Sibel, then to the 
city of Melida, and then to the port of Saint Simeon. He 
next arrived before the city of Antioch, departing from which 
he came to the port of Bunel, then to the port of Alexandrietta. 
After this, he entered the land of the Armenians, which is 
called Armenia, and is the territory of Rupin de la Montaigne, 
being held under the prince of Antioch. He next came to a large 
river, the name of which is Thil, where there is a good city, 
which in like manner is called Thil. He then came to a 
large river called Curk, where there is a fine city deserted, 
also called Curk. He next came to a third large river, which 
is called Salef, where, upon this river, there is a large city, 
which is in like manner called Salef. It was in this river Salef 
that Frederic, emperor of the Eomans, was drowned, when he 
was leaving the territories of the sultan of Iconium. 



A-D. 1191. EETTJEN OF THE KING OF FEAtfCE FKOM ACHE. 247 

It is also worthy to be known, that from this territory caine 
those three kings who offered to our Lord Jesus Christ three 
precious gifts, namely, gold, frankincense, and myrrh. Their 
names were as follow : Jesphar, Pabtrar, 55 and Melchior ; ol 
whom one was king of Salef, which is called the 'Island,' ano- 
ther the king of Malnustre, and the third was the king of Ter- 
zol, that is to say, Tarsis, as to which it is said in the Psalms, 5fi 
" The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents." 
It is also worthy to be known, that these three rivers, Salef, 
Curk, and Thil, rise in Turkia, which is the name of the land 
of the Turks, who are subjects of the sultan of Iconium ; 
these divide the land of the Turks from the land of Rupin de 
la Montaigne, and fall into the sea near the gulf of Satalia. 
The river also, which is called Salef, is opposite to the island 
of Cyprus, and is not distant from it more than fifty miles, ac- 
cording to the calculations of mariners, as people can easily 
see from one shore to the other. 57 

When the king of France had left this river Salef, he passed 
near some very high mountains, which are called Cathimerdes. 
He next passed before a castle, the name of which is Nesse- 
kim, and then came to a fine city called Stamere, in which 
there is a noble abbey of the Griffons. He next passed a de- 
serted castle, which is called the castle of Eote, and then came 
to a river, which is called Scalendros : this river divides the 
territories of the Armenians from those of the emperor of Con- 
stantinople. Here, on one side of this river, in the territory 
of the emperor of Constantinople, is a castle, which is called 
Antiochet, 58 while on the other side of the same river, in 
Armenia, there is a castle, the name of which is Isanci. When 
the king of France arrived at the castle of Antiochet, Constan- 
tine, the lord of the castle, received him with marks of joy, 
and supplied him and his people with all necessaries. The 
king of France made a stay there of eight days, and dubbed the 
eldest son of the said Constantino a knight. It is also worthy 
to be known, that the whole land which extends from the 
river Scalendros towards the north as far as the sea is the ter- 
ritory of the emperor of Constantinople, which is called Ro- 
mania, that is to say, Graacia. 

55 V. r. Pabtizar, or Paptizar ; evidently a corruption for Balthazar, 
The first name stands for Gaspar, or Jasper. 56 Psalm Ixxii. 10. 

57 He must here allude to mountains on either side. 
5 * V. r. Annechet. 



248 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

After taking his departure thence, he immediately entered 
the gulf of Satalia. It is called a gulf, when water ex- 
tends inward between two lands, and forms a bay. Satalia 
is a very fine castle, and from it the gulf takes its name. 
Upon this gulf are two castles and cities, both of which are 
called Satalia ; but one of these is deserted, and is called Old 
Satalia, while the other is called New Satalia, and was found- 
ed by Manuel, emperor of Constantinople. Crossing the gulf 
of Satalia, the king of France passed a mountain, which is 
called Siredune, at the end of the gulf of Satalia. He then 
passed a very high mountain, the name of which is called 
Eesut. He next came to a river, which is called Winke, 59 
upon which there is a deserted castle, which is in like manner 
called Resut. This river Winke is also called the Port of the 
Pisans, because the Pisan pirates often frequent the harbour. 
When the king of France came thither, he found there four 
galleys belonging to the pirates, which he took ; but the pirates, 
leaving the galleys, fled to the mountainous parts, and so 
escaped from his hands. 

He next came to the city of Mirrhea, of which Saint Nicho- 
las held the bishopric, and which the Greeks call Stamira ; after 
which he arrived at a good harbour, and one secure from all 
winds and tempests, the name of which is Karkois ; on both 
sides of which harbour there were in ancient times fine and 
populous cities, the names of which were Cake ; there are also 
vast ruins there of walls to the present day, but no one lives 
there, through fear of the pirates. They next passed the Isles 
of Yse, in one of which there is a castle which is called the 
castle of Huge. 

Here formerly dwelt a damsel, whose name was Yse, and 
from whose name these islands were so called. The natives 
tell the story that a certain knight loved this damsel, but she 
declined to assent to his wishes so long as she lived. How- 
ever, on her death, the knight came and lay with her, saying, 
" What I could not do with her when alive, I have done with 
her when dead ;" on which Satan immediately entered into 
her, and said, " Behold, thou hast begotten by me a son, and 
when he is born I will bring him to thee." After nine months, 
when the time of travail came, she brought forth a still-born 
son, and brought him to the knight, and said, " Behold thy 

59 There can be no doubt that most of these names are in a most cor- 
rupt state. 



A. D. 1191. RETURN OF THE KING OF FRANCE FROM ACRE. 249 

first-born son, whom thou didst beget ; cut off his head and 
keep it in thy possession. And whensoever thou shalt wish 
to vanquish thine enemy, or to lay waste his lands, let the 
features of the head so cut off be disclosed, and let them look 
upon thy enemy or his lands, and immediately they shall be 
destroyed ; and when thou shalt wish to cease so to do, let the 
features be covered up again, and tribulation will cease;" 
which was accordingly done. Now, a considerable time after 
this, the knight married a wife, who often made enquiry 
of him, by what art or device he thus destroyed his ene- 
mies without arms and without an army ; however, he was 
unwilling to tell her, but rebuked her, and made her hold her 
peace. But it so happened, that one day, when the knight was 
away from home, she approached a chest, in which she hoped 
to find this secret of her lord, by means of which he wrought 
such mischiefs, and accordingly found in the chest this abomi- 
nable head ; on which she immediately ran away, and threw 
it into the gulf of Satalia. The mariners have a story that 
whenever this head lies with the face upwards, the gulf is in 
such a state of commotion that no ship can possibly cross it ; 
but when the head lies with the face downwards, then a ship can 
pass over. " Let the Jew Apella believe this, I will not." 60 

There is also another wonderful thing that takes place once 
a month in every year. It seems as though a black dragon of 
vast size comes in the clouds of heaven, and plunges his head 
into the gulf of Satalia, and sucks up the water, drawing it 
up with such violence, that if any ship should chance to be 
there, even though it should be laden, it is drawn up and car- 
ried aloft. It is therefore necessary for those who wish to avoid 
this peril, as soon as they have seen the monster, immediately 
to make a great tumult and raise loud cries, beating pieces 
of wood together, in order that on hearing the noise the 
dragon may be driven away from them. We, however, affirm 
that this is not a dragon, but the heat of the sun, that attracts 
to itself the waters of the sea. 61 

After the king of France had left the Isles of Yse, he passed 
near a great mountain, on the summit of which is situate the 
city of Patara, upon which Saint Nicholas was born, and 
where he lived for a long time. He next passed near a very 
lofty mountain, Turkia by name, which divides the territory 

60 From Juvenal. 6l He evidently alludes to waterspouts, and the 

method of breaking them by means of sound 



250 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

of the emperor of Constantinople from that of the sultan of 
Iconium. After this begins Eomania, which is also called 
Graecia. The whole of Eomania is land on the continent, and 
under the dominion of the emperor ; in the sea there are also 
many islands, which are called the Isles of Eomania. The 
capital of Eomania is the city of Constantinople. Eomania is 
joined to Sclavonia, Hungaria, Istria, and Aquileia. 

The names of some of the principal islands which are in 
the Grecian sea are as follow : The island of Sicily, which 
belongs to the king of Sicily; the island of Crete, which is 
large and fertile, and in the middle of which is a large moun- 
tain, called the Mountain of the Camel ; the island of Ehodes ; 
the island of Cyprus ; the island of Biscopia ; the island of 
Ischia, in which island grows abundance of the substance 
called mastic ; the island of Ysania ; the island of Ynexea ; 
the island of Stuple ; the island of Mil ; the island of Quales ; 
the island of Cuuerfu ; 62 the island of Serfent ; the island of 
Sasent; the island called Falede-Campan ; the island of Andros, 
and the island called Tine. Many however, of these, are de- 
serted, through fear of the pirates, and in many of them 
pirates dwell. There are also some other islands, of which we 
have previously made mention, and many besides which are 
not mentioned in this book. 

When the king of France had passed the Cape of Turkia, 
he came to the isle of Ehodes, and remained there some days 
at the city called Ehodes, which was built by Herod, who 
caused the head of Saint John the Baptist to be cut off, and 
given to the dancing damsel in a charger. Between the isle of 
Ehodes and Eomania there is a broad expanse of sea, twenty 
miles wide, according to the mariners. It is also worth know- 
ing, that when the isle of Ehodes has been reached, one third 
of the voyage has been accomplished between Acre and Brin- 
disi. Between Acre and Brindisi the distance is computed at 
one thousand eight hundred miles ; and between Marseilles 
and Sicily it is computed at one thousand six hundred miles ; 
and between Sicily and Acre the distance is computed at one 
thousand six hundred miles. In the middle of the passage 
between Marseilles and Sicily lies the island of Sardinia ; and 
in the middle of the passage betwen Sicily and Acre is the 
island of Crete. It is also worthy to be known, that, if they 
have a fair wind who are desirous to proceed from Marseilles 
62 Here we can recognize a name known to us, Corfu. 



A.D. 119L DESCRIPTION OF THE AECHIPELAGO. 251 

to Acre, they will leave the island of Sardinia, the island of 
Sicily, and the island of Crete at a great distance on the 
left side of the ship ; and, if they keep straight on in their 
course, 63 will not see land until they see the land of Sulia. This 
way also is the shorter and safer one ; but they must take care 
not to steer their course too much to the right hand side of the 
ship, on account of Barbary and many other islands in which 
the pagans live under the rule of the emperor of Africa. But gal- 
leys cannot go by that route, or even attempt it ; for, if a storm 
overtakes them, they will quickly founder ; for which reason 
they are obliged always to coast along the shore. The person, 
too, who wishes to pass along the coast of Romania, from the 
Cape of Turkia, will have to pass a very lofty mountain, which 
is called Serfent, near which mountain begins the Arm of 
Saint George, through which you pass to the city of Constan- 
tinople. 

Next, on the coast of Eomania, is Maluaise, a large moun- 
tain. Then comes the gulf of Witun, at the head of which 
gulf is a fine and well-fortified castle, which is called Maine. 
At the head of this gulf also is a fine large episcopal city, 
which is called Curun, where grow such large quantities of 
olives, that it is said that jn the whole world there is no place 
where there is made such vast quantities of olive oil. At the 
mouth of the said gulf of Witun is the deserted city of 
Muscun, which was destroyed by Roger, king of Sicily ; and, 
before the entrance of this city are two islands : one of which 
is called Sapientia, and the other the Isle of Vultures. After 
passing this, not more than about twenty miles from the land 
there is a crag of round form, and very dangerous, being nearly 
sunk in the waves, the name of which is Tiffat. Between this 
crag and Muscun, the distance is computed to be fifty miles. 
It is necessary for those who pass this way not to take their 
ships out to too great a distance from the shore, until they 
have passed this dangerous spot. 

Beyond this, about a hundred miles from this perilous 
spot, is an island out at sea called Serfent : this, and two other 
islands, one of which is called Cephalenia, and the other Jagert, 
are islands belonging to Margarite. Next comes port Guiscard. 
It deserves to be known that Robert Guiscard was born in 
Normandy, and, being made a knight, was long one of the 

63 He has already said this, in giving an account of the voyage of king 
Richard. 



252 ANNALS OP EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

household of Henry, king of England, son of "William the 
Bastard. Although he was a knight of prowess in arms, he 
was still unable to find any favour with the king, whereby to 
enrich himself. In consequence of this, with his wife and 
children and brother, he left Normandy and went to Rome ; 
where, having received from the Supreme Pontiff permission 
and advice to subjugate the barbarous nations, a great multi- 
tude of valiant men resorted to him as his adherents. On 
this, he departed thence, and, entering Apulia, on seeing that 
it was a fine and fertile country, and that its inhabitants were 
unskilled in arms, he often attacked them with a strong and 
armed hand, and conquered them, and took possession of their 
territory. The whole of Apulia, Calabria, and the principality 
of Capua he also subjugated, and, taking them out of the hands 
of the emperor of the Romans, gave them to his son Tancred. 

He then collected a large fleet, boasting that he would in- 
vade the empire of Constantinople, and subjugate the whole 
thereof. In the meantime, while his fleet was being equipped, 
it happened that he, and Tancred, and Boamund, his sons, on 
the same day, fought with our lord the pope, the emperor of 
the Romans, and the emperor of Constantinople ; Robert Guis- 
card himself engaging with the emperor of Constantinople, 
one of his sons with the pope, and the other with the em- 
peror of the Romans ; and he, and each of his sons, gained 
a victory on one and the same day. After this, Robert Guis- 
card embarked on board of his fleet, and his wife with him, and 
subjugated the island of Cuuerru, the island of Crete, the Isle 
of Rhodes, and many other islands, which he took from the em- 
peror of Constantinople. He next came to the harbour which 
now, after his name, is called Port Guiscard. While he was 
preparing to proceed thence, and to enter Romania, the empe- 
ror of Constantinople, being in great dread of his approach, sent 
word to his wife, that, if she would put to death the said 
Robert Guiscard, and so free his territories from all dread of him, 
he would marry her, and make her empress of Constantinople. 

On this, the woman agreed to what the emperor requested ; 
and, having gained an opportunity both as to time and place, 
gave her husband, Robert Guiscard, poison to drink : on which 
he died, and was buried in the island which to this day is called 
Port Guiscard, and the whole of his army was dispersed. The 
woman fled to the emperor of Constantinople, who imme- 
diately fulfilled all his promises, and married her, and had her 



A.D. 1191. EOGER CROWNED THE FIRST KING OF SICILY. 253 

crowned empress ; and when all the proper solemnities had 
been performed, both as to the marriage, the coronation, and 
the nuptial ceremonies, so becomingly, that she said to the 
emperor, " My lord, you have now graciously performed all 
the terms of our agreement, " the emperor caused silence to be 
made, and in the presence of all, showed the agreement which 
he had made with her, and how she had put her husband to 
death, and then requested them to pronounce judgment upon her; 
on which, they condemned her to death. Accordingly, she was 
removed from the nuptial ceremony to the place of punish- 
ment, and was thrown upon a lighted pile, and reduced to 
ashes. 

Roger, the brother of the said Guiscard, waged war with 
the people of Sicily, and subjected the whole of that island, 
and became the earl of Sicily. This Sicily is a large island, 
and, before the said Roger subdued it, was inhabited by pa- 
gans, and under the dominion of the emperor of Africa. But 
Roger before-mentioned, having expelled the pagans, esta- 
blished the Christian religion, and erected in it two arch- 
bishoprics and six bishoprics. After this, he married a wife, 
by whom he had an only son, whom, after his own name, he 
called Roger, and made him duke of Apulia, and gave to him 
Calabria and the principality of Capua, after the decease of 
Tancred, the son of Robert Guiscard, without issue. The said 
Roger, earl of Sicily, then died ; on which, his son Roger, 
duke of Apulia, succeeded him in the earldom of Sicily, and 
shortly after, with the consent of his earls and barons, caused 
himself to be crowned king of Sicily; and thus the said 
Roger was crowned the first king of Sicily. He married a 
wife, and by her had two sons and one daughter ; the first of 
whom was called Roger, and the other William, 64 while his 
daughter was called Constance. He gave to his eldest son the 
dukedom of Apulia and the principality of Capua. This son 
married against the will of his father, and by his wife had an 
only son, whom he called Tancred; after which he died, in the 
lifetime of his father. 

After this, his father died, who was king of Sicily, and was 
succeeded in the kingdom by his son William, who married, 
and by his wife had an only son, whom he called William, 
after his own name. This William, last-mentioned, succeeded 
his father in the kingdom, and gave to Tancred, the son of his 
* V. r. Walter. 



254 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

uncle, the earldom of Laleche. He also gave Constance, the 
sister of his uncle, in marriage to Henry, king of the Germans, 
son of Frederic, emperor of the Romans. He also caused the 
kingdom of Sicily to be secured to him on oath in succession 
to himself, in case he should die without issue ; shortly after 
which, "William, king of Sicily, married Joanna, daughter of 
Henry, king of England, son of the empress Matilda ; he died 
however, without issue. 

On his decease, Tancred, the earl of Laleche above-men- 
tioned, unmindful of the oath which, with the rest, he had taken 
to Henry, king of the Germans, usurped the kingdom of Sicily, 
and was crowned king thereof. On Henry, emperor of the 
Romans, hearing of this, he levied a large army and entered 
the territory of king Tancred, bringing with him his wife 
Constance, who was heir to the kingdom of Sicily ; and then 
laying siege to Salerno, within fifteen days, that place was sur- 
rendered to him and his wife, whom he left there. Proceeding 
thence he laid siege to Naples, where having stayed six weeks, 
in that time he lost nearly the whole of his army through pesti- 
lence ; he himself also fell sick and nearly died. When he saw 
that he could not effect his object, he took his departure, and 
went to his city of Milan. On the people of Salerno hearing 
of this, they laid hands on their mistress, the empress Constance, 
and detaining her, delivered her to Tancred, king of Sicily ; on 
which the emperor of Germany, grieving and in confusion at 
the loss of his wife, wrote to pope Celestinus, that by his aid 
he might recover her : and after some time, by the intervention 
of our lord the pope, he was restored to him. 

"When Philip, king of France, had taken his departure from 
the isle of Rhodes, and had come to the coast of Romania, he 
passed a great mountain which has the name of the Cape of 
Melia ; after which he came to the gulf of Witun, and passed 
by the castle of Maine. He next came to a city which is called 
Curun, and then to a deserted city, the name of which is Mun- 
zum, which lies at the end of that gulf. He then passed by 
the island of Triffat, and then came to the islands, of which the 
one is called Cephalenia and the other Fale de Compar. These 
two islands are called 66 Port Guiscard. On the opposite 
side, in Romania, there is a town called Saint Salvator, where, 
at nearly all seasons, pirates are lying in wait for passers-by. 

c6 This does not agree with what he has said before as to Cephalenia 
and Port Guiscard. See p. 251. 



r 1 



A.D. 1191. DESCRIPTION OP THE COAST OF EOMAN1A. 255 

On the king of France departing thence, he came to the island, 
the name of which is Cuuerfu. At the entrance of the isle of 
Cuuerfu, towards the land of Sulia, there are dangerous sands, 
extending through the middle from the island of Cuuerfu to 
the coast of Romania; the sea being not deeper upon the 
sands than four ells and a half. The island of Cuuerfu is large 
and fertile, and yields a yearly revenue to the emperor of Con- 
stantinople of fifteen quintals of gold a quintal being a hun- 
dred pounds. The island of Cuuerfu is six miles distant from 
Romania, and in some places the sea is so narrow between 
Cuuerfu and Romania, that from one shore to the other one 
man may be heard by another. The length of Cuuerfu is fifty 
miles ; and between Cuuerfu and Apulia, the distance is com- 
puted to be one hundred miles. Cuuerfu can easily be seen 
by those in Apulia, but not the converse, because Apulia lies 
low, and Cuuerfu is high land. 

At the extremity of the island of Cuuerfu, in Romania, 
there is a deserted castle, the name of which is Butentrost, in 
which the traitor Judas was born. After this, when you have 
almost come to the entrance of the straits, there is a deserted 
city at the extremity of the island of Cuuerfu, which is called 
Gaszope, in which there is such a vast quantity of serpents that 
no one dares to land near it on that side. Just opposite to 
it, on the coast of Romania, is a deserted city, the name of 
which is Santa Carenta, where there is a good harbour, wide 
and deep. At the mouth of this harbour, at the entrance of the 
straits, there is a rock resembling a half-ruined tower, which 
extends almost to the middle of the harbour and lies concealed 
beneath the waves, so that it is necessary for those passing by 
to hug the shore of the island of Cuuerfu. At the extremity of 
the island of Cuuerfu are four islands, the name of one of 
which is Fanum. After this, about forty miles from the island of 
Cuuerfu, there is a lofty mountain on a cape of Romania, which 
is called Paxo ; from this mountain to Octrente, 67 an archiepis- 
copal city in Apulia, is a distance of fifty miles ; and from this 
mountain to Brindisi, a hundred miles. 

At this mountain, called Paxo, begins the Gulf of Venice, 
which is a hundred and fifty miles in length and a hundred in 
width. Persons passing up this gulf, on their way to Venice, 
will leave behind Romania, Sclavonia, and Istria. In Apulia, 
on the sea-coast, are the ports known by the following names : 
6 ? Otranto. 



256 ASTNALS or EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

the first port of Apulia is called Leuke ; next to which is a 
port called Castre, then the port called Octrente, next the 
port called Leliche, and then the harbour called Brandiz, the 
same as Brindisi. After this, you come to the port of Mono- 
pola, and the port of Bar, where Saint Nicolas reposes ; then 
the port of Trani, and next the port of Barlet. You next 
come to the port of Sipontum, then the port of Bestia, and 
then that of Tremula. This port of Tremula is the last port 
of Apulia. After this comes Ortona, the first port of the ter- 
ritory of Venice ; then the port of Atri, and then the port of 
Pescara ; after which you come to the ports of Ancona, and of 
Ravenna, and then to Venice, a splenoid city with a fine har- 
bour. 

When the king of France had arrived at Cuuerfu, he sent 
envoys to king Tancred, and asked his permission to pass 
through his territories, which was accordingly granted him. 
He then came to Apulia, where he landed at Octrente, on the 
sixth day before the ides of October, being the fifth day of the 
week. Proceeding thence, he sent his forerunners to Henry, 
emperor of the Romans, and asked his leave to pass through 
his territories ; which permission was granted him. On his 
arrival at Rome, he said many evil things of the king of Eng- 
land, in presence of our lord the pope and of all the car- 
dinals, asserting that the king of England had forced him to 
leave the land of Jerusalem, and accusing him of treachery. 
However, neither our lord the pope nor the cardinals put any 
faith in his words, knowing that this proceeded rather from 
envy than from any bad conduct on the part of the king of 
England. Our lord the pope, however, received him with all 
honor and attention, and supplied him with all things neces- 
sary for a period of eight days. Moreover, in consideration of 
the love of God and his own affection, he devised a new method 
of relief for the pilgrims ; for, both the king, and all who 
had come with him, or who came after him, he absolved from 
their vows, and from going on the expedition to Jerusalem, 
and, even though they had not performed their vows, he still 
distributed palms among them, and hung crosses from their 
necks, thus enacting that they were pilgrims. After this, the 
king of France prevailed upon the emperor of the Romans to 
lay hands upon the king of England, in case he should pass 
through his territory. 
The king of France, upon arriving at length in his own terri- 



A.D. 1191. LETTER OF THE AECHBISHOP OF YOKE. 257 

tory, defamed the king of England with his neighbours, mak- 
ing many charges against him. Producing also the charter of 
the king of England which had been executed at Messina, he de- 
manded of William Fitz-Ralph, the seneschal of Normandy, his 
sister Alice, whom the king of England was to have taken to wife; 
the seneschal of ISTormandy, however, refused to give her up. 

In the same year, Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, while making 
his visitation of the houses of the religious in his diocese, 
came to the abbey of the nuns at Godstow, which lies between 
Oxford and Woodstock. On entering the church to pray, he 
saw a tomb in the middle of the choir, before the altar, covered 
with cloths of silk, and surrounded with lamps and tapers; on 
which he asked whose tomb it was, and was told that this was 
the tomb of Eosamond, who had formerly been the mistress of 
Henry, king of England, son of the empress Matilda, and that 
he, for love of her, had shown many favours to that church. On 
this the bishop made answer: " Take her away from here, for 
she was a harlot; and bury her outside of the church with the rest, 
that the Christian religion may not grow into contempt, and 
that other women, warned by her example, may abstain from 
illicit and adulterous intercourse;" which was accordingly 
done. 

In the same year, Hugh, bishop of Coventry, expelled the 
monks of Coventry from the cathedral church of his diocese, 
and placed canons secular therein. In the same year also, the 
monks of Canterbury made choice of Reginald, bishop of Bath, 
as their archbishop ; but just then he fell ill and died, fifteen 
days after his election, and was buried at Bath. In the same 
year, Hugh, bishop of Durham, in consequence of the feelings 
of indignation which he entertained towards Geoffrey, arch- 
bishop of York, used every possible endeavour to obtain a 
release from all subjection to him, on which the said Geoffrey 
wrote to him to the following effect : 

The Letter of Geoffrey, archbishop of York, to Hugh, bishop of 
Durham. 

" Geoffrey, by the grace of God, archbishop of York and 
primate of England, to Hugh, by the same grace, bishop of 
Durham, greeting. While, with all ardour you have been 
hastening onward with impetuous career to reach the highest 
position among the clergy, you have made choice to become the 
master of all others, and wish to be subject to no one. And 

VOL. II. 8 



258 ANNALS OF ROGEE DE E.OVEDEX. A.D. 1191. 

indeed in your case we see the words fulfilled, * I will ascend 
into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God : 
I will be like the most High ;' 69 while you do not keep in 
mind the words, ' God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to 
the humble; 570 and that < He that exalteth himself shall be 
abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.' 71 For 
both ourselves and our church of York you are zealously, in- 
deed with the ardour of an enemy, attacking, contrary to your 
own profession and the obedience due to ourselves and to the 
church of York ; desiring to withdraw and exempt yourself, 
which may God prevent, from our jurisdiction. Wherefore we, 
wishing, as becomes us, to consult the rights of our church and 
our own dignity, do, by the Apostolic authority and our own, 
strictly enjoin you, as being our suffragan, on the Monday 
next ensuing after the feast of Saint Michael, to be present at 
York at the synod held there in our mother church, and on no 
pretext whatsoever to delay so to do, for the purpose of shewing 
due reverence to ourselves, and of paying canonical obedience, 
in conformity with the Apostolic mandate oftentimes shewn to 
you by our letters and in our behalf ; as also to make answer 
why for the last two years you have presumed, contrary to the 
ordinances of the law, to deprive our church of York of the 
processions from ancient times its due, and the oblations due on 
the day of Pentecost, from Hovedenshire and Alvertonshire, 72 
and why, not dreading to put your sickle in the harvest of 
another, you have usurped the power to administer in spiritual 
things to our clergy and those of our diocese." 

On hearing this, Hugh, bishop of Durham, would neither come 
to him nor do obedience or make profession thereof to him. For 
he said that he had once already done obedience and made pro- 
fession to the church of York, and to Roger, archbishop of that 
see, and that he was not by law bound to repeat it; and, in order 
that the said archbishop might not oppress him as to this 
matter, he appealed to the presence of the Supreme Pontiff i 
first, second, and third time, submitting himself and the cause 
of his church to the decision of our lord the pope and of the 
Roman Church. The archbishop, however, not paying any 
regard to the appeal of the bishop of Durham, in the spirit of 
his wrath pronounced sentence of excommunication against 

69 Is. xiv. 13, 14. 70 James iv. 5. 1 Pet. v. 6. 

7i St. Luke xiv. 11, xviii. 4. " The districts of Howden and 

North Allerton. 



A.D. 1191. LETTER OF POPE CELESTHfrS. 259 

the bishop of Durham, relying on the mandate of our lord the 
pope, in which it was stated, that if the bishop of Durham 
should either be unwilling, or should improperly delay to 
pay to him due obedience, he was, all appeal removed, to 
compel him by ecclesiastical censure so to do. However, the 
bishop of Durham, though he saw that sentence of excom- 
munication was pronounced against him, after appeal made by 
him to the presence of the Supreme Pontiff, determined not to 
observe it, but celebrated Divine service, and caused it to be 
celebrated just as boldly as before. 

On this, the archbishop broke down the altars where the bishop 
of Durham had celebrated divine service, and broke the chalices 
with which any one had performed service in his presence in 
his own diocese ; he also held as excommunicated his brother 
John, earl of Mortaigne, because he had eaten in company 
with the bishop of Durham after that sentence was pronounced, 
and refused to hold communication with him till he should 
come to be absolved, and to make due satisfaction. 

When the bishop of Durham found that most people avoided 
speaking, and eating or drinking with him, he sent mes- 
sengers to pope Celestinus, to relate to him, first in private, 
and afterwards in presence of all the cardinals, how rashly 
the archbishop of York had pronounced sentence of excommu- 
nication against him, paying no regard whatever to his appeal. 
On learning this, our lord the pope and all the cardinals pro- 
nounced the sentence to be null, and that it should not be 
observed. Accordingly, our lord the pope wrote to the follow- 
ing effect : 

The Letter of pope Celestinus, nullifying the sentence pronounced 

upon the bishop of Durham. 

11 Celestinus, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his venerable brethren the bishops of Lincoln and Eochester, 
and to his dearly beloved son the abbat of Burgh, health and 
the Apostolic benediction. Whereas the things which are 
enacted by our venerable brethren our fellow bishops, with 
prudent circumspection and due precaution, we ought to pre- 
serve inviolate, so in like manner those things which are done 
inconsiderately, it is our bounden duty to correct with a more 
extended foresight, and to reinstate the same in their proper 
position. Now inasmuch as our venerable brother Geoffrey, arch- 
bishop of York, has pronounced sentence of excommunication 

s2 



260 AtfNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEJf. A. D. 1191. 

against our venerable brother Hugh, bishop of Durham, and 
certain other persons, and, messengers from them having come to 
our presence, a full discussion has been held on both sides in our 
consistory in relation to the said sentence and certain other mat- 
ters ; we, considering that the sentence that has been fulmi- 
nated against him as well as against the other persons, has 
been inconsiderately pronounced, and corroborated by no 
grounds of reasonable cause for the same, have, by the**advice of 
our brethren, publicly pronounced that the same shall not hold 
good, nullifying the same, and forbidding that it shall have any 
authority whatever. To the end, therefore, that what we have 
decreed may in your country be publicly promulgated, we do, by 
these Apostolical writings, command you to declare through- 
out your churches, that the said sentence has been nullified by 
the authority of the Apostolic See ; that the faithful may in 
security live in brotherly communion both with the others as 
well as with the bishop so unjustly put under the said ban, and 
may not in any way avoid intercourse with them on account 
thereof. Given at the Lateran." 

In addition to this, our lord the pope, by other letters, 
directed the said bishops of Lincoln and Rochester and 
abbat of Burgh, that if they should ascertain that, after appeal 
made to the Roman Pontiff, the archbishop of York had 
broken the altars and chalices with which the bishop of Dur- 
ham, either himself or by means of another, had celebrated the 
mass, then, by reason thereof the bishop of Durham should not 
be bound to make any submission to the said archbishop of 
York so long as the two should live. When the said arch- 
bishop and bishop had come into the presence of the said 
delegates at Northampton and a long discussion had taken place 
on both sides in relation to the above matters, at length, by the 
advice and suggestion of the lord bishop of Lincoln, the dis- 
cussion was postponed till the octave of the Nativity of Saint 
John the Baptist, in order that, mutually anticipating the de- 
cision, they might, by the grace of God, be more easily induced 
to agree to a full reconciliation, all things in the meantime 
in dispute between them remaining in the same state in which 
they then were. It was further resolved, that if a reconcilia- 
tion could not in the meantime be effected, the letters directed 
by our lord the pope to the delegates, should have the same force 
that they would have had, if the said space of time had not in- 
tervened ; for such time all exceptions on both sides being saved 



A.D. 1191. LETTER OF POPE CELESTINUS. 2f)l 

and reserved ; it being also arranged that the citation, if it 
should be necessary to be made, should be made at the end of 
the said intervening time, and in like form to that used on the 
day on which it had first been made, that is to say, on the day 
of Saint Calixtus. 

In the same year, Roger, the constable of Chester, in whose 
hands the chancellor had placed the castles of Nottingham and 
Tickhill, took two prisoners, Alan de Lee and Peter de Bouen- 
court, of the number of those to whom he had entrusted the 
charge of the said castles, and hanged them both, because they 
had consented to the treachery of Robert de Crokston and Eudo 
de Diville, who had delivered those castles to John, earl of 
Mortaigne. The earl of Mortaigne, being exasperated at this, 
laid waste the whole of his lands which were in his juris- 
diction. 

In the same year, "William, king of the Scots, sent his 
envoys to Celestinus, the Supreme Pontiff, for the purpose of 
confirming the liberties of the churches of his realm, and found 
grace in the eyes of our lord the pope ; upon which our lord 
the pope wrote to him to the following effect : 

" Celestinus, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his most dearly beloved son in Christ, William, the illustrious 
king of the Scots, health, and the Apostolic benediction. 
Whereas all who are subject to the yoke of Christ ought to 
find favour and protection with the Apostolic See ; still those, 
in especial, is it right to strengthen, with every possible en- 
couragement, whose fidelity and dutifulness have been in many 
instances experienced; to the end that they may be more 
fully induced to gain the favour of His love, and with more 
duteous affection show Him all reverence, the more they feel 
assured that they shall obtain the pledge of His benevolence 
and favour. Wherefore, most dearly beloved son in Christ, 
holding in mind the feelings of reverence and dutifulness which, 
for a long time past, we have known you to entertain towards 
the Roman Church, in the page of this present writing we have 
thought fit to enact that the Scottish Church shall be subject to 
the Apostolic See, as an especial daughter thereof, without the 
intervention of any person whatever ; in which the following 
are recognized as the episcopal sees, namely, the churches 
of Saint Andrew's, Glasgow, Dunkeld, Dumblane, Brechin, 
Aberdeen, Moray, Ross, and Caithness. Also, it is to be lawful 
for no one but the Roman Pontiff, or his legate l a later e^ to 



262 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOYEDEN". A.D. 1191. 

pronounce against the kingdom of Scotland sentence of excom- 
munication or interdict ; and, if such shall be pronounced, we do 
hereby decree that the same shall be of no effect. We do also 
add that to no one in future, who is not a native of the kingdom 
of Scotland, shall it be permitted to exercise the office of the 
legateship therein, except such person as for that especial pur- 
pose the Apostolic See shall have commissioned from its own 
body. "We do also forbid that the disputes which shall have 
arisen as to possessions in that kingdom shall be brought for 
judgment before judges appointed out of that kingdom, except 
in case of appeal to the Church of Rome. And further, if any 
writings shall appear in contravention of this statute of liberties 
which have been already obtained, or if hereafter such shall 
happen to be obtained, mention not being made therein of this 
concession ; in such case nothing shall hence arise to the pre- 
judice of yourself or your kingdom in relation to the concession 
of this prerogative. And further, the liberties and immunities 
granted to you, or to your kingdom, or to the churches estab- 
lished therein by the Pontiffs of Rome, our predecessors, and 
hitherto observed, we do hereby ratify, and do enact that the 
same shall remain, to all future time, inviolate. Let no man, 
therefore, presume to infringe upon the enactments of this page 
of our constitution and prohibition, or in any way to contra- 
vene the same. And if any one shall presume so to do, let 
him know that he will incur the indignation of Almighty God 
and of the holy Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Given 
at the Lateran, on the third day before the ides of March, in 
the first year of our pontificate." 

In the same year, after the rebuilding of Cesaraea and Joppa, 
the Idng of England gave them both to Geoffrey de Lusignan, 
brother of king Guido. After this, the king of England for- 
tified the castle of Planes, and then the castle of Maen ; and 
on the second day before the Nativity of our Lord, he came 
to Tours des Chanalets, and remained there during the 
Kativity of our Lord ; after which, he wished to proceed 
to lay siege to the city of Jerusalem ; but the duke of Burgundy 
and the French refused to follow him : saying, that the king 
of France, their lord, forbade them at his departure to stay 
any longer in that land. In consequence of this, the king of 
England was forced to desist from his purpose, as both men 
and money failed him. 

. In the same year, Boyac El Emir Amimoli, the emperor 



A.D. 1191. JTJEISDICTIOtf OP THE ARCHBISHOP OP TOLEDO, 263 

of Africa, (who in the previous year had entered the territory 
of the king of Portugal with a large army, and had taken a 
castle called Torrenova, and laid siege to a castle called Thomar, 
and abandoned them both to the Christians, through fear of 
the pilgrims who had come in the fleet of the king of Eng- 
land, and who, taking to flight, had pretended that he was 
dead, as already mentioned, 72 ) after all the fleet of the king of 
England had passed by, assembled a large army, and again 
entered the territories of the king of Portugal, and took by 
storm the city of Sylves, and Alcaz, and Almada, and Palmella, 
and laid waste the territory of the Christians. The king of 
Portugal, however, was unable to make head against his forces, 
and Boyac El Emir Amimoli gave the before-named cities 
which he had taken, to his brother, the king of Cordres, or 
Corduba. 

It is worthy of remark, that in the territories of the king of 
Navarre there is only one episcopal city, the name of which is 
Pampeluna ; but there are many castles in this territory ; one 
of which is Tudela, situate on the river Ebro, another is 
called L'Estella, and there are many others besides. In the 
territories of the king of Castille there is only one archiepis- 
copal city, the name of which is Tulette, 73 and which lies on 
the river Tagus, and has the primacy of Spain ; in the 
same state there is also an episcopal city, the bishop of which 
is called the bishop of Muscerause, that is to say, Suriens. 7 * 
In the same city there is a mountain from which every day 
there are taken more than a hundred camel loads [of earth], 
and yet it never decreases ; for although a cavern of very great 
depth is thereby made, still by the next day it is filled up if 
rain had fallen upon it. The earth that is taken thence is car- 
ried throughout the adjoining provinces, and is sold for the 
purpose of washing the hands and clothes of men, both Chris- 
tians and pagans. 

The archbishop of Toledo has under him eleven suffragan 
bishops; namely, the bishop of Muscerause, the bishop of 
Alarchas, which is near Cordres, or Corduba, the bishop of 
Plazencia, the bishop of Trugel, 75 the bishop of Avila, the 
bishop of Segovia, the bishop of Alarghes, the bishop of Si- 
guenza, the bishop of Soyra, the bishop of Osma, the bishop 
of Palencia, and the bishop of Bursa. In the kingdom also of 

See p. 148. Toledo. 7 * It does not appear what place is 
meant, but it may possibly be Servienza. The text here is very defective. 
* 5 Perhaps Teruei. 



264 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1191. 

the king of Castille there are more than two hundred fine 
castles, of which one is called Le Gruin. 

In the territory of the king of Saint Jago there is one arch- 
bishopric, namely, that of Saint Jago ; 76 which has under 
it eleven suffragans, namely, the bishop of Leon, the bishop of 
Sturghe, 77 the bishop of Auzemore, 78 the bishop of Salamanca, 
the bishop of Citras Rodrike, 79 the bishop of Cooire, 80 the 
bishop of Santa Maria de Lugo, the bishop of Saint Salvador de 
Wede, the bishop of Yillamaur, the bishop of Orense, and the 
bishop of Tiue. 81 In the kingdom of the king of Saint Jago 
there are also many castles. 

In the territory of the king of Portugal there is one arch- 
bishopric, at a city called Braga ; which has seven suffragans, 
namely, the bishop of Portigal, 82 the bishop of Cuvillana, the 
bishop of Lamego, the bishop of "VViscou, 83 the bishop of Cu- 
numbre, 84 the bishop of Evere, 85 on the borders of the Saracens, 
and the bishop of Lisbon, on the river Tagus. 

Thence extends the part of Spain, which is called Saracenic, 
under the dominion of the emperor of Africa ; and here begins 
the territory held by the king of Cordres, or Corduba, the 
brother of El Emir Amimoli before-named ; the same place as 
Corduba, the city of which Lucan says, 

" Corduba me genuit, rapuit Nero, prselia dixi, 
Quae gessere pares, hinc socer, inde gener." ^ 

Here are also the cities of Palmella, Almada, Alchaz, Sylves, 
and Santa Maria de Hairun, the city of Badeluz, upon the 
river Guadiana, Merida, which was formerly an archiepiscopal 
city, Sibylla, 87 which also was formerly an archiepiscopal city, 
and which, with Corduba, is situate on the river Guadalquivir, 
the city of Granada, and the city of Jubellaria. 38 

Next begins the territory of the king of Gahang, likewise 
in Spain, and under the emperor of the Africans; this king also is 
brother of El Emir Amimoli, and has under his rule the castle 
of Gehem, and the city of Baence, the city of Aubdene, the city 
of Segurra, as also the city of Malaga, where large quantities of 
red morocco leather are made, and the city of Melita, on an 
inlet of the sea ; each of which is situate on a river which is 
called Segura. Next, still in Saracenic Spain, begins the ter- 

76 Or Compostella. 77 Astorga. 78 Probably Zamora. 

Cuidad Rodrigo. 8 Coira. 81 Tuy. 82 Oporto. 

83 Viseu. 84 Coimbra. 85 Evora. 8G This has been 

previously translated in p. 155. 87 Seville. ** Gibraltar. 



A.D. 1192. EZN'G PHILIP ARRIVES IN FKANCE. 265 

ritory of the king of Miircia, who is a brother of the said El 
Emir Amimoli ; and in whose rule are the city of Murcia, the 
castle of Oriola, the castle of Urgelet, the city of Almeria, the 
city of Carthagena, the castle of Chinchele, and the castle of 
Lapanne de Scumpere. Next, still in Saracenic Spain, begin 
the territories of the king of Valencia, who is brother of the 
said Ernir Amimoli, and under whose rule are the castles of 
Oedeeb, and Stuve, the city of Valencia, the city of Burrianz, 
and Peniscle, and many other fortified places. 

Next begins the territory of the king of Arragon, in Spain ; 
at the commencement of whose kingdom is the castle of Ampost, 
and next the episcopal city of Tortosa. Then comes Saragossa, 
an episcopal city, then the castle of Caletau, then the castle of 
Doroke, then the castle of Torol, and then Santa Maria Aben- 
razin, a city on the borders of the Christians and the pagans. 
Next comes Tarragona, an archiepiscopal city, then Tarra- 
guna, an episcopal city, then the city of Oske, then the city 
of Jake, and then the city of Bide, upon the river Segre. 
After this comes the city of Wike, then the city of Barcelona, 
then Sain de Urget, 88 then the city of Gironda, then the castle 
of Turezla, the name of which once was Purpallar Beyond 
Sea. After this come the high mountains called Portas de 
Laduse, then Chastillon, and, after that, the castle d'Em- 
pires. 

Next to this comes the land called Roussillon, in which 
there is a fine city called Alne, and then the city of Nar- 
bonne, after which come the cities of Bediers, and of Agde, and 
then Villeneuve, the bishopric of Magdalena, near to which 
is the port of Montpellier, which is called Lates. 89 There are 
also many other castles and cities in the kingdom of the king 
of Arragon, as already mentioned. 

In the year of grace 1 192, being the third year of the reign 
of Richard, king of the English, Philip, king of France, was 
in France safe and sound, at Fontaine Blaud, 90 on the day of the 
Nativity of our Lord, which fell on the fourth day of the week, 
insolently boasting that he would before long lay waste the 
territories of the king of England. On the same day of the 
Nativity of our Lord, John, earl of Mortaigne, brother of 
Richard, king of England, was at Hovedene, together with 
Hugh, bishop of Durham. On the same day of the Nativity 

88 Seu d'Urgel. 89 Probably a misprint for Cette. 

* Now Fontainebleau. 



266 A^NAJIS OF KOGEB. DE HOVEDEtf. A.D. 1102. 

of our Lord, queen Eleauor, mother of Hi chard, king of Eng- 
land, was at Normandy, at Bonville sur Toke. 

On the same day of the Nativity of our Lord, Richard, king 
of England, was in the land of Sulia, at Tours, of Ascalon, 
intending, after the Nativity of our Lord, to lay siege to the 
city of Jerusalem ; and, on the day of Saint Hilary, he held 
a conference there with the Templars and Hospitallers and the 
whole army, as to besieging the city of Jerusalem. However, 
they were of opinion that he ought not to move onward, but 
that he should return for the purpose of fortifying Ascalon ; 
on which, he proceeded to Ascalon, and fortified it, and in for- 
tifying it expended a considerable time. 

Fifteen days before Easter, the duke of Burgundy and the 
Franks left him, saying that they would stay no longer with 
him, unless he would supply them with necessaries ; but the 
king declined to supply them with anything. During Lent, 
the king of England fortified Blanchward, Galatia, and 
Gazere ; and on Easter day he held there a general festival, 
in tents outside of the town. After Easter, he rode through 
the territories of the pagans, and found their corn ripe; 
on which, he caused it all to be gathered by the Christians, 
as forming half their supply of corn. He made a stay on the 
plains of Ascalon until Pentecost, and, on the last day of 
Pentecost, rode to Le Damn, a strongly-fortified castle, near 
the great river Euphrates, and in this excursion took prisoners 
twenty-four pagans and one Ren, who had formerly been a 
Christian, and had denied our Lord Jesus Christ ; on which, 
the king set him up as a mark for arrows, and he was 
pierced to death. On the Monday after the close of Pentecost, 
he laid siege to Le Darun, and on the Friday following took it 
by storm, and found there nineteen hundred pagans alive, 
whom he at once gave to Henry, count of Champagne. 

In the meantime, after Easter, a great dissension had arisen 
between the Pisans and the Genoese who were before Acre ; 
so much so, that they slew one another ; and the duke of Bur- 
gundy, at the request of the Genoese, sent to Tyre for the 
marquis Conrad, wishing to appoint him king. On this, the 
Pisans sent to the king of England, who at this time was stay- 
ing at Ascalon, and informed him of the intentions of the 
duke of Burgundy. Accordingly, the king came to Acre, and 
demanded of the duke of Burgundy fifteen hundred pounds of 
silver which he had lent him ; on which, the duke, not having 



A.D. 1192. THE SPIES EETTJEN TO THE XlffG OF EXGLASTD. 267 

wherewithal to pay, delivered to the king Carakois, the Sara- 
cen, in full satisfaction of the debt. 

After this, the king returned to Ascalon ; and, while he was 
staying there, two of the servants of the king of the Accini, 
or Assassins, who had for a long time served at the court of 
the marquis Conrad, and had been members of his household, 
slew the said Conrad, in his city of Tyre ; on which, they 
were immediately arrested by the bystanders. This took 
place on the fifth day before the calends of May. On being 
interrogated, they said that they had done this by command of 
the king of the Accini, their master ; upon which, one of them 
was immediately put to death, while the other was flayed 
alive. The Franks, however, averred that this was entirely done 
by the suggestion of the king of England. After the assassi- 
nation of Conrad, his wife married Henry, count of Champagne, 
the nephew of the king of England and the king of France ; 
immediately on which, by the choice of the whole army, the 
said Henry was elected king of the land of Jerusalem. The 
king of England also gave to king Guido the island of Tyre, 
in exchange, to hold the same for life. After the capture of 
Damn, that is to say, on the same Friday on which the king 
of England had taken it, the Franks returned to Ascalon, and 
placed themselves at the mercy of the king of England : on 
which, the king came there to meet them, and afterwards, 
with the consent of the whole army, marched forward to lay 
siege to Jerusalem. 

When they had come as far as Bethonople, the king rode on 
with some of them to view Jerusalem ; and then proceeded 
to the chapel of Saint Elias, which is three leagues distant 
from Jerusalem. Here he found a certain cross of wood, said to 
be made of the wood of that of our Lord, sealed up within the 
walls of a chapel, which was called the Cross of the Syrians ; 
upon which, he carried it away, and returned to his army. In 
the meantime, his spies returned to the king of England, and 
informed him that a caravan of Saladin was coming from Baby- 
lon to Jerusalem, for the purpose of supplying it with provisions 
and arms : the king, accordingly, believed them, and, taking 
with him five thousand picked men, went to meet the caravan, 
which was escorted by eleven thousand pagans. The king met 
them on the vigil of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, at 
about the first hour of the day, and, engaging with them, gained 
a victory, and slew nearly the whole of them, taking possession 



268 AJfNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1192. 

of their spoils, with three thousand camels, and four thousand 
horses and mules and she-mules, besides those that were killed. 

After having gained this victory, the king returned to Beth- 
onople, whence he had set out, and gave to the knights of the 
army a portion of the spoils of the slain. After this, holding 
a conference with the duke of Burgundy and the Franks, he 
offered to make oath that he would proceed to Jerusalem and 
lay siege to it, and not depart therefrom as long as he had a single 
horse left to eat, until he had taken the city, and requested 
that the Franks and the whole of the army would take the same 
oath. On this, the duke of Burgundy and the Franks made 
answer that they would not take the oath, or remain any longer 
in the land, but would depart from it as soon as they could, 
in obedience to the commands given to them by the king of 
France, their master. Accordingly, they left the king upon 
bad terms, and returned to Acre, the king following them. 
On this, Saladin immediately came down from the moun- 
tains, and laid siege to Joppa, which the king of England had 
delivered into the charge of Alberic de Rains ; and, as he 
found himself unable to defend it, he surrendered it to Saladin, 
upon condition that he might depart with safety to life 
and limb. However, after having received from Saladin the 
selected arrow as a sign of the treaty with him, on hearing of 
the approach of the king of England, he returned to Saladin, 
and gave back to him his arrow, and renounced the treaty. 
Upon this, Saladin immediately took him prisoner, and cap- 
tured the whole of the city, with the exception of the fortress 
of the castle ; to which a few retired and sent word to the 
king of England to inform him of these recent events : im- 
mediately upon which, he gave his troops, consisting of horse, 
to Henry, count of Champagne, for the purpose of being led 
thither by land, while he himself, with only seven galleys, 
proceeded by sea. On the third day, being Saturday, he 
arrived at Joppa, on the morning after the feast of Saint Peter 
ad Vincula ; on which, he entered the castle, and had an inter- 
view with his people there, instructing them to follow him. 
After this, he went forth and a few with him, and suddenly 
made an attack upon the army of Saladin, and, shouting his 
war-cry, he valiantly charged them, and drove them out of the 
city, and slew many of them with the edge of the sword, and 
so liberated the city from their hands. 

Three days after this, Saladin sent word to the king that he 



A.D. 1192. THE KIXG OF ENGLAND LANDS AT GAZERA. 269 

would fight him in a pitched battle ; which message greatly 
pleased the king. But, just as everything had been ready 
prepared for the pitched battle, five galleys arrived from Acre 
with soldiers, by way of succour for the king : upon which, 
Saladin declined to engage with him. 

In the meantime, Hugh, duke of Burgundy, Ralph de 
Courcy, and the viscount de Pinkenny, died at Acre, on the 
eighth day after their arrival there. Shortly after, Saladin 
sent word to the king of England that he would repay him 
all his expenses which he had been put to in fortifying Ascalon, 
and would make with him and the other Christians who should 
remain in the land of Jerusalem a truce to last for three years, 
from Easter then next ensuing, and would keep the peace 
with them until the said time, if he would reinstate Ascalon 
in the same condition in which he himself had left it. Ac- 
cordingly, the king of England, seeing that both men and 
money and health were failing him, by the advice of the Tem- 
plars and of the whole army, closed with the said offer which 
Saladin had made him : on which, upon oath, they agreed that 
peace should be observed for that period. 

After this, the king of England placing everything in the 
hands of Henry, count of Champagne, hastened to return to his 
kingdom, by reason of the sinister reports which he had heard 
both as to the king of France and the expulsion of his chan- 
cellor, as also the earl of Mortaigne, his brother, who had seized 
the castles of the kingdom, and would have taken possession 
of the whole thereof if he could have found the opportunity. 
Accordingly, the king of England came to Caiaphas, where he 
fell sick, and proceeded thence- to Acre. Here, after the feast 
of Saint Michael, being the eighth day before the ides of Oc- 
tober, and the fifth day of the week, he embarked on board of 
a large buss, and, within a month from that day, arrived at the 
island of Cuuerfu, where he went on board a boat, and sailed 
towards three galleys which he saw on the opposite side off the 
coast of Romania, and hired them to take him as far as Ra- 
gusa, for two hundred marks of silver; after which, he re- 
turned to his buss, and the said galleys with him ; and, having 
made terms with them, he took with him Baldwin, the advocate 
of Bethune, and twenty other companions, and embarked on 
board one of the said galleys ; and on landing at Gazera, near 
Ragusa, declined to tell them that he was king of England, 
but said that they were pilgrims. However, although he had a 



270 ANNALS OF EDGES DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1192. 

long beard and long hair and garments, and everything else to 
resemble the people of that country, he was unable to remain 
unknown, in consequence of his great expenditure, which was 
quite foreign to the usage of the people of that country. 

Immediately, the people of the province guessing that he 
was the king of England, prepared to capture him and deli- 
ver him to the emperor of the Romans, who hated him, on 
account of the aid he had given to king Tancred, and for the 
death of his kinsman, the marquis Conrad. Upon the king of 
England being informed of this by one of his followers, he 
placed his retinue in charge of Baldwin, the Advocate of 
Bethune, and ordered him to remain the next four days at that 
place, making a more lavish expenditure than he himself had 
done ; after which, he himself, with a single attendant, 
having mounted a swift horse, his attendant doing the same, 
set out late at night, and, hastening day and night, arrived 
in the neighbourhood of Vienna ; at a little village, not far 
from which place he and his attendant took up their abode. 
While the king's attendant was gone to buy food, the king, 
being fatigued by the labour of his journey, immediately 
threw himself upon a bed and fell asleep. In the meantime, 
his attendant, while endeavouring to exchange some money, 
was recognized by a servant of .the duke of Austria, and taken 
prisoner, and brought before the duke ; and, when he could 
conceal it no longer, disclosed to him the lodging of the king ; 
on which, they came, and, finding him asleep, took him pri- 
soner. As for the Advocate of Bethune, and those who were 
with him, on attempting to leave the town, they were taken 
prisoners, and not allowed to depart. 

In the meantime, the king of France, holding a conference 
with the seneschal and nobles of Normandy, demanded of them 
his sister, Alice, whom they had in their charge in the castle 
of Rouen : he also demanded the castle of Gisors, the county 
of Auch, and the county of Aumarle, and showed him the 
written agreement made between him and the king of England, 
at Messina. To this, the nobles of Normandy made answer 
that they had received no commands upon the subject from 
their master, and were, therefore, unwilling to comply with 
his demands. 

Upon this, the king of France, levying a large army, was 
desirous to invade Normandy in a hostile manner, but the 
nobles of his kingdom would not agree thereto, saying that our 



A.D. 1192. THE NUNS O.F SAINT CLEMENT'S APPEAL TO THE POPE. 271 

lord the pope had excommunicated all those who should make 
war on the territory of the king of England before his return, 
and that they had sworn to keep the peace towards him and 
his territory until his return. 

During Lent, in the same year, the archbishop of York 
came to London by command of the king's justices; but 
when he came to Westminster with his cross, he was forbidden by 
the bishop of London and the other bishops of England thence- 
forth to presume to carry his cross in the province of Canter- 
bury. On this, he contumaciously made answer that he would 
not lay it aside for them ; but, listening to the advice of his 
own people, he hid it from before the face of the people, lest a 
tumult might arise among the clergy. The bishop of London, 
however, holding him as an excommunicated person, in con- 
sequence of this transgression, suspended the New Temple, 
at which place the said archbishop of York had taken up his 
abode, from the performance of Divine service and from the 
ringing of bells, and in consequence, he was obliged to leave 
the city ; but before he left, queen Eleanor, the archbishop 01 
llouen, himself, and all the nobles of the kingdom, met to- 
gether and swore fealty and faithful service to Kichard, king 
of England, and his heir, against all men. 

During the same Lent, the bishop of Ely, the chancellor, 
returned to England, by command of the earl of Mortaigne, 
and remained some days in the castle at Dover, not daring to 
proceed any further. The earl of Mortaigne, however, in con- 
sideration of five hundred pounds of silver which the chancellor 
had promised him for the restoration of his office, tried in every 
way to induce the chief men of the kingdom to receive the 
chancellor in his former position ; but they refused, and sent 
word to the chancellor, that if he did not make haste and leave 
the kingdom with all speed, they would take him prisoner. On 
hearing this, the chancellor, not daring to stay in England against 
the will of the chief men, crossed over at the Supper of our Lord. 

In the same year, Geoffrey, archbishop of York, gave, and by 
his charter confirmed, the priory of Saint Clement's, at York, to 
the abbey of Godstow. But the nuns of Saint Clement's, who 
had always been free from the very foundation of that church, 
refused to pay obedience to the abbey of Godstow, and appealed 
to our lord the pope in behalf of the liberties of their church. 

In the meantime, the clerks of the archbishop of llouen, 



272 AJfNALS OF BOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1192. 

whom he had sent to Borne to oppose the chancellor, wrote to 
him to the following effect : 

The Letter sent ly Ms clerics to Walter, archbishop of Rouen. 

"To Walter, by the grace of God archbishop of Rouen, 
their most dear lord and father, his clerks, greeting. We will 
omit the perils and labours which in our journey we have 
oftentimes been obliged to endure, and how, after having 
frequently escaped from dangers by the way, we at length fell 
into the hands of robbers, and, being despoiled of all our pro- 
perty, except a few horses and our letters, arrived destitute 
of all provision whatever in this magnificent city, on the third 
day before the ides of February, the court then staying at the 
church of Saint Peter. Here we found the clerks sent by 
the chancellor, uttering many boasts, and, as it appeared to us, 
exulting in complete success. For the office in full of legate 
having been granted to him, our lord the pope and certain of 
the cardinals had sent letters to the bishop of Ely addressed 
therein as legate, but the principal letters conferring the legate- 
ship under the authority of the bull not having been yet de- 
livered, the deputies before-mentioned were preparing for their 
speedy departure. Moreover, we found the pope fully inclined 
to take the part of the chancellor ; while those who, as his 
familiar friends, are much in the society of our lord the pope, 
and are constantly at his side, were promoting his interests as 
though they were their own. However, by the grace of God, 
in consequence of our arrival, those letters were detained, some 
persons who zealously attend to our interests, often and re- 
peatedly remarking that the presence of your deputies had 
hitherto been much needed. After this, as soon as we had ob- 
tained permission, having gained an audience, in the presence of 
our lord the pope and the whole of the cardinals, we presented 
the letters sent by you, and by the bishops, prelates, and justi- 
ciaries of England, with due care adding thereto all other 
things that we believed were consistent with your intentions. 
After the deputies of the bishop of Ely had made an attempt 
to raise objections both to our answers and our assertions, our 
lord the pope made many remarks militating against your in- 
terests, with indignation and bitterness, inculcating in many 
words, and affirming as follows : We know that the illustri- 



A.D. 1192. LETTEK TO THE AliCHBISHOP OF EOUEX. 273 

ous king of the English left the administration of the whole 
of his kingdom to our lord of Ely, and left no one his equal 
or superior. We have seen letters of our lord the king to 
that effect ; those which revoke them or are contrary thereto 
we have not seen, nor do we see, nor yet a signed copy thereof 
with the seals thereto appended and duly authenticated. 
However, many venerable persons have written against the 
lord chancellor ; and in favour of the lord chancellor we have 
received letters from many venerable persons. But the letters 
that you bring are from those who have expelled the lord 
chancellor ; and we are not very much surprised if they do 
seem to write in their own favour. "We know that our lord 
the king never showed to any mortal so much love, or paid 
such high honor, as he has done to our lord of Ely. He made 
him not only bishop of the venerable and most wealthy see of 
Ely, but his chancellor as well, and, besides, has entrusted 
to his sole charge the whole of the kingdom of England. 
And yet, with all this our lord the king was not content, but 
begged our lord Clement of happy memory, and ourselves as 
well, to bestow the office of legate upon the lord chancellor. 
Consider how affectionately he loved him ; what man is there 
whom he loves as much, or has loved ? At the entreaty of our 
lord the king, and at his urgent request, we have granted the 
legateship for the present to the lord bishop of Ely. That the 
king has withdrawn such great favour thus suddenly from the 
man whom he used to love we can hardly believe, unless we 
see his letter and the royal seal. And what we have granted 
to our lord the king, to wit, the legateship of our lord of Ely, 
we cannot possibly suspend or take away without suffering the 
stigma of falsehood. Moreover, all the bishops of England 
have sent us letters begging us to confirm him in the office of 
legate, and, unanimously supplicating us, have put forward 
many recommendations in favour of the chancellor. And that 
now, the contrary should be asked by them, seems to us to de- 
serve to be imputed to a feeling of levity. Even your own 
master, too, the archbishop of Eouen, sent to us letters, full 
of professions of devotion, in favour of the bishop of Ely ; in- 
asmuch as he could write in his favour as long as he enjoyed 
prosperity. Consequently, it is a hard matter to listen to those 
against him, when oppressed with the calamity of exile, as to 
whom it has been written, ' So long as you are fortunate, you 
will reckon many a friend; if the times become cloudy, 

VOL. II. T 



274 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1192. 

then you will be alone.' 91 Moreover, when he was exulting 
in his former state of prosperity, and was performing the duties 
of legate among you, what church, what monastery, what bene- 
ficed clergyman, what person of low station or of high, ever sent 
word or complaint to us about the exactions of the lord bishop of 
Ely, or any grievances of the churches r All applauded him 
when prosperous, all murmur against him when fallen. These 
were friends of fortune, who took their leave together with the 
favour of fortune." These and many other objections made by 
our lord the pope could not be otherwise than of great weight 
and moment, as being put forward by one who has no supe- 
rior, a Supreme Pontiff and a judge, and one whose will there is 
no one to resist. Still more, it seemed to some to make very 
greatly against us, that our lord the king of England, upon 
your return, had begged in your behalf that your legateship 
might be transferred to the parts of Normandy and other parts 
beyond sea ; consequently, at the first blush it seemed likely to no 
one that it was the king's wish that you should hold authority in 
England, and the office of legate in Normandy, inasmuch as for 
one and the same man to hold authority in England and the 
office of legate in Normandy, seemed a thing neither easy nor 
convenient. Moreover, the intimation of the royal wish, 
which had been sent in your behalf to the chancellor by the 
king, was said to have been transmitted by the king to the 
seneschal of Normandy, in order that he might in Normandy 
enjoy the benefit of your counsel. Although we made suitable 
answers to these objections and the like, still the favour of our 
lord the pope and his predilections leaned on the other side. 
However, being at length forced to feel some hesitation, both at 
our instance as also at that of some of the cardinals whom we 
had got to favour our views, having called all the cardinals to- 
gether, he required the opinion of each ; and, after our busi- 
ness had been discussed in many deliberations, adjourned from 
time to time for a long period, our lord the pope, sitting in 
judgment, pronounced sentence to the following effect, that is 
to say, to state it shortly and in a condensed form ; he ab- 
solved the chancellor from your denunciation and that of 
our lord the dean of llouen, and, conversely, he publicly ad- 
judged to be null and void the sentence which the bishop of 

91 A quotation from Ovid : 

" Dum fueris felix, multos numerahis amicos ; 
Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris." 



A.D. 1192. LETTEK, TO THE AECHBISHOP OF ROUEN. 275 

Ely had pronounced under the pretext of certain letters 92 against 
you and the dean and certain others who were obnoxious to 
the chancellor. Moreover, our lord the pope, proceeding in his 
sentence, pronounced the chancellor excused for the injury ho 
had done to the archbishop of York without any prescribed 
form [of trial]. He also declined to take away from him 
either his legateship or the powers attached thereto, as he had 
but lately conferred the same at the urgency of the king's entrea- 
ties, and at the request of yourself as well as of all the bishops 
of England. However, he pronounced that he should perform 
the duties of the legateship with this exception thereto ap- 
pended, that in the meantime he should not have the power of 
pronouncing sentence of suspension or excommunication against 
you, or against the dean of Rouen, or against the bishops of 
England, or the justiciaries and nobles thereof. Of this sen- 
tence we trust that we shall have a more precise version, and 
that we shall be enabled to transmit to you the very words 
themselves in the letters of the pope himself. To the said 
judgment he also added, that, convoking a council of the car- 
dinals, and inviting ourselves thereto as well as the depu- 
ties of the lord bishop of Ely, he will nominate some venerable 
persons in your parts through whose mediation peace and re- 
conciliation may possibly be effected between you and the 
lord chancellor, at least so far as to assuage the rancorous feel- 
ings that exist between you. From the tenor, however, of the 
deliberation that took place, and from the form of the sentence 
which we have mentioned, we believe that for certain those 
letters will be entirely revoked, which, although they were 
directed to the bishops of the whole of England, still upon the 
pretence thereof the said chancellor pronounced you and 
many others under the ban of excommunication. With refer- 
ence, however, to this denunciation, when, in conformity with 
the request of our lord the dean of Rouen, we laid open his 
complaint in full consistory before all the cardinals and the 
people, on the said letters being read and examined, the pope 
protested with the loudest voice possible, in the presence of 
92 It is not clear what the meaning of the adjective " probabilium" 
here is. It may possibly signify " of letters probably written by you ;" 
or it may stand for the Norman legal term " probalium," and allude to 
the letters written by the pope to the bishop of Ely, in which case it 
would mean, " under the pretext of the pope's letters made public by 
him." The latter is most probably the meaning, from the reference to 
this letter at the end of the present letter. 

T2 



276 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1192. 

all, that the said letters had never originated in his conscience, 
while the assemblage of cardinals shouted aloud to the same 
effect as regarded themselves in most emphatical terms ; and 
when the deputies of the bishop of Ely most urgently ex- 
claimed against those statements, he refused to lend an atten- 
tive ear to any of them. Farewell." 

On the following night the deputies of the bishop of Ely 
went to our lord the pope, and censured him, for thus, in the 
presence of all the cardinals, protesting that the confirmation 
of the sentence which the chancellor had pronounced against 
the archbishop of Rouen and his accomplices who had abetted 
him in procuring his overthrow, had not proceeded from his 
conscience ; and entreated him, for the love of God and the 
honor of the Roman Church, to recall to mind the services that 
the chancellor had dutifully performed for him and the Church 
of Rome, and that, testifying to the truth, he would remove 
this opprobrium from the chancellor and his people, in order 
that their enemies might not exult at their unjust condemna- 
tion. 

GUP lord the pope, on being applied to with these exhorta- 
tions and others of a like nature, sitting the next day in judg- 
ment in presence of the cardinals and all the people, confessed 
that those letters which the day before he had on oath dis- 
owned had been written by his command, and sent to England 
to confirm the sentence of excommunication which the chan- 
cellor had pronounced against the archbishop of Rouen and his 
accomplices who had expelled him from the kingdom. 

In addition to this, the clerks of the archbishop of Rouen 
sent word to him that they had conversed four days at Rome 
with Hugh de Gurnay, "William de Pessy, Drogo de Tru- 
bleville, and many others whom the king of England had 
sent to his dominions ; and that fifteen days after, Andrew de 
Chavency came to say that the king was much pleased that 
the chancellor had been deposed, but that he was also much 
displeased that the corporation of London and the whole of 
England had been pledged by oath to earl John. The king 
also requested that our lord the pope would make null and 
void all donations of ecclesiastical revenues which the chancellor 
had made after the king's departure ; but our lord the pope 
was unwilling so absolutely to nullify those donations, though 
he nullified in common all donations of ecclesiastical revenues 
that belonged to the king, by whomsoever they had been made, 



A.D. 1192. GASCON Y 11EDUCEU TO SUBJECTION TO KING ElCIiARi). 277 

and on this matter our lord the pope appointed the bishops of 
Lincoln and London judges. On the letters being given to the 
clerks of our lord the archbishop of Rouen, they came to our 
lord the pope, and said to him, alluding to the chancellor, 
" Behold how he loved him !" 93 

In the same year, our lord the pope sent two cardinals as 
legates a latere, namely, Octavianus, bishop of Ostia, and 
Jordan de Fossa Nova, to put an end to the dissensions that 
existed between the chancellor and the archbishop of Rouen. 
On their arrival at Gisors, in Normandy, the gate was shut 
against them, and they could not obtain admittance. When 
they ascertained that this was done by William FitzRalph, 
seneschal of Normandy, they excommunicated him and all 
his accomplices and coadjutors, advisers and abettors in the 
said piece of presumption, and laid the whole of Normandy 
under interdict. On this being told in England, queen 
Eleanor and the archbishop of Eouen sent to them Hugh, 
bishop of Durham, that they might revoke the sentence they 
had pronounced against the seneschal of Normandy and Nor- 
mandy itself. At first the bishop of Durham found them at 
Paris, after which he followed them to Vezelay, but they would 
by no means remit the sentence until they had been received in 
Normandy. However, our lord the pope revoked the interdict 
placed upon Normandy, and caused it to be revoked by the 
legates ; but still they did not enter Normandy. 

In the same year, while the seneschal of Gascony lay ill, the 
count de Perigord and the viscount de Marke and nearly all 
the barons of Gascony, began to ravage the territories of the 
king of England ; and in the meantime, the seneschal could 
neither obtain peace nor truce, although he frequently, and more 
than frequently, requested it. Having at length recovered, he 
attacked the castles and fortresses of the said count, and besieged 
and took them all, fortifying some on behalf of the king, and 
levelling others with the ground. In like manner, he took all the 
castles of the said viscount, and reduced the whole of that 
county to final subjection to the king. Shortly after, the son 
of the king of Navarre came to his assistance with eight hun- 
dred knights ; on which, they together entered the territory of 
the count of Toulouse, and took many castles in the vicinity of 

a:1 St. John xi. 36. This they spitefully and ironically said, in allusion 
to the impression entertained by the pope relative to the affection of the 
km.g for the bishop of Ely. 



278 ANJTALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1192. 

Toulouse, and, after taking them, fortified them in the king's 
behalf, and levelled many other fortresses with the ground, 
after which they proceeded as far as the gates of Toulouse, and 
passed the night almost under its very walls. 

In the same year, many pilgrims who had come away with 
the king of England from the land of Sulia, returned before the 
Nativity of our Lord to England, hoping there to find the king ; 
and, on being asked about the king, where he was, they made 
answer, " We know not, but his ship on board of which he 
embarked, we sawnearing the shore at Brindisi, in Apulia." In 
the meantime, Leopold, duke of Austria, who had taken the 
king of England, delivered him into the hands of Henry, em- 
peror of the Eomans ; in consequence of which, the said emperor 
wrote to Philip, king of the Franks, to the following effect : 

The Letter of Henry, emperor of the Romans, to Philip, king of 
France, in reference to the confinement of Richard, Icing of 
England. 

11 Henry, by the grace of God, emperor of the Romans and 
ever august, to his beloved and especial friend Philip, the illus- 
trious king of the Franks, health and sincere love and affection. 
Inasmuch as our imperial highness does not doubt that your 
royal mightiness will be delighted at all things in which the 
omnipotence of the Creator has honored and exalted ourselves 
and the Roman empire, we have thought proper to inform 
your nobleness by means of these presents, that while the 
enemy of our empire and the disturber of your kingdom, 
Richard, king of England, was crossing the sea for the pur- 
pose of returning to his dominions, it so happened that the 
winds brought him, the ship being wrecked on board of which 
he was, to the region of Istria, at a place which lies between 
Aquileia and Yenice, where, by the sanction of God, the king, 
having suffered shipwreck, escaped, together with a few others. 
A faithful subject of ours, the count Maynard of Gortze, and the 
people of that district, hearing that he was in their territory, 
and calling to mind the treason and treachery and accumulated 
mischief he had been guilty of in the Land of Promise, pursued 
him with the intention of making him prisoner. However, the 
king taking to flight, they captured eight knights of his retinue. 
Shortly after, the king proceeded to a borough in the arch- 
bishopric of Saltzburg, which is called Frisi, where Frederic 
de Botesowe took six of his knights, the king hastening on by 



LETTEK OP THE AECHBISHOP OF ROUEN". 279 

night, with only three attendants, in the direction of Austria. 
The roads, however, being watched, and guards being set on 
every side, our dearly-beloved cousin Leopold, duke of Austria, 
captured the king so often mentioned, in an humble house in 
a village in the vicinity of Vienna. Inasmuch as he is now 
in our power, and has always done his utmost for your 
annoyance and disturbance, what we have above stated we 
have thought proper to notify to your nobleness, knowing that 
the same is well pleasing to your kindly affection for us, and 
will afford most abundant joy to your own feelings. Given at 
Creutz, 94 on the fifth day before the calends of January." 

On these rumours being spread through England as to the 
capture of the king of England, Walter, archbishop of Rouen 
wrote to Hugh, bishop of Durham, to the following effect : 

The Letter of the archlishop of Rouen to tlw bishop of Durham, 
relative to the captivity of Richard, Icing of England. 

" To his venerable brother in Christ and his most dearly- 
beloved friend Hugh, by the grace of God, bishop of Durham, 
Walter, by the same grace, archbishop of Rouen, health in all that 
is truly healthful. Yarious rumours having been spread abroad 
relative to the arrival of the king, at length, as the truth could 
110 longer be concealed, everything relative thereto has become 
known to us. But, whether in adversity or in prosperity, it be- 
hoves us to display equanimity, as we cannot avert the will of 
God ; and inasmuch as His judgments are secret, we commend 
the fortuitous results of things to His mercy and providence. 
With grief of mind are we compelled to confess that it has befallen 
the lord our king otherwise than would have been expedient 
for his realm and all his faithful subjects ; and if we look more 
fully into his meritorious deeds, this misfortune is in no way the 
due of his actions. For he, who, for the sake of God exhausted 
all his patrimony, and indifferently entrusted the blood of him- 
self and of his subjects to the fortune of war, deserved in all 
his wanderings to have received the protection of God. But 
this adversity, which is so opposed to our good wishes, is a test 
of his virtues, and not a mark of censure. And why are we 
obliged to say more than we could have wished ? We have 
thought proper to transmit to you a copy of a letter of the em- 

94 This place in Sclavonia may possibly be meant by " Rithiencie," as 
a misprint for " Risceusis." 



280 ANNALS OF IIOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1192. 

peror of Germany which he has sent to the king of the Franks, 
relative to the capture of our lord the king of England, folded 
within this present page. Now, there is need not of your tears 
but of your promptness, as we must not meet the attacks of 
fortune with lamentations, but, concealing our sorrow, must 
endeavour to make trial of our prowess ; perhaps ' Weeping 
may endure for a night, but joy will come to us in the morn- 
ing.' 95 And inasmuch as, next to the mercy of God, the great- 
est portion of our hope is reposed in your bosom, with a breast 
bedewed with tears, and with our entire heart, we do suppliantly, 
devotedly, and as being most dear to you, entreat you that in 
this trouble which, thus momentous beyond all conception, has 
befallen our lord the king, you will with all your energies act 
the part of diligence and of circumspection, and that, through no 
consideration of difficulty, no prospect of adversity, no pretext, 
no consideration of temporal benefits or of your own welfare, you 
will refuse to us and to our lord, or rather to yourself, your 
counsel, which with all our bowels we are longing to receive. 
And whereat the mind is more fully opened to one present 
than to a person when absent, and in the presence of persons 
counsel under present difficulties will shine forth with greater 
effulgence, and the Lord will bestow on the same a more 
healthful effect, we do consequently beg of you, tearfully and 
with all the affection before expressed, all excuse as to difficul- 
ties laid aside, to meet us and other faithful servants of our 
lord the king at Oxford, on the Lord's day before ' Latare 
Jerusalem ' % is sung. For the present matter requires that 
degree of prompt attention, that all excuses whatsoever should 
be laid aside ; and it is our belief that the love which is due to 
our lord the king, should, in the case of which we speak, be 
fully made proof of. You must also know that the lord bishop 
of Bath has already had several interviews with our lord the 
emperor, on the subject of setting our king at liberty ; for he is 
using every labour and exertion to show him all due obe- 
dience, and to pay that homage which is due from his respect for 
the crown, acceptable to the king's honor, and as advantageous 
under present circumstances, as it has also been on other occa- 
sions ; this we have learned from those persons who were pre- 
sent at the interview which the lord bishop of Bath had with 

95 Psalm xxx. 5. 

96 The introit for the fourth Sunday in Lent, which begins " Rejoice, 
Jerusalem, and meet together, all you who love her." 



A.D. 1192. CONDUCT OF TOE KING LU1UNG CONFINEMENT. 281 

our lord the prince respecting the liberation of our master. 
And whereas, under all circumstances, the Divine aid of God 
ought to be implored, we beg that throughout the whole of 
your diocese you will cause prayers to be put up for him to the 
Most High. ' The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man 
availeth much/ 97 and the importunate woman in the Gospel 
was deemed deserving to be heard, and, as it is there said, 
Christ raised her son, because for him many tears were shed. 
Farewell." 

Accordingly, upon hearing of the confinement of the king, 
Walter, archbishop of Eouen, and the other justiciaries of our 
lord the king, sent the abbat of Boxley and the abbat of Pont 
Robert to Germany, to seek the king of England. After 
having passed through the whole of Germany, and not find- 
ing the king, they entered Bavaria, and met the king at a 
town, the name of which is Oxefer, where he was brought 
before the emperor, to hold a conference with him, on Palm 
Sunday. On hearing that the before-named abbats had come 
from England, the king showed himself courteous and affable 
to them ; making enquiries about the state of his kingdom 
and the fidelity of his subjects, and the health and prosperity 
of the king of Scotland, in whose fidelity he placed a very 
strong reliance : on which they testified to what they had 
heard and seen. A conference accordingly taking place be- 
tween them, the king made complaint of the treachery of his 
brother, John, earl of Mortaigne, on whom he had conferred so 
many favours and boundless honors, and who had thrown him- 
self into the hands of the king of France against him, and, 
having broken the ties of brotherhood, had made a league with 
death and a compact with hell. The king, though greatly 
afflicted upon this subject, suddenly broke forth into these 
words of consolation, saying, " My brother John is not the 
man to subjugate a country, if there is a person able to make 
the slightest resistance to his attempts." 

During his journey of three days, while on the road to meet 
the emperor, it was the admiration of all, how boldly, how 
courteously, and how becomingly he behaved himself, and they 
judged him worthy of the imperial elevation who so thoroughly 
understood the arts of command, and how, with uniform sell- 
possession, to rise superior to the two-faced events of fortune. 
On a day named, after he had held a conference by messen- 
gers with the emperor, they were unable on that day to have an 
^ James v. 16. 



282 ANNALS OF KOGEE DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1192. 

inter\iew with him, because the emperor had made of him 
many demands, to which the king had determined not to yield, 
even though his life should be perilled thereby. On the mor- 
row, however, while all were despairing, with joyous success 
ensued joyous consolation. 

For, on the emperor accusing the king of many things, and 
charging him with many misdeeds, both with his betrayal of the 
land of Sulia, and with the death of the marquis of Montferrat, as 
also with reference to certain covenants made between them and 
not observed by him, the king made answer with such frank- 
ness, such self-possession, and such intrepidity, that the em- 
peror thought him worthy not only of his favour and pardon, 
but even of his praise. For he raised the king when bending 
before him, and received him with the kiss of peace, and made 
a treaty of friendship with him, and, loading him with honors 
and succour (the people standing around and bursting into 
tears for very joy), made a promise that he would reconcile 
the king of England with the king of France. After this, 
with the mediation of the duke of Austria, the king of Eng- 
land promised that he would pay to the emperor for his libe- 
ration, by way of ransom, one hundred thousand marks. The 
emperor also promised that, if by his means the king of Eng- 
land and the king of France could not be reconciled, he would 
send the king of England home without exacting the money. 

In the same year, pope Celestinus, thinking that the king 
of France and the earl of Mortaigne, the brother of the king 
of England, were waging war against the king of England, 
wrote to the bishops of England to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Celestinus to the archbishops and bishops 
of England. 

" Celestinus, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his venerable brethren, the archbishops and bishops throughout 
England appointed, health, and the Apostolic benediction. 
"Whereas, for the purpose of repelling the injuries done to the 
people of Christendom, and wiping away that stain to our 
common faith which the pollutions of the pagans, in the cap- 
ture of the Holy Land, which has been named the inheritance 
of the Lord, had perniciously and violently imprinted thereon, 
and for cleansing the Holy City and the Sepulchre of our Lord 
from the abominations of the Saracens and others, who held 
possession thereof, as also for the purpose, with the assistance 



A.D. 1192. LETTES OF POPE CELESTINUS. 283 

of the Divine mercy, of rescuing it from their power, the 
Apostolic See, remembering what was its bounden duty, sent 
its nuncios to different parts of the world, and letters of admo- 
nition, and, putting its trust in the Divine clemency, granted 
great indulgences to those proceeding thither; although, as 
your brotherhood may have perceived, to do this at its exhor- 
tations, very many manfully and duteously devoted themselves, 
and oftentimes, in parts beyond sea, so many of the faithful ones 
of Christ were for this purpose assembled together, that their 
multitude seemed in no slight degree to exceed the numbers of 
their antagonists, and also to be superior in resources and 
strength, they were still unable to effect much, or to make head 
against those who were fighting against them, because (as 
one may perceive from the result) the attempts and the actions 
of those who had set out for those parts were, in a great 
measure, displeasing unto the Lord. Wherefore, on the ground 
of their other offences, because they trusted not in God but in 
their own strength, and the fear of God was not before their 
eyes, by reason of their preconceived vanity, their heart was 
allowed to be darkened, that so they might do other things as 
well, which were by no means befitting, thus provoking against 
themselves, by their perversity, the Divine vengeance. But, 
inasmuch as the mercies of the Lord are manifold, although, 
in order to bend the refractoriness of the wicked, and to 
bow the necks of stiff-necked men, for the purposes of cor- 
rection He makes heavy the weight of his hand in admi- 
nistering discipline, and depresses that He may raise, and 
smites or scourges that He may heal, if, with due humility 
we return "unto Him, fully chastened for our sins, and if 
we resolutely make it our purpose with more fervent zeal to 
observe for the future the commands of our Creator, we may 
then, without any hesitation, conceive hopes that He will 
more abundantly and more graciously assist us, and will, with 
His indulgence, grant us from heaven a full victory over the 
enemies of Christ ; so much so, that all the grievances which 
we have hitherto suffered may be committed to oblivion, 
all those being turned back, and falling with deserved confusion, 
who hate Zion, and have presumed to defile her with the pol- 
lutions of the heathen. When we consider, however, and 
examine the matter with diligence and earnestness, what was 
the nature of the threats which the Divine power pronounced 
against the people of Israel, when, according to promise, they 



284 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEX. A. D. 1192. 

entered the land above-mentioned, there cannot be a particle 
of doubt to present itself in this our examination why it is that 
our attempts thus begun on behalf of God have not been 
crowned with the hoped-for success. For they were told to 
abstain from the impurities and filthiness of the inhabitants of 
that land, and not to deem their vices worthy of imitation, 
which might redound to the ruin of themselves, but to observe 
the law of the Lord with firmness of purpose and with every 
effort of zeal and earnestness ; and that, if they should dute- 
ously and humbly obey these admonitions, one of them should 
conquer a thousand, and ten of them ten thousand. And this 
they shortly after became sensible of from a more assured ex- 
perience, inasmuch as a few of them slew a vast and almost 
infinite multitude of their enemies ; and, so long as they 
dutifully obeyed the Divine commands, there was not a city or 
a fortified place that was able to withstand their attacks, or by 
any resources or counsels to be rescued from becoming subject 
to their power. And yet, when their sons, who, as it is there 
said, ' knew not the Lord,' had, in their rashness, begun to fall 
away from the observance of those things which in the promul- 
gation of the law had been enjoined them, then did their foes, 
rallying their forces against them, often subject them to their 
power ; whom once again, by the Divine aid, they conquered, 
when, being penitent for the excesses committed by them, and ac- 
knowledging their guilt, with pious devotion they numbly turned 
to God. And you may know beyond a doubt, that it was in con- 
sequence of the discords that arose, that the achievement of the 
hoped-for victory was taken away from the Christian chivalry 
by reason of the quarrels and frequent rancours that liad sprung 
up in the army, and because they had made the flesh their arm, 
and had withdrawn their hearts from the Lord. If, then, it is 
our wish without great labour to obtain a glorious triumph in 
all things, with the downfall of our adversaries, let us not faint 
in spirit by reason of the grievances hitherto endured ; but, with 
all humility and contrition of heart, seeking the mercy of the 
Creator, to their lasting confusion we shall be enabled to hope 
agreeably to our deserts for a complete victory, in reliance upon 
the accustomed beneficence of the supreme mercy. Induced, 
therefore, by this consideration, we have entreated all the princes 
of the world, for the remission of their sins, that, out of regard 
for the Divine love and their own salvation, if any one has on 



A.D. 1192. LETTER OF POPE CELESTIXUS. 285 

any ground entertained feelings of rancour against another, and 
has despised the advice of man, he will for the Creator do 
away with the same ; lest grounds for mutual dissension 
may still exist, which have hitherto, as you are well aware, 
deprived us of the achievement of victory, and have, without 
any advantage, brought the greater part of this multitude into 
peril of death. And, among themselves, let them make it their 
care, with all earnestness of mind, to consider the means by 
which, in the meantime, that little of the land, the portion of the 
Lord, which is still held under the sway of the Christians, 
may be yet preserved unshaken, and without any fear defended 
against the attacks of the wicked, that so it may not fall into 
the hands of the unbelievers ; and that, lastly, a multitude of 
the faithful may put themselves in readiness, who may with 
all due and duteous humility proceed thither, and, conquering 
and utterly treading under foot the frantic might of those in 
possession thereof, liberate the land and the Sepulchre of the 
Lord. And further, inasmuch as there hence arises too abun- 
dant cause for tearfulness to ourselves and all Christian people, 
and we are bound in every way to be sorrowful and not to 
rejoice, so long as the land, on which have stood the feet of the 
Lord and where the sacraments of our salvation were revealed, 
is held in the occupation of the Gentiles, we do utterly forbid 
tournaments, which were invented for the sake of mirthfulness 
and for the exercise of the prowess of novices in the art of war, 
to the end that he who wishes to exercise himself may repair to 
that land, where the prowess of his mind and his body may 
both manfully and healthfully be proved. Let them also so 
make it their care to maintain unity, peace, and concord one 
with another, that there may be no one to wage war against 
another, or to presume to avenge an injury with arms, but rather 
let them make it their common study, what means may, through 
zeal and diligent attention, soothe all conflicting spirits. But 
if any one, a thing we do not believe, laying aside all fear of 
God and respect for ourselves, and through contempt for the 
Christian faith, shall with any rashness presume to act con- 
trary hereto, then let him know that we do strictly command 
yourselves and the other archbishops and bishops to place under 
ecclesiastical interdict the lands of such persons as shall think 
proper contumaciously to follow a course of this kind, as also, 
if there shall be a necessity, to place under the ban of excommu- 
nication their persons as well, and to cause both sentences to be 



286 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOYEPEN. A.D. 1193. 

inviolably observed. We do therefore by these Apostolic wri- 
tings strictly enjoin and command you, that you will prepare 
yourselves with all haste to fulfil what we have above men- 
tioned, all tardiness and hesitation laid aside, and will make it 
your endeavour throughout your dioceses, no delay or appeal 
being allowed, to put the same into execution. Given at St. 
Peter's, at Eome, on the third day before the ides of January, 
in the second year of our pontificate." 

Richard, king of England, being still detained in captivity 
by Henry, emperor of the Romans, in order that he might 
escape from this captivity, by the advice of Eleanor, his mother, 
abdicated the throne of the kingdom of England, and delivered 
it to the emperor as the lord of all, and with his cap invested 
him therewith. However, the emperor, as had been pre- 
arranged, immediately restored to him, in the presence of the 
nobles of Germany and England, the said kingdom of England, 
to hold the same of him for five thousand pounds sterling, 
yearly, payable as tribute; and the emperor invested him 
therewith, with a double cross of gold. However, the said 
emperor, at his death, released Richard, king of England, and 
his heirs from these and all other covenants whatsoever. 

In the year of grace 1193, being the fourth year of the reign 
of Richard, king of England, Philip, king of France, was in 
France on the day of the Nativity of our Lord, being the sixth 
day of the week, in great sorrow and confusion, because the 
seneschal of Normandy refused to deliver up to him his sister 
Alice ; he also frequently sent messengers to England, to John 
earl of Mortaigne, the king's brother, telling him how the king 
was detained in captivity, and would never escape from the 
custody of the emperor of Germany; adding, that if he would 
acquiesce in his wishes and designs, he would give him his sister 
Alice in marriage, and restore to him Normandy, Aquitaine, 
andAnjou, and all the other territories beyond sea, that his 
father, Henry, king of England, had ever possessed, and would 
secure for him the kingdom of England ; lor Richard, the king 
of England, was still kept in confinement by the emperor of 
Germany. 

Upon this, immediately after the Nativity of our Lord, 
John, earl of Mortaigne, the king's brother, crossed over to 
Normandy, upon whose arrival the seneschal of Normandy, 
and other faithful subjects of the king of England, went to meet 
him, and requested that he would come with them to a con- 



A.D. 1193. THE KING OF FUATs T CE VIOLATES HIS OATH. 287 

ference at Alencon, to treat on the affairs of the king and his 
liberation. To this he made answer, "If you will receive me 
as your lord, and swear fealty to me, I will come with you 
and will be your defender against the king of France ; but if 
not, I will not come to you." On hearing this, the nobles of 
Normandy refused to obey him, or to swear fealty, trusting 
that by the help of God, their lord, the king of England, would 
return safe and sound. 

"Upon this, John, the king's brother, repaired to the king of 
France and did homage to him for Normandy, and for the 
other territories of his brother beyond sea, and for England as 
well, as some said. He also made oath that he would marry his 
sister Alice, and released to the king of France all claims upon 
Gisors and the whole of the Yexin, in Normandy ; on which 
the king of France gave to him, with his said sister, that part 
of Flanders which belonged to him, and swore to him that he 
would, to the utmost of his ability, assist in gaining England 
and the other territories of the king of England on his behalf. 
After this, the said earl of Mortaigne returned to England, 
bringing many foreigners with him ; immediately on which, 
the castles of Wallingford and "Windsor were surrendered to 
him. The earl next came to London, and demanded of the 
archbishop of Rouen and the other justiciaries of England the 
kingdom, and the fealty of the subjects of the realm, assert- 
ing that the king of England, his brother, was dead. However, 
they did not place any confidence in his words. 

On this, being repulsed by the justiciaries and the other 
nobles of the kingdom, he withdrew, and, excited by indigna- 
tion, fortified his castles and fortresses, and in his hostility in- 
vaded the lands of the king, his brother. Accordingly, multi- 
tudes resorted to him, deceiving themselves j on which, being 
scourged by the deserved retribution of God, they lost everything 
that they possessed. For the justiciaries of England and the faith- 
ful subjects of our lord the king manfully resisted the said earl of 
Mortaigne, and inflicted upon him much loss; they also strength- 
ened with garrisons the seaports and all the maritime places, with 
such care, that the Franks and Flemings, and many others, who 
had promised their aid to the before-named earl, * did not dare 
to land in England. Some, however, of their number who did 
land in England, were taken prisoners and placed in chains. 

The king of France, also, unmindful of the oath which on his 
departure from the land of Sulia he had made to the king of 



288 ANNALS OF EOGEft DE HOYEDEN. A.D. 1193. 

England, as to maintaining peace, entered Normandy in a hostile 
manner, and ravaged the king's territories with fire, and carried 
off much spoil. However, Robert, earl of Leicester, who had 
shortly before returned from the land of Sulia, and the other 
nobles of Normandy, made a stout resistance against him. 

In the meantime, the above-named abbats of Boxley, and of 
Pont Robert, whom the justiciaries of England had sent in 
search of the king, returned to England after Easter, inform- 
ing them that peace had been made between the emperor and 
the king of England, on the day of the Supper of our Lord, 
upon the following terms : " The king of England shall give 
to the emperor of the Romans one hundred thousand silver 
marks as his ransom, and shall find fifty galleys, with all 
their equipments, and twenty knights for his service for one 
year :" and stated that they themselves were present at- the 
said treaty. 

After this treaty had been made, there arrived envoys from 
the king of France, who, on his behalf, defied our lord the 
king. To them the emperor immediately made answer, that 
whoever should molest the king of England would also offend 
the emperor himself; such great love and lasting concord had 
been established between them. And because the king of Eng- 
land made offer to obey the demands of justice in the court of 
his lord the king of France, as to all matters with which the 
king of France or any other person of his party might charge 
him, the emperor attempted to have a conference held between 
him and the king of France, but it was not proceeded with. 
The king of England, on this, sent to England for ships, and 
for Alan Trenchemere, the pilot of his own ship, as also for 
hostages to be given to the emperor as a security for his per- 
formance of the treaty made between them. These commands 
he gave, and they were all complied with ; after which, Ro- 
bert de Turnham, one of the king's household, came to Lon- 
don, being sent to England with the king's armour. 

Upon this, all the principal men of the kingdom met to- 
gether, and laid siege to Windsor, the castle of the earl 
of Mortaigne. Geoffre} r , archbishop of York, Hugh Bar- 
dolph, the king's justiciary, the sheriff of York, and William 
de Stuteville, assembling their forces, came to Doncaster, and 
fortified it. But when the archbishop of York wished to 
proceed thence, and lay siege to Tickhill, a castle belonging to 
the earl of Mortaigne, Hugh Bardolph and William de Stute- 



A.D. 1193. TKUCE WITH THE EARL OF MOBTAIGNE. 289 

ville would not agree thereto, because they were liegemen of 
earl John ; on which the archbishop of York left them, with his 
people, calling them traitors to the king and his realm. 

In the meantime, the king of France, with a strong hand, 
entered Normandy, and laid siege to Gisors ; on which Gilbert 
de Guascoil, who had charge of the castle of Gisors and the 
castle of Nefle, surrendered them both to the king of France, 
and became his adherent. However, he was despised among 
them for the treason he had been guilty of to his master the 
king of England, who had, in the fulness of his favour, sent 
him from Messina to take charge of the said castles. After 
this, the king of France came to Rouen, and said to the inha- 
bitants of that place : " John, earl of Mortaigne, has done 
homage to me for England, and has given up to me Normandy 
and all other lands on this side the sea ; and I have come hither 
to take possession of this city, which is the capital of the 
whole of Normandy ; allow me to enter peaceably, and I will 
prove a kind and just master to you." 

To this they made answer : " See, the gates are open ; 
enter if you like ; no one opposes you." On which the king 
replied: " I will speak to my people about it;" and then, 
after consulting his people on the matter, declined to enter. 
Accordingly, the king of France being thus deceived in his 
hopes, retired from Rouen with his army, and burned his stone- 
engines, twenty-four in number, which he had posted around 
the city: he also broke his wine-casks, and having poured 
forth all the wine, took his departure, sending word to the 
citizens that he would visit them with a rod of iron. 

The king of England still remaining in the custody of the 
emperor of the Romans, all people were surprised at his thus 
delaying ; and some, in consequence of the predictions of the 
earl of Mortaigne, who always predicted that he would never 
return, doubted about him and his ever returning. In con- 
sequence of this, Walter, archbishop of Rouen, and the other 
justiciaries of England, although they had compelled the earl 
of Mortaigne to surrender, and had nearly taken his castle of 
Windsor, to which they had been laying siege, made a truce 
with the earl of Mortaigne until the feast of All Saints, the 
castles of Nottingham and Tickhill remaining in the charge of 
the earl, as before. But the castles of AVindsor, and of Wal- 
lingford, and of the Peak, were given into the hands of queen 
Eleanor, the mother of the said earl of Mortaigne, and of some 

VOL. II. U 



290 ANNALS OF KOGEB DE HOYEDEN. A.D. 1193. 

other custodians, who were to deliver them into fris hands if 
the king, his brother, should not come in the meantime. "When 
Hugh, bishop of Durham, who had in the meantime been 
laying siege to the castle of Tickhill, heard of this, he was 
greatly vexed, as he now felt sure of taking it ; but, by the 
command of the said justiciaries, he took his departure, leav- 
ing his task incomplete. 

Shortly after this, there came messengers to England with 
letters from the king, addressed by him to all the archbishops, 
bishops, abbats, earls, barons, clerks, and freeholders ; and by 
them the king humbly entreated that all persons, both clergy 
as well as laity, would give such assistance in ransoming him 
as should secure his grateful thanks to them ; and, in order that 
they might do this with the more full assurance, the emperor 
of the Romans wrote in general terms to all the subjects of 
the king of England, informing them that their lord the king 
of England had come to an agreement with him as to the sum 
to be paid for his ransom ; but he did not state the amount of 
the sum. Our lord the pope Celestinus also wrote in like man- 
ner, in behalf of the king, to all the ecclesiastics of the king- 
dom of England, to the effect that the emperor and the whole 
of liis empire would be placed under interdict unless the king 
of England were speedily liberated from his custody. He like- 
wise issued a command that the king of France and his king- 
dom should be laid under interdict unless he should desist 
from persecuting the king of England, so long as he remained 
in the emperor's hands. Moved by these and other admoni- 
tions of our lord the pope, and the whole of the cardinals, and 
the advice of prudent men, the Roman emperor and the king 
of England became reconciled : on which the king of England 
wrote to his faithful servants throughout England, to the fol- 
lowing effect : 

Tlie Letter of Richard, king of England, to queen Eleanor, his 
another, and his justiciaries in England. 

"Richard, by the grace of God, king of England, duke of 
Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, to Eleanor, by 
the same grace, queen of England, his much-loved mother, and 
to his justices, and all his faithful servants throughout Eng- 
land, greeting. Be it known unto you all, that, after our be- 
loved servants, the venerable Hubert, bishop of Salisbury, and 
William, of the Church of Saint Mary, our prothonotary, had 



A.o. 1193. > LETTER OF KING EICHAED. 291 

departed from us, our most dearly beloved chancellor, "William, 
bishop of Ely, came to us, and, he faithfully negociating be- 
tween our lord the emperor and. ourselves, the result was, that 
we came from the castle of Trevelles, in which we were con- 
fined, to meet the emperor at Haguenau, where we were ho- 
norably received by the emperor and the whole of his court. 
Here, too, our lord the emperor and our lady the empress 
honored us with many and various presents, and, what is of 
especial importance, a mutual and indissoluble bond of friend- 
ship was formed between our lord the emperor and ourselves ; 
whereby each of us is bound to aid the other against all living 
men in gaining his rights and in retaining possession of the 
same. For becoming reasons it is that we are prolonging our 
stay with the emperor, until his business and our own shall be 
brought to an end, and until we shall have paid him seventy 
thousand marks of silver. "Wherefore we do beg of you, and 
by the fealty by which you are bound to us, do adjure you, 
that you will use all earnestness in raising the said sum of 
money, and that you, our justiciaries, who are placed above the 
others in our kingdom, will set an example to others ; that 
so you may honorably and nobly afford of your own means for 
our assistance, and also raise what you can on loan from 
others, in order that you may set an example to our other faith- 
ful subj ects for doing the like . The whole of the gold and silver, 
also, of the churches, you are with careful attention, and with 
a written inventory, to receive from the prelates of those 
churches ; and you are to assure them by your oath, and by that 
of such others of our barons as you shall think fit, that full res- 
titution shall be made for the same. You are also to receive 
hostages from all our barons, in order that when our most trusty 
chancellor, as soon as our business has been settled in Germany, 
shall come to England, he may find the same hostages with our 
much-beloved mother, that so he may with all expedition 
transmit to us such of them as may have been agreed upon 
between ourselves and the emperor ; to the end that our libe- 
ration may not suffer any delay in consequence of the absence of 
the hostages and your neglect. Also, money there collected is, 
in like manner, to be delivered to our mother and such persons 
as she shall think proper. He whom, in the moment of our 
necessity, we shall find to be prompt, in his necessity will find 
us a friend, and ready to reward ; and it will be more pleasing 
to us if, in our absence, any person shall in any way assist us, 

u 2 



292 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1193. 

than if, in our presence, hie should give us twice that amount 
of aid. We do also desire that the names of each of the nobles, 
and their subsidies which shall be made on the present occasion, 
shall be signified unto us under the seal of our mother, that we 
may know how far we are bound to return thanks to each. 
Know for certain that, if we were now in England, free and at 
our own disposal, we would give as great or a greater sum of 
money to our lord the emperor than we now give for obtain- 
ing the terms which, by the grace of God, we have gained : 
and, moreover, if we had not such sum of money in our posses- 
sion, we would deliver up to the emperor our own body until 
the said money should be paid, rather than that which has 
been agreed upon should be left incomplete. Under the golden 
bulla of our lord the emperor, our chancellor brings to you 
the attestation above-mentioned. Witness ourselves, at Ha- 
guenau, the thirteenth day before the calends of May." 

Accordingly, upon the authority of this letter the king's 
mother and the justiciaries of England determined that all 
the clergy as well as the laity ought to give the fourth part 
of the present year's revenue for the ransom of our lord the 
king, and to add as much from their chattel property, whereby 
the king would be bound to know whom he had to thank. 
They also exacted from each knight's fee twenty shillings, 
and from the abbeys of the Cistercian order and the houses 
of the order of Sempringham the whole of their wool for the 
current year, and the whole of the gold and silver of the 
churches, as the king by his mandate had directed. After 
this, his said chancellor came to England on behalf of our 
lord the king, bringing a letter from his lordship the em- 
peror, ratified by the golden bulla, and to the following effect : 

The Letter of the emperor Henry to the nobles of England, on 
behalf of king Richard. 

"Henry, by the grace of God, emperor of the Romans and 
ever august, to his loving friends the archbishops, bishops, 
earls, barons, nobles, and all persons throughout England to 
whom this present page shall come, greeting and good will. 
We have deemed it proper and reflecting credit upon our high 
estate, most earnestly to engage the whole of you in every way 
that we possibly can, to take those steps which are due to the 
honor of our most dearly beloved friend your lord Eichard, 
king of England, to the end that the constancy of your dutiful 






A.D. 1193. ARRIVAL OF THE :ONG'S CHANCELLOR IN ENGLAND. 293 

attachment, and the merits of your fidelity, may not seem to be 
dead as regards his advantage, but rather may appear to live in 
obedience to himself and to his rule. Wherefore to all whose 
duty shall be proved to be sincere and pure to their said king 
in his absence, we shall return most abundant thanksgivings, 
wishing it to come to the knowledge of you all that his 
imperial highness is upon terms of concord and lasting peace 
with his royal nobleness. "Wherefore, whatever shall be said 
to his disparagement, will be productive of annoyance and in- 
convenience to ourselves equally with him. Accordingly, to 
the honor and advantage of his duteous and faithful subjects, 
and to the condemnation and uprooting of those who molest 
him, we will always give our zealous assistance ; and, because 
in heart and soul we are united, shall always folly consider 
the acts of your king to be especially our own and those of our 
empire, and shall look upon injuries done to him as offered to 
ourselves and to our imperial crown ; nor, with the will of God, 
will we pass over the same without vengeance and the heavy 
punishment and destruction of those who have been guilty of 
the same. Given at Haguenau, on the thirteenth day before 
the calends of May." 

After this treaty of peace was made between the emperor 
and the king of England, the emperor proposed an interview 
between him and the king of France, for the purpose of effect- 
ing a reconciliation between him and the king of England, 
through the mediation of William, archbishop of Bheims, 
uncle of the king of France, and a kinsman of the king of 
England ; on which they appointed a day for an interview on 
the morrow of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, being 
the sixth day of the week, between Vaucouleurs and Toul. 

The king's chancellor, on his arrival in England, went to 
Saint Alban's with great humility, where our lady the queen, 
the king's mother, with the lord archbishop of Rouen, and the 
other justiciaries of our lord the king, met him. There also 
the said chancellor gave to the justices the golden bulla of the 
emperor, containing the indissoluble treaty made between his 
lordship the emperor with our lord the king, asserting that 
neither as justiciary, legate, nor chancellor, but as a simple 
bishop, he had come to England ; not as a dweller therein, but 
as a stranger ; indeed, as a messenger only from our lord the 
king. He also enjoined certain of the barons to accompany 
him to the king, namely, Gilbert, bishop of Rochester, Sefrid, 



294 ANNALS OF B.OGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1193. 

bishop of Chichester, Benedict, abbat of Burgh, Richard, earl 
of Clare, earl Roger Bigot, Geoffrey de Say, and several others. 

Here, also, it was arranged in whose hands the money, 
when collected, was to be placed, namely, in the charge of 
Hubert Fitz- Walter, archbishop elect of Canterbury, the lord 
bishop of London, William, earl of Arundel, Hamelin, earl of 
Warenne, and the mayor of London, under the seal of our 
lady the queen, and the seal of the lord archbishop of Rouen. 
Here it may be remarked, that after the arrival of Hubert 
Fitz- Walter, bishop of Salisbury, in England, the monks of the 
metropolitan church of Canterbury met together, and elected 
as their archbishop the said Hubert, bishop of Salisbury. 
Against this election Hubert, archdeacon of Canterbury, ap- 
pealed to the Supreme Pontiff, both because the king was in 
confinement, as also because the bishops of England, whose 
duty it was to be present at the election, were not present at 
that election. 

In the same year, while the king of England was in the 
custody of the emperor, Saladin departed this life in the first 
week of Lent ; upon which occasion the duke of Yenice wrote 
'to the said king of England to the following effect : 

The Letter of Dandolo, duke of Venice, Dalmatia, and Cherum, 9 * 
to Richard, king of England, on the death of Saladin. 

" To his most serene lord Richard, by the grace of God, 
king of England, duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl 
of Anjou, Henry Dandolo, by the same grace, duke of Venice, 
Dalmatia, and Cherum, health, and sincere and duteous affec- 
tion. Know ye that it has been intimated to us from a source 
that can be relied on, that Saladin, that enemy of the Christian 
religion, is dead : and one of his sons, whom he is said to have 
appointed heir to the whole of his dominions, is at present in 
Damascus, while the other one is ruling at Babylon" and 
Alexandria. His brother is in the vicinity of Babylon with 
a numerous army, and the greatest dissension exists between 
them. Farewell." 

In the meanwhile, as the time approached for the interview 
between the emperor and the king of France, the king of Eng- 
land found, through other signs, that if this interview should 
take place, the emperor and the king of France would form a 
confederacy against the archbishops of Cologne and Mentz, 

98 Probably a misprint for Croatia. " In Egypt ; the seat of the 

Fatiraite Caliphs. 



A.D. 1193. TREATY FOE THE RELEASE OF THE KING. 295 

and the dukes of Louvain, Lemberg, and Saxony, and many 
other chieftains and nobles who had conspired against the em- 
peror, on account of the death of the bishop of Liege, brother of 
the duke of Louvain, which had been contrived by the emperor. 
The king of England was also apprehensive that if this confer- 
ence should take place, he himself would without doubt be 
delivered into the hands of the king of France. Consequently, 
the king exerted himself to the utmost of his power that the 
conference might be broken off, and that peace should be made 
between the emperor and the said nobles. 

Accordingly, at his urgent entreaty, the emperor and the 
said nobles concluded between themselves a treaty of peace 
and reconciliation to the following effect : The emperor caused 
a great number of bishops, earls, and barons to make oath upon 
his own soul that he had neither commanded nor wished that 
the said bishop of Liege should be put to death, and that when 
he knew it, he was greatly grieved thereat ; and, by way of 
satisfying them, he restored to every one of the persons afore- 
said, who had conspired against him, all the castles that his 
father or he himself had taken from them ; on which they be- 
came reconciled, with the sole exception of the duke of Saxony. 
The interview, also, which was to have taken place between 
him and the king of France at Vaucouleurs was broken off, and 
did not take place. 

These matters being thus arranged, on the Friday next after 
the feast of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, the empe- 
ror came to Worms, where our lord the king of England then 
was. Here a conference was held between them for four days, 
at which were present the bishops of those parts, the dukes of 
Louvain and of Lemberg, and many earls and barons. Of 
the king of England's party, there were present the bishops of 
Bath and Ely ; and on the fourth day, which was the vigil of 
the Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, there came to the king 
of England William Bruyere and Baldwin de Brun ; for as yet 
all quite despaired of the liberation of the king of Eng- 
land. But, by the mercy of God, on the day of the Apostles 
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, matters were finally arranged be- 
tween the emperor and the king in the following manner: 
"Our lord the king will pay to the emperor one hundred 
thousand marks of pure silver, Cologne weight, and another 
fifty thousand marks of silver, instead of the assistance which 
he was to have given the emperor in regaining Apulia. Also, 
the king will give the sister of Arthur, duke of Brittany, his 



296 ANNALS OF HOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1193. 

nephew, in marriage to the son of the duke of Austria, 
and will set at liberty the emperor of Cyprus, but without 
restoring to him his empire ; and, in like manner, will libe- 
rate the daughter of that emperor, whom he will cause to 
be delivered up to the duke of Austria, as being her uncle. 
The said hundred thousand marks, our lord the king is to 
bring at his own risk to the borders of the empire, and so soon 
as they shall have entered any part of the empire, our lord the 
king shall freely and quietly return with a safe conduct to Eng- 
land." To this, the bishops, dukes, earls, and all nobles who 
were then present made oath upon the soul of the emperor : 
on which, the agreement was reduced to writing, as made be- 
tween the emperor and the king of England to the following 
effect : - 

The form of the agreement made between the emperor Henry, and 
Richard, Icing of England,. 

" In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost, Amen. This is the form of the agreement made 
between our lord the emperor, ever august, and our lord 
Richard, the illustrious king of England. Our lord the em- 
peror shall send his messengers with the messengers of the 
king of England, who shall proceed to London, and there re- 
ceive one hundred thousand marks of pure silver, Cologne 
weight ; which money, on being received by the messengers of 
the emperor, and duly weighed, shall be sealed in the presence 
of his messengers, and shall be escorted under the king's 
charge through the territories of his kingdom ; so that if it 
shall chance to be lost in his kingdom, it shall be so lost at the 
said king's risk. After the said money shall have come to the 
borders of the empire, it shall be handed over by the messengers 
of the king to the messengers of our lord the emperor, who 
shall immediately there receive it, and if it shall happen to be 
lost within the territories of the empire, it shall be so lost at 
the risk of the emperor, and the king shall not be damnified, 
nor yet his hostages, thereby. The king shall also give ano- 
ther fifty thousand marks of silver to the emperor and the duke 
of Austria, and shall give hostages for the same, namely, to 
our lord the emperor, sixty hostages for thirty thousand marks, 
and to the duke of Austria, seven hostages for twenty thousand 
marks. And when the hundred thousand marks shall have 
been paid and the hostages given, the king shall be at liberty 






A.T5. 1193. PEACE MADE WITH THE KING OP FRANCE. 297 

to depart. But if our lord the king shall keep the promise 
which he has made to our lord the emperor as to Henry, the 
former duke of Saxony, the emperor will then release and dis- 
charge the king from payment of the said fifty thousand marks, 
and, for the king, will give to the duke of Austria twenty 
thousand marks ; and the king shall not he bound to give to 
the duke of Austria the seven hostages, or to the emperor the 
sixty. When, therefore, the king shall have fulfilled his 
aforesaid promise as to Henry, the former duke of Saxony, and 
shall have paid the said hundred thousand marks, he shall be 
at liberty to depart. Moreover, the king has caused oath to be 
made upon his soul, that he will deliver his niece, the daughter 
of the duke of Brittany, in marriage to the son of the duke of 
Austria, within seven months after he shall have been set at 
liberty, and shall have returned into his own territory, and 
will send her to the entrance of the empire, if they shall 
think fit to Deceive her; and if they shall not, he shall be re- 
leased therefrom. Also, if the promise as to Henry, the for- 
mer duke of Saxony, shall not be fulfilled, the fifty thousand 
marks, remaining unpaid, shall be paid within seven months 
after he shall have been set at liberty, and shall have returned 
to his territory. When the king shall have been set at liberty, 
and shall wish to return, the emperor shall give him a safe 
conduct through his dominions to the limits of his empire, 
and in the harbour where he shall embark, so long as he shall 
there remain, and until he shall depart with a fair wind. More- 
over, all things, both in these as also in other familiar letters, 
sealed with the emperor's seal, with reference to the contracts 
that have been made between them, each according to his own 
ability, will ratify and confirm, and will with good faith ob- 
serve." 

When the king of France heard of this, he immediately 
sent word to earl John that he must take care of himself, for the 
devil was now let loose. Accordingly, earl John, understanding 
that this was said in reference to the king, his brother, imme- 
diately crossed over from England to Normandy, and became 
an adherent of the king of France, not daring to await the 
arrival of the king, his brother, in England. After this, the 
king of England sent William, bishop of Ely, his chancellor, and 
William Bruyere, and other discreet men to make peace on 
some terms or other with the king of France ; who accordingly 
made a treaty of peace with him to the following effect : 



298 ATTffALS OF XQGEB, DE HOYEDEff. A.D. 1193. 

The Form of the Treaty of Peace made between the Icings of 
France and England. 

" Know all men to whom these present letters shall come, 
that "William, chancellor of Richard, king of England, hishop 
of Ely, and legate of the Apostolic See, and, with him, 
"William de Roches, John de Pratelles, and William Bruyere, 
have come to the king of France, on behalf of the king of 
England, with letters patent to the said king, in which it is 
stated that such terms as they shall agree to and conclude 
with him, the said king of England will fully ratify and con- 
firm. Wherefore they have agreed to the following effect, and 
have, on behalf of their lord the king of England, made the 
following covenants with the king of France. Richard, king 
of England, agrees with his liege lord, the king of France, as 
to the whole of the land which the king of France has taken 
from him and his subjects, and which is held by himself and 
his subjects, that he shall retain as much of the same as he 
shall think fit for himself and his people. And, as to earl 
John, the following shall be the terms agreed to. If the men 
of the king of England shall be able fully to make proof in 
the court of our lord the king of France that the said John 
has sworn to obtain money for the liberation of the king of Eng- 
land, and has made agreement to that effect, then the said John 
shall be held bound to pay the same ; also, the whole of the 
lands which he held, when the king of England, his brother, 
took his departure to go beyond sea, he shall hold, on both 
sides of the sea, as freely as he previously held the same ; ex- 
cepted always, that he shall be released from the oath which 
he made as to not entering the territory of England ; and, on 
this point, the said king of England shall give to the lord John 
security, both by himself and by the barons, 98 archbishops, and 
bishops of his dominions, as also by the king of France. But, if 
the said earl John shall attempt to deny that the said letters 
were his, or that he swore to that effect, the men of the king of 
England shall sufficiently prove in the court of the king of 
France, by fit and proper witnesses, that he did swear to obtain 
money to procure the liberation of the king of England. And 
if it shall be proved, as has been said, that the said earl swore 
to seek money for the liberation of the king, or if he shall fail 
in making his proof, then the king of France shall not interest 
98 By oath made by them to that effect. 



A. D. 1193. TREATY OF PEACE WITH THE KING OT FKA^CE. 299 

himself about earl John, if he shall think fit to make peace in 
relation to his own territory above-named. As to count Louis, 
the following shall be the terms agreed to : The king of Eng- 
land shall, according to the advice and to the satisfaction of the 
king of Trance and the archbishop of Kheims, assign to him a 
yearly revenue in his own territory of five hundred pounds An- 
jouin, or more if more there shall be, and shall cause promise to 
be made to him on oath that he will render to count Louis the 
rights and services that his father rendered to count Theobald ; 
and the king of England shall repay to count Louis as much 
money as he retained after the death of count Theobald, and 
which he ought to have paid him. As to Hugh de Gurnay, the 
following shall be the terms agreed to : Hugh shall hold all 
the lands which he has anywhere held of the king of France, 
unless it shall so be that the said Hugh, of his own free 
will, and without compulsion, and without desertion of the 
king of France, shall wish to return to the king of England ; 
and the king of France shall be ready to interrogate the said 
Hugh thereon, without employing force and losing any rights 
of his own thereby. But, if Hugh shall be unwilling to re- 
turn to the king of England with the lands which he holds of 
the king of France, and shall wish to hold other lands of his 
in England and Normandy of the king of England, and not to 
receive anything in exchange for such land, nor to accede to 
any terms entered into by the king of France and the king of 
England relative thereto, then the king of England shall be 
bound to make to the said Hugh a reasonable warranty relative 
thereto. The count of Angouleme and his people shall be set at 
liberty, and shall safely return to his territory, and he and his 
people shall be in the same state in which they were before the 
war ; nor shall he or his receive any detriment for anything that 
shall have taken place during the war. The count of Perche 
shall hold his revenues in full in England, and the king of Eng- 
land and his people shall preserve the peace towards him. The 
count of MelLent shall again enjoy his lands in the territory 
of the king of England. When the king of England shall 
have made peace with the king of France, he shall do ser- 
vice and pay all lawful dues, in the court of the king of 
France, for every fee which he holds of him, in such manner 
as each fee is bound to pay. Also, the king of England shall 
pay to the king of France twenty thousand marks of silver, 
good and pure, Troy weight, payable to him in two years, 



300 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1193. 

at the following periods : at the end of the first half year, from 
the day of his liberation from the custody of the emperor, five 
thousand marks ; at the end of the next half year, from that 
period, five thousand marks ; at the end of the next half year, 
from that period, five thousand marks ; and at the end of the 
next half year from that period, the remaining five thousand 
marks of silver. As security for the observance of all these 
covenants, the king of England shall deliver to the king of 
France Loches and Chatillon sur Saone, and to the archbishop 
of Rheims, Driencourt and Arches. These four castles also 
shall be maintained at the expense of the king of England on 
the following terms : "William des Roches, or he who shall be 
in his place, shall deliver to the king of France two thousand 
pounds Anjouin each month, which shall suffice for a month ; 
and he shall always place in the said castles as much provisions 
as shall suffice for two months; in Loches, for eleven knights and 
a hundred and forty men-at-arms; in Chatillon, for four knights 
and forty men-at-arms. For Driencourt and Arches, the senes- 
chal of Normandy shall make arrangements for provisions and 
garrison according to the will and option of the archbishop 
of Rheims. In case all the aforesaid covenants shall be fully 
observed to the king of France, then, when five thousand 
marks of silver shall have been paid -on behalf of the king of 
England to the king of France, the king of France shall re- 
store to him such one of the aforesaid castles as the king of 
France shall think fit. And, again, when five thousand marks 
of silver shall have been paid on behalf of the king of England 
to the king of France, the king of France shall restore to him 
another such one of the aforesaid castles as the king of France 
shall think fit. But, if ten thousand marks shall be paid at 
the same time to the king of France, on behalf of the 
king of England, the king of France shall restore to him such 
two" of the said four castles as the king of France shall think 
fit. And, if fifteen thousand marks shall be paid at the 
same time to the king of France, the king of France shall re- 
store to him such three of the said four castles as the king of 
France shall think fit. And, if the whole twenty thousand 
marks shall be paid at the same time to the king of France, 
the said four castles shall be restored to the king of England. 
The king of France, however, shall restore not one of the said 
four castles unless the said covenants as to paying the afore- 
99 " Domino," is clearly a misprint for " duo." 



A.D. 1193. TREATY OF PEACE WITH THE KING OF FRANCE. 301 

said sum of money, as to earl John, as to count Louis, as to the 
count of Angouleme and his people, as to the count of Perche, 
and as to the count of Mellent, shall be duly observed by him and 
his. Also, when the king of France shall have received pos- 
session of Loches and Chatillon, and the archbishop of Rheims 
of Driencourt and Arches, the king of France will receive the 
king of England into his favour for the carrying out of the afore- 
said covenants, according to the tenor of this present instrument, 
and will entreat the emperor to set the king of England at 
liberty. The said chancellor, and "William des Koches, John 
de Pratelles, and William Bruyere, have also sworn upon the 
soul of the king of England that the king of England shall ob- 
serve the covenants which are contained in the present instru- 
ment, and that, when the king of England shall return, he shall, 
in his own person, make oath within a reasonable time after 
he shall have been summoned by the king of France, that 
he will observe the aforesaid covenants, and will give to him 
his letters patent thereon. In addition to this, the four per- 
sons aforesaid, and with them the constable of Normandy, Ko- 
bert de Harencourt, and Stephen de Longchamp, have made 
oath that, if the king of England shall not observe the afore- 
said covenants, they will, at Paris, place themselves in the 
custody of the king of France. Such of the archbishops, 
bishops, and barons of the territory of the king of England, 
as the king of France shall think fit, shall, when called upon, 
make oath that they will, at Paris, place themselves in the 
custody of the king of France, if the king of England shall not 
observe the aforesaid covenants, according to the tenor of this 
present treaty. And if the king of England shall chance to 
die before the king of France shall have restored the said four 
castles, then the king of France shall restore the said four 
castles to his right heir, in consideration of his performing the 
said covenants, according to the tenor of this present treaty, 
saving always the rights of the king of France. To the end 
that all the matters aforesaid may remain ratified and in- 
violate, I, William, bishop of Ely, chancellor of the king of 
England, and I, William des Roches, and I, John de Pratelles, 
and I, William Bruyere, have, by command of our lord the 
king of England, corroborated the same with the attestation 
of our respective seals. Done at Mayenne, in the year from 
the Incarnation of our Lord one thousand one hundred and 
ninety-three, on the eighth day before the ides of July." 



302 ANNALS OF HOGEB DE HOVEDEJf. A.D. 1193. 

In the same year, Richard, king of England, while he was 
still in the custody of the Roman emperor, gave to Hubert 
Fitz- Walter, archbishop of Salisbury, the archbishopric of Can- 
terbury, to Savaric, archdeacon of Northampton, the bishopric 
of Bath, and to Henry Marshal, dean of York, the bishopric of 
Exeter ; also, to Master Philip of Poitiers, his clerk, the king 
gave the archdeaconry of Canterbury, to Henry, abbat of Glas- 
tonbury, he gave the bishopric of Worcester, and to the said 
Savaric, bishop of Bath, he gave the abbey of Glastonbury. 
Accordingly, on Henry Marshal, the dean of York, being elected 
to. the bishopric of Exeter, Geoffrey, archbishop of York, who 
was at this time staying at Ripon, gave to his brother Peter 
the deanery of York, in presence of Hamo, the pracentor, 
Simon of Apulia, and a considerable number of his other 
clerks. But because the said Peter was at this time at Paris, 
and Richard, king of England, most urgently demanded 
that the archbishop would give the deajjery to John, prior of 
Douay, brother of the Advocate of Bethune, the said arch- 
bishop, by the advice of his people, gave the deanery to Simon 
of Apulia, his clerk, and by this method evaded the king's 
request. 

But, some time after, the archbishop wanted to undo what 
he had done ; and told the said Simon that he had only given 
the deanery into his charge to be kept in behalf of his brother 
Peter ; on which the canons of the church of York, with one 
consent, elected the said Simon as their dean, though contrary 
to the wishes of the archbishop. In consequence of this, the 
said archbishop, in order that he might please the king, gave 
to the aforesaid master Philip, 1 clerk to the king, and one of 
his household, the said deanery ; on which a dissension broke 
out between the archbishop of York and his canons ; of which 
the following was the cause and origin. 

At the time when Richard, king of England, on his return, 
from the land of Jerusalem, had been made prisoner and de- 
tained in Germany, and an agreement had been entered into, 
between him and the emperor, as to obtaining his release by 
ransom, the king had, by his letters, especially entrusted to 
the archbishop of York the charge of his territories and the 
liberation of his person. On receiving this command, being 
moved with sorrow for his brother's captivity, he called upon 
those canons with whom he was most familiarly acquainted, 
1 Philip of Poitiers, archdeacon of Canterbury, before mentioned. 



A.D. 1193. POPE CLEMENT SEXDS THE PALL TO HUBERT. 303 

and whom he had enriched and exalted, and advised and en- 
treated them to give the fourth part of their revenues towards 
the liberation of the said king, as had been already done in 
other parts of the kingdom. To this they objected, and, getting 
the other canons to join their party, asserted that, in this case 
and other similar ones, he was wishful to subvert the liberties 
of their church ; and accordingly withdrew from his acquaint- 
anceship, and all converse and communication with him. 

At this time, as already-mentioned, the deanery of the church 
of York was vacant, the presentation to which the archbishop 
asserted to belong to himself, while the chapter declared that 
the election lay in their hands. Consequently, an appeal was 
made on behalf of the archbishop to the Apostolic See ; but 
for all this, the chapter proceeded to the election of master 
Simon of Apulia as dean ; after which, the said Simon crossed 
over to the king, who, as previously mentioned, was at this time 
in Germany. Messengers were also sent by the archbishop to 
the Apostolic See for the purpose of urging the appeal, but 
so as to pass through Germany and see the king on their 
road. On their coming before the king and paying their re- 
spects to him, and declaring the causes of their journey, the 
king forbade either side going for this reason to the Roman 
Court, and forbade the person who should attempt to do so, 
without his consent, to enter his kingdom, declaring that he 
would, without delay, effect a reconciliation between them. 

Accordingly, one of the messengers of the archbishop re- 
turned to him with letters from the king, signifying that he 
was, with all haste, to come to him, as, indeed, he had pur- 
posed, but was hindered by circumstances of an emergent 
nature. For, in the meantime, the canons of York had sus- 
pended the great church from the usual celebration of Divine 
service, and the bells from being rung as usual ; on account of 
which the whole city was in commotion. They also stripped 
the altars, and placed a lock on the archbishop's stall in the 
choir ; they also locked up the door by which he entered the 
church when coming from his palace and chapel thither, and 
did many other things for the purpose of insulting him. 

Consequently, when he was just ready to embark, he returned 
to his church from the coast, and sent before some of his clerks 
to warn and command the servants of the church, to observe the 
ancient forms, and to perform the service therein ; but, setting 
at nought his warning and commands, they left the church 



304 ANNULS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1193. 

empty, and deprived of the celebration of Divine service 
therein. 

In the same year, pope Clement sent the pall to Hubert 
Fitz- Walter, the archbishop elect of Canterbury. In the same 
year, Philip, king of France, married Botilda, 2 daughter of 
Waldemar, the former king of Denmark, and sister of Canute, 
the then reigning king of Denmark, at Amiens, on a Saturday, 
in the month of September ; and on the following day had her 
crowned and consecrated queen of France before the envoys 
of the king of Denmark who had escorted her to him, with 
the intention that the said king of Denmark might be induced 
to invade England with a naval armament. But, on the mor- 
row after the first night on which the said king of France had 
known his said wife, after having consummated the marriage, 
he wished to send her away. However, when he wanted to 
place her in the hands of the envoys of her brother, they de- 
clined to receive her, but departed in all haste and returned 
to their own country, while she remained in the hands of the 
king of France, her husband ; and, shortly after, a divorce was 
effected between them by William, archbishop of Rheims, and, 
upon the oaths of Reginald, bishop of Chartres, Philip, bishop 
of Beauvais, Robert, count de Drues, the count de Nevers, 
Walter, the chamberlain of the king of France, and many 
other persons, who swore that the said daughter of the king 
of Denmark was cousin of the earl of Hainault, whose daughter 
the said king of France had previously married. But the 
reason for the king of France acting thus, was, that he might 
marry the daughter of the count Palatine of the Rhine, in 
Germany, the uncle of the before-named emperor of the Ro- 
mans. However, when she was offered by her father and her 
other relations to the king of France, she refused to have him ; 
and, by the advice of her mother, she married Henry, duke of 
Saxony, nephew of Richard, king of England. 

In the meantime, Walter, archbishop of Rouen, and the 
other justiciaries of England, received for the king's ransom, 
from every knight's fee, twenty shillings, and the fourth part 
of all the incomes of the laity, and all the chalices of the 
churches, besides the other treasures of the church. Some 
of the bishops, also, took from the clergy the fourth part of 
their revenues, while others took a tenth, for the ransom of the 
Baid king. The same was done throughout all the king's ter- 
5 Roger of Wendover calls her " Ingelburg." 



A.D. 1193. LETTER OF RICHARD, KING OF ENGLAND. 305 

ritories beyond sea, and in this way they amassed an end- 
less amount of money. After this, the emperor's messengers 
came to London, and there received the greater part of the 
king's ransom by weight and measure, and delivered the same, 
under the attestation of their seals, to persons who were to take 
it to the borders of the empire, at the risk of the king of Eng- 
land. The said emperor also gave to the king of England 
the lands under- written : Provence, Vienne, the Viennais, 
Marseilles, Narbonne, Arles-le-Blanc, and Laon-sur-Rhone, 
as far as the Alps, and whatever the emperor possessed in 
Burgundy, as also the homage of the king of Arragon, the 
homage of the count of Diziers, and the homage of the count of 
Saint Gilles. It deserves to be known that in these territories 
there are five archbishoprics and thirty- three bishoprics. It 
ought also to be known that the emperor was never able to 
establish his dominion over the said territories and subjects, 
nor would they, upon the nomination of the emperor, accept 
of any superior lord. 

The king of England immediately sent to England for queen 
Eleanor, his mother, and for Walter, archbishop of Rouen, and 
many other persons, to come to him in Germany, and appointed 
Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, chief justiciary in England. 
In the meantime, Henry, emperor of the Romans, by the ad- 
vice of the principal men of his empire, named as the day 
for the liberation of Richard, king of England, the second day 
of the week ensuing after the expiration of three weeks from 
the day of the Nativity of our Lord ; 3 on which the king of 
England wrote to Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, to the 
following effect : 

The Letter of Richard, king of England, to Hubert, archbishop 
of Canterbury, on his liberation. 

" Richard, by the grace of God, king of England, duke of 
Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, to the venerable 
father in Christ, and his most dearly-beloved friend, Hubert, by 
the same grace, archbishop of Canterbury, health and the full- 
ness of his sincere affection. Inasmuch as we feel certain that 
you greatly long for our liberation, and that our liberation will 
very greatly delight you, we do therefore desire that you should 
be partakers of our joy. For this reason it is that we have 
thought proper to make known to your affection, that his lord- 
3 The next Monday three weeks. 

VOL. II. X 



306 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1193- 

ship the emperor has appointed a certain day for our liberation, 
namely, the Monday next ensuing after the twentieth day from 
the day of the Nativity of our Lord ; and on the Lord's day then 
next ensuing, we shall be crowned king of the kingdom of Pro- 
vence, which he has given unto us. Wherefore, we do send into 
England to you the letters patent of our lord the emperor rela- 
tive hereto, as also to the rest of our friends and well-wishers ; 
and do you in the meantime, to the best of your power, endea- 
vour to console those whom you know to love us, and whom 
you know to long for our release. Witness myself at Spires, 
this twenty-second day of September." 

The Letter of the emperor Henry to the nobles of England, on the 
liberation of Richard, king of England. 

" Henry, by the grace of God, emperor of the Romans, and 
ever august, to his dearly-beloved friends, the archbishops, 
bishops, earls, barons, knights, and all the faithfnl subjects of 
Richard, the illustrious king of England, his favour and every 
blessing. We have thought proper to intimate to all and every 
of you, that we have appointed a certain day for the liberation 
of our dearly-beloved friend, your lord, Richard, the illustrious 
king of the English, being the second day of the week next 
ensuing after the expiration of three weeks from the day of the 
Nativity of our Lord, at Spires, or else at Worms; and we have 
appointed seven days after that as the day of his coronation as 
king of Provence, which we have promised to him ; and this 
you are to consider as certain and undoubted. For it is our 
purpose and our will to exalt and most highly to honor your 
aforesaid lord, as being our especial friend. Given at The- 
alluse, on the vigil of Saint Thomas the Apostle." 

But before this treaty was confirmed between the emperor 
and the king, the king sent William, bishop of Ely, his chan- 
cellor, and other envoys, into Prance, to earl John, his brother, 
and prevailed upon him to return to Normandy, and to swear 
fealty and peace to the king, his brother, against all men. The 
king also gave orders that all the castles of the honors which 
he had given to him, on either side of the sea, should be deli- 
vered up to him ; but their keepers, notwithstanding the king's 
writ, refused to deliver up to him any of the said castles. The 
earl, being enraged at this, returned to the king of France, and 
became his adherent ; on which the king of France delivered 



A.J). 1194. ENVOYS SENT TO THE EMPEROB OF THE BOMANS. 307 

to him the castle of Driencourt, and the castle of Arches, which 
were to have been delivered to "William, archbishop of Rheims. 

In the same year, Berengaria, queen of England, Joanna, 
queen of Sicily, and the daughter of the emperor of Cyprus, 
came to Rome, under the charge of Stephen de Turnham, and 
were honorably received by our lord the pope, Celestinus, and 
the nobles of Rome ; and they stayed there nearly half a year, 
through fear of the emperor. When they departed thence, 
our lord the pope gave them into the charge of Master Mellur, 
a cardinal ; on which they proceeded to Pisa, thence to Genoa, 
and thence to Marseilles. At Marseilles they were received 
by the king of Arragon, who paid them all due honor and 
respect, and escorted them to the borders of his kingdom, on 
which the count of Saint Gilles escorted them through his terri- 
tory ; and thus they arrived in Poitou. 

In the year of grace 1194, being the second year of the cap- 
tivity of Richard, king of England, the said Richard was still 
in the custody of the emperor of the Romans, at Spires, in 
Germany, on the day of the Nativity of our Lord, which took 
place on a Saturday ; and there he remained until the time of 
his liberation which the emperor had appointed for him, that 
is to say, the second day of the week after the expiration 
of three weeks from the day of the Nativity of our Lord. After 
the emperor had arrived there, together with the archbishops, 
bishops, dukes, and nobles of his empire, and had discussed 
at length the liberation of the king of England, there came to 
the emperor envoys from the king <3f France, and envoys from 
John, earl of Mortaigne, brother of the king of England ; and 
they made offer to the emperor, on behalf of the king of France, 
of fifty thousand marks of silver, and on behalf of earl John of 
fifty thousand marks of silver, on condition that he should 
keep the king of England in his custody until the Feast of 
Saint Michael the Archangel next ensuing ; or, if the emperor 
should prefer it, they would pay him at the end of every month, 
so long as he should detain the king of England in his custody, 
one thousand pounds of silver ; or, again, if the emperor should 
prefer it, the king of France would give him one hundred 
thousand marks of silver, and the earl John would give him 
fifty thousand marks of silver, on condition that he would de- 
liver up to them the king of England, or at least detain him 
in his custody for the space of one year from that time. Be- 
hold, how they loved him ! After hearing them, the emperor 

x 2 



308 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1194. 

put off the day of the liberation of the king of England, and 
appointed another day for his liberation, namely, the day of 
the Purification of Saint Mary, and at Mentz. 

In the meantime, Geoffrey, archbishop of York, on the 
eighth day before the Nativity of our Lord, came to York, and, 
by the advice of prudent men, appointed ministers for the 
metropolitan church of York, which he found deserted, in 
order that they might, as was fitting, perform Divine service 
in the said church. And this was accordingly observed, until 
the canons and their chaplains, by means of the influence 
and violence of the laity, were restored. After this, four of 
the chief men of the church, who, in consequence of the sus- 
pension of service in the said church, had been excommunicated, 
crossed over to the king who was then set at liberty, and, re- 
ceiving permission from him, because he was angry that the 
archbishop had not come as he had been commanded by him, 
set out for Rome. Against them, deputies were also sent thither 
by the archbishop. 

Each side accordingly appearing in presence of pope Celes- 
tinus, the election of the dean was discussed at great length, and 
after due deliberation, as it was acknowledged to have taken 
place after appeal duly made, it was therefore to be annulled, 
or rather to be pronounced as having been null and void. Our 
lord the pope, also, being wishful for the present to avoid pro- 
nouncing a decision in the matter, whether the presentation 
to the deanery of right belonged to the archbishop or to the 
chapter, relying on his own power, the extent of which it is 
lawful for no one to question, saving always for the future the 
rights both of the archbishop as also of the chapter, gave the 
deanery to the before-named Simon of Apulia, and confirmed, 
and with his golden ring invested him with the same. 

This matter being thus disposed of, they immediately pro- 
ceeded to slander and accusations against the said archbishop, 
declaring that he was a violent spoliator of themselves and 
the other clergy, a dishonest extortioner, that he had with 
an armed band broken open the doors of churches, had simo- 
niacally divided and retained in his own hands ecclesiastical 
benefices, that he had paid no regard to appeals, and had set at 
nought the privileges of the Roman Pontiff, and, to express it 
in a few words, asserted that he quite despised his duties as 
archbishop, and was devoted to hawking, hunting, and other 
military pursuits. For these, and for other reasons, they sought 



A.D. 1194. LIBERATION OF EICHAED, ZING OF ENGLAND. 309 

to depose him ; and they in especial, whom he had enriched 
with the greatest honors, and with inestimable wealth and 
revenues in the church of York, and beyond what, with due 
regard to God, he ought to have done. Of such it is, that the 
Lord saith, " I have nourished and brought up children, and 
they have rebelled against me." 4 Therefore, let them beware, 
lest the just Judge despise them, and lest with the traitor 
Judas they be condemned to hell. 

These allegations being made, our lord the pope wrote to 
Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, and his fellow judges, that if there 
should be any to accuse the archbishop on these charges, they 
should carefully hear what was alleged on either side, and 
after enquiry into the truth thereof, send their report, sealed 
with their seals, to the Apostolic See. But, if no accuser 
should appear, and the archbishop should be attacked by pub- 
lic rumour, they were to call upon him to clear himself by 
the testimony of three bishops and as many abbats. But, as 
the archbishop had appealed before the citation of the judges, 
and had proceeded on the road for the purpose of urging his 
appeal, the said judges, in accordance with the contents of the 
rescript of our lord the pope, assigned him a space of three months 
for the said appeal, appointing the calends of July as the day for 
his^ippearance. The archbishop, however, did not appear at the 
time so named, both on account of the king's prohibition, as also 
by reason of the unwholesomeness of the atmosphere that then 
prevailed at Rome. His clerks, however, who were at this 
time staying at the court of Rome, alleging the above as the 
causes of his absence, obtained of the pope, that whatever had 
been done against the archbishop in the meantime, after his 
appeal, should be revoked, as being null and void ; because it was 
not his fault that he had not come to the court of Rome ; and 
the time on which he was to present himself in the Apos- 
tolical presence was fixed by our lord the pope, upon the 
octave of the feast of Saint Martin, then next ensuing. But 
because not even then he appeared in the Roman court,, either 
personally, or by sufficient proxy, he was at the Nativity of 
our Lord next ensuing, suspended from the performance of all 
episcopal duties. 

The liberation of Richard, king of England. 
In the meantime, Henry, emperor of the Romans, with the 
4 Is. i. 2. 



310 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1194. 

nobles of his empire, and Richard, king of England, with queen 
Eleanor, his mother, Walter, archbishop of Rouen, William, 
bishop of Ely, his chancellor, and Savaric, bishop of Bath, met 
at Mentz, on the Purification of Saint Mary, and, a con- 
ference being there held as to the liberation of the king of 
England, the emperor wished, in his eagerness for the money 
which the king of France and earl John had offered him, to 
recede from his agreement. Bringing with him the envoys from 
the king of Prance and the envoys from earl John, in whose 
number was Robert de Nunant, brother of Hugh, bishop of 
Coventry, he delivered to the king of England the letters of 
the king of France and of earl John for him to read, which 
they had sent to prevent his liberation. On seeing and read- 
ing these, the king was very much disturbed and confused, 
and despaired of his liberation. 

Accordingly, by his summons, the emperor convened on this 
subject the archbishops of Mentz, Cologne, and Saltzburg, the 
bishops of Worms, Spires, and Liege, the duke of Suabia, 
the brother of the emperor, the dukes of Austria and Lou- 
vain, the count Palatine of the Rhine, and the other nobles 
of the empire who had been sureties on behalf of the emperor 
between him and the king of England for his performance of 
the articles agreed upon between them. These boldly appeared 
before the emperor, and reproved him most severely for attempt- 
ing in so shameless a manner to recede from his agreement, 
and prevailed upon him to release and dismiss the king of Eng- 
land from his custody : a stipulation, however, having been 
made that the king of England should deliver to the emperor 
Walter, archbishop of Rouen, Savaric, bishop of Bath, Bald- 
win Wac, and many others of his earls and barons, as hos- 
tages for the payment of the remainder of the money due 
for his ransom, and for his keeping the peace towards the 
emperor and his empire, and all the lands of his dominions. 

Accordingly, the archbishops of Mentz and Cologne delivered 
him, free and released by the emperor, into the hands of his 
mother Eleanor, on the day before 5 the nones of February, 
being the sixth day of the week, an Egyptian day, or what 
the people of modern times call an unlucky day ; and so, upon 
an unlucky day, the Lord restored him to liberty. On the said 
king asking Robert de Nunant, brother of Hugh, bishop of 
Coventry, to be one of his hostages, Robert made answer that 

5 The 4th February : other writers say that it was the 2nd February. 



A.D. 1194. LIBERATION OF RICHARD, KING OF ENGLAND. 311 

he was a liegeman of earl John, and, therefore, declined to he a 
hostage for him ; at which the king being incensed, ordered him 
to be seized and thrown into prison, which was accordingly 
done. 

On the same day on which the king was set at liberty from 
the custody of the emperor, he sent one Salt de Brail, as his 
messenger, to his nephew, Henry, count of Champagne, in Sulia, 
and the other Christian princes, informing them of the day of 
his liberation ; and that, if God should grant him vengeance 
against his enemies, and peace, he would come by the time ap- 
pointed to succour them against the pagans. He also promised 
to the said Salt de Bruil that he would give him lands to the 
value of forty pounds on his return from the land of Sulia. 
On the same day, the king, by his letters, summoned Hugh, 
bishop of Coventry, to appear in his court, and to take his 
trial before the bishops, because he himself was a bishop, and 
before certain laymen, because he held under him a layman's 
office, upon the charges that were made against him. 

On the same day, the emperor of the Eomans, and the arch- 
bishops, bishops, dukes, and counts of the empire, joining in a 
letter in common, and appending their seals thereto, sent word 
to the king of France and to earl John, immediately upon 
sight of the said letter to restore to the king of England the 
castles, cities, fortresses, towns, lands, and all other things 
which they had taken from him, while he had been in the 
custody of the emperor ; and, unless they did so, they were to 
know for certain that they would aid the king of England to 
the utmost of their power, in recovering everything that he 
had lost. After this, the king of England made promise of, and 
by his charters confirmed, to certain archbishops, bishops, 
dukes, and counts, and many of the barons of the empire, yearly 
revenues, for their homage and fealty, and aid against the king 
of France. He accordingly received the homage of the arch- 
bishop of Mentz, the archbishop of Cologne, the bishop of 
Liege, the duke of Austria, the duke of Lou vain, the marquis 
of Montferrat, the duke of Nemburg, 6 the duke of Suabia, the 
brother of the emperor, the count Palatine of the Ehine, the 
son of the count of Hainault, the count of Holland, and many 
others, saving always their fealty to the emperor. 

It ought also to be known that the king of England was in 
captivity with the emperor during a period of one year, six 
weeks, and three days. 

6 Probably meaning Mecklenburgh. 



312 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1194. 

On the king being set at liberty, all who were present shed 
tears of joy. The emperor then gave to the king a safe con- 
duct as far as the port of Antwerp. On the king reaching 
Cologne, the archbishop of Cologne received him with joy; and, 
in his delight at his liberation, celebrated the following mass : 
" Nunc scio vere, quia misit Dominus angelum suum, et 
eripuit me de manu Herodis, et de expectatione plebis Judcsorum," 
&c. 7 And, when the king took his departure thence, the 
said archbishop escorted him as far as the gate of Antwerp, 
where the river Ehine falls into the sea. 8 On the king arriving 
at this place, he embarked on board the galley of Alan Trenche- 
mere, in order that in it he might more easily pass among the 
islands ; but each night he left the galley and went on board 
a large and very fine ship which had come from Eye, and lay on 
board of it at night, and then, in the daytime, returned on board 
the galley, until he arrived at the port of Swiene, which is 
in Flanders, in the territory of the count of Hainault, having 
been four days on his voyage from the port of Antwerp to the 
port of Swiene ; and he made a stay of five days in the port of 
Swiene. On the sixth day, about the third hour, he left the 
port of Swiene ; and, on the day after, about the ninth hour, 
landed in England, at the port of Sandwich, it being the third 
day before the ides of March, 9 and the Lord's Day. 

In the meantime, there came into England, not long before the 
king's arrival, Adam, of Saint Edmund's, a clerk, and one of the 
household of earl John, being sent by him to England with 
letters for the purpose of fortifying his castles against the king, 
his brother. Having come to London, and it being in his 
power to cross over without any hindrance, he went to the 
mansion of Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, and dined 
with him; where he uttered many boasts about the prosperous 
circumstances of his master, and the familiar acquaintanceship 
that existed between the king of France and his master, and 
mentioned that the king of France had delivered up to him 
the castle of Driencourt and the castle of Arches, which were 
to have been placed in the hands of the archbishop of Kheims, 
according to the terms of the writing above-mentioned, and 

' " Now I know of a surety that the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath 
delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the 
people of the Jews." Acts xii. 11. The commencement of the introit on 
the feast of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. 

8 Our Chronicler is at fault in his geography here. 9 The 12th March. 



A.D. 1194. THE BISHOP OF DURHAM LEVIES AN AIQTY. 313 

said that he would have delivered stll more to his master, if 
his master had had men in whom he could place confidence. 

The consequence was, that with these and similar boasts he 
exasperated the lord archbishop of Canterbury, and all who 
heard these speeches ; but still, from respect to the table, no one 
laid hands on him. However, after dinner, when the before- 
named Adam was on his return to his lodging, the mayor of 
London laid hands on him, and detained him, and took pos- 
session of all his documents, in which were contained the com- 
mands of earl John, and gave them up to the archbishop of 
Canterbury. On the following day, having convened in his 
presence the bishops, earls, and barons of the kingdom, he 
shewed them the letters of earl John, and the purport thereof ; 
immediately on which, by the common consent of the council 
of the kingdom, it was decided that earl John should be dis- 
seised of all his lands in England, and that his castles should 
be besieged ; which was accordingly done. 

On the same day, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, Hugh, 
bishop of Lincoln, Richard, bishop of London, Gilbert, bishop 
of Rochester, Godfrey, bishop of Winchester, the bishops of 
Worcester and Hereford, and Henry, bishop elect of Exeter, 
together with the abbats and many of the clergy of the pro- 
vince of Canterbury, met together in the chapel of the Sick 
Monks at Westminster, and pronounced sentence of excom- 
munication against earl John, and all his abettors and advisers, 
who had disturbed the peace and kingdom of the king of Eng- 
land, or should disturb the same, unless, desisting from their 
hostilities, they should come to give him satisfaction. They 
then appealed to the presence of our lord the pope, against 
William, bishop of Ely, in order that he might not in future 
discharge the duties of the legateship in England, and, confirm- 
ing their appeal with their seals, sent the same to our lord the 
king, and then to the Supreme Pontiff, for his confirmation. 
This appeal was made on the fourth day before the ides of 
February, being the fifth day of the week. 

Upon this, all the persons who had charge of the siege of 
the castles belonging to earl John, returned to their homes. 10 
Accordingly, the bishop of Durham, to whom had been en- 
trusted the siege of the castle of Tickhill, levied a large army 
in Yorkshire and Northumberland, and other parts of his lands, 

10 This seems contradicted by what follows, unless we take " patrias 
suas " to mean " their respective districts." 



314 ANNALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1194. 

and laid siege to it. Earl David, also, brother of the king of 
Scotland, with Ranulph, earl of Chester, and the earl of Ferrers, 
with a great army, laid siege to Nottingham castle. The arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, also, with a large force, laid siege to 
Marlborough, which was in a few days surrendered to him, 
safety to life and limb being granted to 'the garrison. In like 
manner, the castle of Lancaster, of which Theobald Fitzwalter, 
his brother, had charge in behalf of earl John, was surrendered 
to him ; Saint Michael's Mount, in Cornwall, was also surren- 
dered to him, which Henry de la Pomeroy, after expelling the 
monks, had fortified against the king ; and the said Henry, on 
hearing of the king's arrival, died of fright. 

These three castles, however, Marlborough, Lancaster, and 
Saint Michael's Mount, were surrendered before the king's 
arrival ; while the other two, namely, Nottingham and Tick- 
hill, made a stout resistance to the besiegers. But, on 
hearing of the king's arrival, the people in the castle of 
Tickhill, with the permission of the bishop of Durham, sent 
two knights to see if the king really had returned, and to offer 
their castle to him. The king, however, refused to receive it, 
unless they would place themselves at his mercy, without any 
exception ; and accordingly they returned, and told Robert de 
la Mare, the constable of the castle, and the rest of the garrison, 
the king's intentions. Upon this, after conferring with the 
bishop of Durham, who had promised them safety to life and 
limb, they surrendered to him, in the king's behalf, the castle 
of Tickhill. 

The garrison, however, of the castle of Nottingham did not 
send any of their number to meet the king. The king, being 
consequently much exasperated, came to Nottingham on the day 
of the Annunciation of our Lord, being the sixth day of the 
week, with such a vast multitude of men, and such a clangor 
of trumpets and clarions, that those who were in the castle, on 
hearing and seeing this, were astonished, and were confounded 
and alarmed, and trembling came upon them; but still they 
could not believe that the king had come, and supposed that the 
whole of this was done by the chiefs of the army for the purpose 
of deceiving them. The king, however, took up his quarters 
near to the castle, so that the archers of the castle pierced the 
king's men at his very feet. The king, being incensed at this, 
put on his armour, and commanded his army to make an assault 
on the castle ; on which a sharp engagement took place between 



A.D. 1194. THE BESIEGED IMPLOBE THE KDfG's MEKCT. 315 

them and the people in the castle, and many fell on both sides, 
killed and wounded. The king himself slew one knight with 
an arrow, and having at last prevailed, drove them hack into 
the castle, took some outworks which they had thrown up with- 
out the gates, and burned the outer gates. 

On the same day came thither Hubert, the archbishop of 
Canterbury, having his cross carried before him. Geoffrey, 
archbishop of York, however, did not have his cross carried, but 
made complaint to the king about the archbishop, who had 
caused his cross to be carried in the diocese of York. "When 
the archbishop of Canterbury heard this, and saw that the arch- 
bishop of York did not have his carried, he made answer, "I 
carry my cross throughout the whole of England, and I ought 
to carry it, as being primate of the whole of England ; whereas 
you do not carry your cross, and, perhaps, you ought not to 
carry it ; and therefore, matters standing as they do, I make 
appeal to my lord the pope." 

On the twenty-sixth day of the month of March, the king 
of England ordered his stone-engines to be put together, hav- 
ing come to the determination that he would not make another 
assault on the castle until his engines of war had been got in 
readiness ; but he ordered gibbets to be erected near the castle, 
on which he hanged some men-at-arms of earl John, who had 
been taken prisoners outside of the castle. 

On the twenty-seventh day of the month of March, Hugh, 
bishop of Durham, and those who were with him at the siege 
of the castle of Tickhill, came to the king at Nottingham, bring- 
ing with them the prisoners who had been taken in the castle 
of Tickhill ; on which the king went forth to meet them. On 
seeing the king the bishop of Durham dismounted, and the 
king, in like manner, went to meet him and embraced him ; 
after which, remounting their horses, they repaired to the siege. 
On the same day, while the king was sitting at dinner, Ralph 
Murdac, and William de Wendeval, constables of the castle or 
Nottingham, sent two of their companions to see the king ; who 
after having seen him, returned to the castle, to tell those 
who had sent them what they had heard and seen respecting 
the king and his preparations. 

When William de Wendeval and Roger de Montbegum 
heard of this, they went forth with twelve others, from the 
castle, and threw themselves upon the king's mercy, and re- 
turned to the castle no more. On the twenty-eighth day of 



316 ANNALS OP EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1194. 

March, through the mediation of the archbishop of Canterbury, 
Ralph Murdac, Philip de Worcester, and Ralph de Worcester, 
his brother, and all the rest who were in the castle, surrendered 
the castle to the king, and threw themselves on the king's 
mercy, for life, and limb, and worldly honor. 

On the twenty-ninth day of March, Richard, king of Eng- 
land, went to see Clipston and the forests of Sherwood, 
which he had never seen before, and they pleased him greatly ; 
after which, on the same day, he returned to Nottingham. 
On the thirty-first day of March, being the fourth day of the 
week, Richard, king of England, held the first day of his 
council at Nottingham, at which were present queen Eleanor, 
the king's mother, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, who 
at that council sat on the king's right hand, Geoffrey, 
archbishop of York, who sat on his left hand, Hugh, bishop 
of Durham, Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, William, bishop of Ely, 
the king's chancellor, William, bishop of Hereford, Henry, 
bishop of Worcester, Henry, bishop of Exeter, John, 
bishop of Whitherne, earl David, brother of the king of Scot- 
land, Hamelin, earl of Warenne, Ranulph, earl of Chester, 
William, earl of Ferrers, William, earl of Salisbury, and 
Roger Bigot. 

On the same day, the king dispossessed Gerard de Camville 
of the castle and shrievalty of Lincoln, and Hugh Bardolph 
of the shrievalty of Yorkshire, and of the castle of York, and 
of Scarborough, and of the custodianship of Westmoreland, 
and set up all the offices before-mentioned for sale. Ac- 
cordingly, after the chancellor had offered to give the king for 
the shrievalty of Yorkshire, the shrievalty of Lincolnshire, 
and the shrievalty of Northamptonshire, one thousand five 
hundred marks at the beginning of the agreement, and every 
year an additional hundred marks for each of the said counties, 
Geoffrey, archbishop of York, offered the king three thousand 
marks for the shrievalty of York, and every year an additional 
hundred marks ; on which, the chancellor being outbid, the 
archbishop obtained the shrievalty of York, and accordingly 
became a servant of the king, and threw himself into the 
king's power. 

On the thirty-first day of the month of March, that is to 
say, on the day before the calends of April, the king of Eng- 
land held the second day of his council, at which he demanded 
judgment to be pronounced against earl John, his brother, who, 



A.D. 1194. COMPLAINTS AGAINST THE AECHBISHOP OF YOEK. 317 

against the fealty which he had sworn to him, had taken pos- 
session of his castles, laid waste his lands on both sides of the 
sea, and had made a treaty against him with his enemy, the 
king of France. In like manner, against Hugh de Nunant, 
bishop of Coventry, he demanded judgment to be pronounced, 
who, being aware 11 of their secret plans, had devoted himself, 
and had given his adherence to the king of France and earl 
John, his enemies, devising all kinds of mischief to the injury 
of his kingdom. Judgment was accordingly given, that earl 
John and the bishop of Coventry should be peremptorily cited, 
and if they should not come within forty days to take their 
trial, they pronounced that earl John had forfeited all rights 
in the kingdom, and that the bishop of Coventry would be 
subjected to the judgment of the bishops, because he him- 
self was a bishop, and of the laity, because he had been a sheriff 
under the king. 

On the calends of April, being the first day of that month, 
the said king of England held the third day of his council, on 
which he enacted that there should be granted to him, out of 
every carucate of land throughout the whole of England, the 
sum of two shillings, which, by the ancients, was called 
Temantale. 12 He then commanded that every man should 
render to him the third part of a knight's service, according as 
each fee would bear, in order to make preparations for crossing 
over with him to Normandy He then demanded of the monks 
of the Cistercian order all their wool for the current year ; but 
as this was to inflict a grievous and insupportable burden upon 
them, they made a pecuniary composition with him. 

On the second day of the month of April, being Saturday, 
he held the fourth and last day of his council, upon which all, 
both clergy as well as laity, who wished to make complaint to 
him of the archbishop of York, made their complaints, which 
were many in number, as to his extortions and unjust exac- 
tions ; the archbishop of York, however, gave them no answer. 
After this, by the advice and artifices of the chancellor, as it 
is said, Gerard de Camville was arraigned for harbouring some 
robbers, who had plundered the goods of certain merchants 

11 " Consciura " appears to be a mistake for " conscius," 

12 Holinshed calls this " Tee men toll," or " Theynae toll." There is 
some doubt as to the origin of the name, whether it is derived from " tene- 
mentum," or, more probably, from the Saxon, meaning " a toll paid by ten 
men," or " decenniers," the whole of which would amount to a pound. 
See vol. i. p. 550. 



318 ANNALS OF EOGEK J)E EOVEDEN. A.D. 1194. 

going to the fair of Stamford ; and it was said that they had 
set out from his residence for the purpose of committing the 
robbery, and after committing it, had returned to him. They 
also accused him of treason, because he had refused to come 
at the summons of the king's justices, or take his trial as to 
the aforesaid harbouring of the robbers, or produce them 
before the king's justices ; hut made answer that he was a 
vassal of earl John, and would take his trial in his court. 
They also arraigned him for having taken up arms, and aiding 
earl John, and others of the king's enemies, in taking the castles 
of Tickhill and Nottingham. Gerard de Camville, however, 
denied all these charges which were so made by them against 
him ; on which they gave pledges to follow their suit, and 
Gerard de Camville gave pledge to defend himself by one of his 
freeholders. 

On the same day, our lord the king appointed as the day of 
his coronation, at Winchester, the close of Easter. On the same 
day, the king also proceeded to Clipston, to meet the king of 
the Scots, and gave orders that all who had been taken at the 
castle of Nottingham, the castle of Tickhill, the castle of Marl- 
borough, the castle of Lancaster, and at Mount Saint Michael, 
should come and meet him at Winchester the day after the 
close of Easter. On the third day of the month of August, 
namely, Palm Sunday, the king of England stayed at Clip- 
ston, and the king of the Scots at Worksop, on account of the 
solemnity of the day. On the fourth day of the month of 
April, the king of England and the king of Scotland came to 
Sewell. On the fifth day of the month of April, the king of 
England and the king of Scotland came toMalton, where the king 
of Scotland demanded of the king of England the dignities and 
honors which his predecessors had enjoyed in England. He 
also demanded that the earldoms of Northumberland, Cumber- 
land, and Westmoreland, and the earldom of Lancaster, should 
be given up to him, as of right enjoyed by his predecessors : 
to which the king made answer, that he would satisfy him ac- 
cording to the advice given by his earls and barons. 

On the sixth day of the month of April, the said kings 
came to the house of Peter the Eorester of Rutland. On the 
seventh day of the month of April, the said kings came to 
Gaindinton. On the eighth day of the month of April, the 
said kings stayed at Gaindinton, out of respect for the day of 
the Preparation 13 of our Lord. On the ninth day of the month 
13 " Parasceue," Good Friday. 



A.D. 1194. CHARTEK GRANTED TO THE KING OF SCOTLAND. 319 

of April, on the vigil of Easter, the said kings arrived at 
Northampton ; and on the tenth and eleventh days of the 
month of April, the said kings stayed at Northampton, where 
the king of England, taking counsel with his bishops, earls, 
and barons, after due deliberation in -the council, made 
answer to the king of Scotland that he ought on no account to 
do what he had requested as to Northumberland, and especi- 
ally in those times, at which nearly all the powerful men of 
the kingdoms of the Franks were at enmity with him. For, 
if he were to do so, it would seem that this was rather the 
effect of fear than of affection. 

However, in the presence of his mother Eleanor, Hubert, 
archbishop of Canterbury, Hugh, bishop of Durham, Jocelyn, 
bishop of Glasgow, and many others, both clergy and laity, 
of both kingdoms, the king granted, and by his charter con- 
firmed, to William, king of the Scots, and his heirs for ever, 
that whensoever they should, at his summons, come to the 
court of the king of England, the bishop of Durham and the 
sheriff of Northumberland should receive them at the river 
Tweed, and should, with a safe" conduct, escort them as far as 
the river Tees, and there the archbishop of York and the sheriff 
of York should receive them, and escort them, with a safe 
conduct, to the borders of the county of York, and so, by the 
respective bishops and sheriffs, they should be escorted from 
county to county, until they should have arrived at the court of 
the king of England ; and that, from the time that the king of 
Scots should enter the territory of the king of England, he 
should have daily from the king's purse one hundred shillings 
for his livery ; and when the king of Scotland should have 
arrived at the court of the king of England, so long as he 
should be staying at the court of the said king of England, he 
should have daily thirty shillings for his livery, and twelve 
wastels 14 for the lords' table, twelve simnels for the lords' 
table, 15 and four gallons of wine for the lords 5 table, and eight 

14 Wastels were a peculiar kind of delicate bread, probably something 
like the rusks of the present day. " Dominicus" is added to describe the 
quality, as probably meaning that these articles of provision were to be of 
the best kind, and suited for the lords' table. 

15 Simnel cakes were prob'ably so called from being made of " simila," 
the finest wheat flour. There were the " siminelli sali," and the " simi- 
nelli dominici," the inferior, and the best bread, the latter being unfer- 
mented. They were made in the shape of plates, or cups, and were some- 
times marked with the figure of the Virgin Mary. They are made in 
Shropshire at the present day. 



320 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1194. 

gallons of household wine, two pounds of pepper, four pounds 
of cinnamon, two stone of wax or else four waxen links, 
forty long and thick lengths of best candle, such as is used by 
the king, and eighty lengths of other candle for household pur- 
poses : and that, when he should wish to return to his own 
country, he should be escorted by the bishops and sheriffs from 
county to county, until he should have arrived at the river 
Tweed : and should in like manner have daily one hundred 
shillings from the purse of the king of England for his livery, 

The charter of this grant and confirmation of the king of 
England was delivered to William, king of Scotland, in the 
town of Northampton, on the second day of Easter, by the hand 
of William, bishop of Ely, the king's chancellor. 

In the year from the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ 
1194, which was also the fifth year of the reign of king Eichard, 
on the twelfth day of the month of April, being the third day 
in Easter week, Eichard, king of England, departed from 
Northampton, and proceeded as far as Selveston ; and Hubert, 
archbishop of Canterbury, and Hugh, bishop of Durham, pro- 
ceeded to Brackley, where was a lodging prepared for the bishop 
of Durham, which he had held for thirty years past at the 
award of the marshal of king Henry. When his entertainment 
had been prepared, the servants of the king of Scotland came 
up and attempted to expel the servants of the bishop, but were 
unable. However, they purchased provisions for the king, and 
prepared the same in a house belonging to the same estate. 
When the bishop of Durham came thither, and was told 
by his people what had taken place, he was determined 
not to move a step thence, but boldly entered his lodging, and 
ordered the tables to be set. While he was at dinner, Hubert, 
the archbishop of Canterbury, came and offered him his lodg- 
ing, and advised him to leave that one to the king of Scot- 
land, and quit the house. 

When the king of Scotland, at a late hour, returned from hunt- 
ing, and was informed of what had happened, he was greatly 
offended, and refused to go there, but ordered all that had been 
prepared for him to be given to the poor, while he himself went 
to the king at Silveston, and made complaint to him of the 
insult he had received from the bishop of Durham ; on which, 
the king, being greatly vexed, censured the bishop of Durham. 

On the thirteenth day of the month of April, the king came 
to Woodstock. On the fourteenth day the king came to Free- 



A.D. 1194. THE SECOND CORONATION OF KING EICHAED. 321 

mantle. On the fifteenth day of the month of April, the king 
of England came to Winchester, and on the same day dispos- 
sessed Godfrey, bishop of Winchester, of the castle and county 
of Winchester, and of the . two manors which the bishop 
had bought of him before his departure for Jerusalem, and 
of a great part of his inheritance. On the sixteenth day of 
the month of April, after dinner, the king of England left 
the castle of Winchester for the priory of Saint Swithin, and 
lay there that night, and took the bath ; and he sent word to 
Geoffrey, the archbishop of York, not to come next day to his 
coronation with his cross, lest there might happen to be a dis- 
pute between him and the archbishop of Canterbury. Because 
he was forbidden to carry his cross, he declined to be present at 
the king's coronation. 

The Coronation of Richard, Icing of England, after Tii& liberation. 

On the seventeenth day of the month of April, being the Lord's 
day, and the octave of Easter, there being assembled in the church 
of Saint Swithin, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, John, arch- 
bishop of Dublin, Hugh, bishop of Durham, Hugh, bishop of 
Lincoln*, Richard, bishop of London, Gilbert, bishop of Rochester, 
William, bishop of Ely, Sefrid, bishop of Chichester, Henry, 
bishop of Exeter, William, bishop of Hereford, and the bishops 
of Worcester, Saint David 's and Bangor ; and, many of the 
abbats, clergy, and people being there present, Richard, king 
of England, arrayed in royal robes and having a crown of gold 
on his head, proceeded from his chamber, carrying in his 
right hand the royal sceptre, on the top of which was a re- 
presentation of the cross, and in his left hand a wand of gold, 
on the top of which was the figure of a dove. On his right 
hand walked William, bishop of Ely, his chancellor, and on his 
left Richard, bishop of London. A procession also preceded 
them in due order, of archbishops, bishops, abbats, monks, and 
clerks. The earls also, and barons, and knights, and a great 
multitude of the common people, followed the king. A canopy 
of silk, supported on four lances, was carried over the king, 
k by these four earls, Roger Bigot, earl of Norfolk, William, 
earl of the Isle of Wight, the earl of Salisbury, and the earl of 
Ferrers. Three swords also, taken from the king's treasury, 
were borne before the king, one of which was carried by Wil- 
liam, king of the Scots, while Hameline, earl of Warenne, 
carried another, and Ranulph, earl of Chester, carried the third ; 

VOL. II. Y 



322 ANXALS OF 110GER DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1194. 

in the middle of them walked the king of the Scots, with the 
earl of "Warenne on his right hand, and the earl of Chester on 
hi& left. And thus, wearing the crown, he was led into the 
metropolitan chnrch of Saint Swithin up to the altar ; where, 
falling on his knees, he devoutly received the benediction from 
Hugh, archbishop of Canterbury, and was then led to his seat. 
Eleanor, the queen's mother, was seated with her maids of 
honor on the northern side of the church, opposite the king. 
The archbishop of Canterbury also celebrated the mass ; and 
the king was led by the before-named bishops to the offertory, 
and was then re-conducted to his seat. 

After the celebration of the mass, the king was re-conducted 
to his chamber, the procession going before him in the order 
above stated. Having taken off his more weighty vestments 
and his crown, the king put on lighter garments and a lighter 
crown, and then entered the refectory of the monks to dine 
there ; on which the before-mentioned archbishops and bishops, 
with the king of Scotland, and the earls and barons, took their 
seats at table, each according to his rank and dignity, and 
feasted magnificently. The citizens of London, having made 
the king a payment of two hundred marks, served in the cellars, 
notwithstanding the claim of the citizens of Winchester. The 
citizens of Winchester, however, served in the kitchen. On 
the same day, at a late hour, after dinner, the king returned 
to his mansion in Winchester castle. 

On the eighteenth day of the month of April, being the day 
after the king's coronation, Jollan, 16 brother of Henry 17 de la 
Pomeroy, was accused of having traitorously taken part in the 
capture of Saint Michael's Mount, in Cornwall, and he chose 
rather to be banished from England than take his trial on the 
charge in the king's court. On the nineteenth day of the month 
of April, Hugh, bishop of Durham, of his own accord, no one 
compelling him so to do, gave up to the king the county of 
Northumberland, with its castles and other appurtenances; 
and the king ordered him to deliver the same to Hugh Bar- 
dolph. 

When William, king of Scotland, heard of this, he imme- 
diately offered the king of England fifteen thousand marks 
of silver for Northumberland and its appurtenances ; saying 
that earl Henry, his father, held it by gift of king Henry the 

16 V. r. John. ' 7 The word "rcgis" after this word is superfluous,, 

and evidently a typographical error. 



A.D. 1194. KECOXCILIATIOX OF THE BISHOPS. 323 

Second, and that after him, king Malcolm, his son, held it in peace 
for five years. Upon this, the king of England, after taking 
counsel with his people, made answer to the king of Scotland 
that he would give him the whole of Northumberland, except- 
ing the castles, for the said sum ; but the king of Scotland 
declined to receive it without the castles. On the twentieth 
day of the month of April, the king of England caused the more 
wealthy persons to be separated from the rest of those who had 
been taken prisoners in the castles of Tickhill and Nottingham, 
and the other caetles of earl John, and to be placed in prison 
to be ransomed ; while the others he let go, on their finding 
sureties that they would appear at his summons, and abide by 
the judgment of his court ; on which each of them found sure- 
ties for a hundred marks, if he should not return to the court 
of the king. 

On the twenty-first day of the month of April, William, 
king of the Scots, again made an attempt to see if he could in 
any way obtain the earldom of Northumberland with the 
castles ; but it did not suit the purpose of the king of England 
to trust him with any castles. However, he gave him hopes 
of obtaining them at a future time, after his return from Nor- 
mandy. On the twenty-second day of the month of April, 
being the sixth day of the week, William, king of Scotland, 
left the court of the king of England, sorrowful and in con- 
fusion at the repulse he had there received. On the same day, 
the king of England left Winchester, on his way to the sea, 
for the purpose of crossing over, on account of the unfavour- 
able reports which he had heard from Normandy, and lay at 
Waltham. 

On the twenty- third day of the month of April, the king of 
England remained at Waltham, and Geoffrey, archbishop of 
York, came thither to the king, and caused his cross to be 
carried before him. On this, Hubert Fitz-Walter, archbishop 
of Canterbury, greatly complained to the king ; but the king 
made answer that the matter was not one for him to decide, but 
rather our lord the pope. On the same day, the king restored 
to Geoffrey, archbishop of York, Baugy and Langis, in Anjou, 
and by his charter confirmed the same. 

On the twenty-fourth day of April, the king made peace and 
a final reconciliation between Geoffrey, archbishop of York, 
and William, bishop of Ely, his chancellor, as to all the mat- 
ters in dispute between them, both the arrest of the arch- 

Y2 



324 ANNALS OF ROGER BE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1194. 

bishop of York, at Dover, as also the expulsion of the chancel- 
lor from England, upon condition that the said bishop of Ely 
should, at the summons of the archbishop of York, make oath, 
at the hands 18 of one hundred priests, that he had neither 
ordered nor desired that the said archbishop of York should be 
arrested. After this reconciliation was effected, on the same 
day, the king departed from Waltham, and proceeded to Ports- 
mouth, for the purpose of crossing over, and queen Eleanor, 
his mother, with him. 

On the twenty-fifth, twenty-sixth, and twenty-seventh days 
of the month of April, the king was staying at Portsmouth. 
On the twenty-eighth day of the month of April, the king 
left Portsmouth, and proceeded as far as Stansted, for the 
sake of hunting ; but, after his departure, the Welch and the 
Brabanters had a hostile meeting, and slew one another. On 
the twenty-ninth day of April, the king returned to Ports- 
mouth, for the purpose of quelling the dissensions of the 
Welch and the Brabanters, which/ was accordingly done. 

On the thirtieth day of the month of April, and the first day 
of the month of May, on the feasts of the Apostles Saint Philip 
and Saint James, the king was staying at that place ; which 
appeared to him to be very tedious. On the second day of the 
month of May, being the second day of the week, the king 
ordered all his fleet to be laden with men, horses, and arms, 
and, against the advice of his mariners, entered one of his 
long ships, hoping to be able to sail across ; and although the 
wind was unfavourable, he refused to return. The other ships, 
however, remained in harbour, while the king and those with 
him were tossed about on the waves ; for there was a mighty 
tempest, and their hearts became fearful. On the following 
day, the king returned to the Isle of Wight, and then to 
Portsmouth. After a stay there and in that county of eight 
days, on the ninth day, being the fifth day of the week, and 
the feast of Saint Nereus, and Saint Achilleus, and Saint 
Pancratius, the Martyrs, he again embarked on board of his 
ships with his army, and passed over to Normandy, and 
landed at Harfleur with a hundred large ships, laden with war- 
riors, horses, and arms : on which he immediately hastened to 
Verneuil, to which the king of France had laid siege. On hearing 
of his approach, the king of France, without the knowledge of 
his army, left the siege of Verneuil on the vigil of Pentecost, after 
having made a stay there of eighteen days at the siege. In the 
18 One hundred priests making oath with him to this effect. 



A.D. 1194. CONFEBENCE WITH A VIEW TO PEACE. 325 

meantime, John, earl of Mortaigne, the king's brother, returned 
to the king his brother, and through the mediation of queen 
Eleanor, their mother, the king and he became reconciled : 
but the king refused to restore to him any castle or lands. As 
to the army of the king of Prance, which he had left besieging 
Verneuil, on seeing that their king had taken his departure, 
his troops followed him on Monday, in the week of Pentecost. 

The king of England, being full of activity, and more swift 
than the discharge of a Balearic sling, on hearing that the king 
of France was laying siege to Verneuil, hurried on to that 
place with all haste, and on not finding the king of France 
there, pursued his retreating army with the edge of the sword. 
The king of England then hastened to Verneuil, and fortified 
the parts that were most unprotected. After so doing, the 
king hastened to Montmirail, to which the people of Anjou 
and Maine were laying siege ; but, before he arrived, they had 
taken it and levelled it with the ground. 

The king of England next hastened with all speed to the 
castle of Loches, passing by the castle of Tours, where he re- 
ceived two thousand marks from the burgesses as a volun- 
tary gift. The knights of Navarre, however, and the Bra- 
banters, laid siege to the castle of Loches. The chieftain 
and leader of these was Aufuns, son of Sancho, king of Na- 
varre, and brother of Berengaria, queen of England ; but he 
did not lead them as far as Loches, for, before he had arrived 
there, word was brought to him that his father, the king of 
Navarre, was dead ; for which reason he returned to his coun- 
try, and was received as king by the people of that kingdom. 

On the king of England arriving before the castle of Loches, 
he there found the before-mentioned Navarrese and Brabanters, 
amid watchings, and hunger, and other hardships, labouring 
in vain at the capture of that castle : on which, immediately 
with his own men and the others who were there, making as- 
saults upon it day and night, he at length took it by force of 
arms, and captured in it five knights and four-and- twenty men- 
at-arms, on the second day of the week after the feast of Saint 
Barnabas the Apostle. 

In the meantime, messengers from the king of France ap- 
pointed a conference with the seneschal, and constable, and 
nobles of Normandy, at Pont d' Arches. Accordingly, on the 
day appointed, "Walter, archbishop of Eouen, together with 
the said seneschal, constable, and nobles, came to the place ap- 



326 AiraALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1194. 



pointed for the conference, and with them awaited the arrival 
of envoys from the king of France ; but to no purpose. The 
king of France, with no small army, came before a small 
castle, four miles distant from Rouen, called Fontaines, and 
laid siege to it ; and after labouring at the siege for four days, 
more than could be conceived, he at length took it, and it was 
levelled with the ground. 

In the meantime, earl John, the brother of the king of Eng- 
land, with Robert, earl of Leicester, and many other barons, had 
met at Rouen ; but as they had no one under whose guidance 
in especial to act as they would under our lord the king, and 
because they were much inferior in numbers and strength to 
the king of France, they did not dare attack that king. But 
when the king of France had destroyed the above-mentioned 
castle, and was on his road thence, he found the earl of Leicester 
off his guard ; he having gone forth from Rouen by night for 
the purpose of laying an ambush against him, and made a 
rash sally into the lands of Hugh de Gournay for the purpose 
of laying them waste ; upon which, with a few of his men, 
he was made prisoner by the king of France. 

After this, by the common consent of both kings, William, 
archbishop of Rheims, the count de Severs, the count de Bar, 
master Anselm, the dean of Tours, and many others, on behalf 
of the king of France, and Walter, archbishop of Rouen, and 
seneschal and constable of Normandy, and many others, on 
behalf of the king of England, met near the Yal Rodol, on the 
sixth day of the week after the feast of Saint Barnabas the 
Apostle, for the purpose of making a truce between the said 
kings. Accordingly, after a long deliberation held between 
them, they at length agreed to the following terms : 

The king of England (it being in nowise against the will of 
the king of France) was to hold all the lands that he then held 
in his own hands, and in like manner the king of France was 
to hold in peace the castles which he had taken or then held ; 
and, in the meantime, they were each to be at liberty to fortify 
and strengthen all the fortresses which whole and unhurt he 
then held in his hands ; but those that had been destroyed, 
neither was in the meantime to be at liberty to rebuild. But 
if any other person besides them should wish, in rebuilding his 
castle, to build houses that had been destroyed or burnt, he 
was to be at liberty unmolested to make all provision for him- 
self, either in erecting buildings, or in getting in crops of 



A. D. 1194. THE FKEXCH ARiEY PUT TO FLIGHT. 327 

corn, or other fruits of the earth. It was also agreed that all 
churches and ecclesiastical persons who, by the ravages of the 
said war, had been deprived of their property or incomes, 
everywhere throughout the territories of both kings, should 
have full compensation made them. 

But, because the king of France wished that all those who 
had adhered to him or to the king of England should be in- 
cluded in the said truce, so as to receive molestation from 
neither of them, as also, that no one of those who had changed 
sides, should be subject to hostile proceedings, the truce was 
broken off. For the king of England was unwilling to violate 
the customs and laws of Poitou, or of any other of his terri- 
tories, in which, from ancient times, it had been the custom 
of the nobles to settle their own disputes with the sword. 

Accordingly, the matter being broken off, they all separated 
who had begun the said conference, and from that day the 
said kings became still more hostile, and with greater violence 
made attacks on each other with ravages and excessive confla- 
grations. The king of France came to the city of Evreux, and 
utterly destroyed it, and levelled its churches, sparing neither 
age nor sex, and carrying off the relics of the saints. This he 
did because the citizens of Evreux, having left him, had re- 
turned to their duty and allegiance to their lord the king of 
England. After the king of France, having destroyed the city 
of Evreux, was on his departure thence, and had appeared before 
a town called Freteval, the king of England came to Yendome, 
to lie in wait for him ; and, as that place was not surrounded 
by a wall, or suited for defence, the king ordered his tents to be 
pitched outside the town ; and in them he awaited the approach 
of the king of France, who had sent him word that that day he 
would visit him with a hostile band, as unconcernedly as if he 
had been shut up within walls. The king of England joyously 
receiving his message, sent word back to him that he would 
wait for him, and, if he should not come, would pay him a 
visit on the following morning. On the king of France hear- 
ing this, he did not visit the king of England that day. 

Accordingly, early next morning, the king of England or- 
dered his troops to arm, and went forth for the purpose of en- 
gaging with the army of the king of France : on hearing of 
which, the king of France and his army fled before the face 
of the king of England, who pursued them ; and, in the flight, 
many of the troops of the king of France were slain, and many 



328 ANNALS OF KOGEE DE HOVEJDEtf. A.D. 1194. 

taken prisoners. Vast treasure of the king of France was also 
taken, with the furniture of the king's chapel, and the papers 
of all the subjects of the king of England who had deserted 
him and become adherents of the king of France and earl John. 

In the flight, however, the king of France left the multitude 
and entered a certain church, at a distance from the high road, 
for the purpose of hearing mass ; but the king of England, not 
knowing that the king of France had concealed himself, still pur- 
sued his course, breathing forth threats and slaughter against 
the men of the king of France, and sought him, that he might 
either put him to death or take him alive. 

Being informed by a certain Fleming that the king of 
France had now got to a considerable distance, the king of 
England was deceived thereby, and proceeded on a horse of the 
greatest swiftness a little beyond the territories of France and 
Normandy; on which his horse failing him, Marcades, the 
chief of his Brabanters, gave him another horse. However, the 
Jang of England, not meeting with the king of France, re- 
turned to Vendome with a vast amount of booty in prisoners, 
and horses, and large sums of money. After this, the king 
proceeded to Poitou, to attack Geoifrey de Eancon and the vis- 
count d'Angouleine, who had gone over to the king of France 
and earl John against him, and he defeated them : on which, 
he wrote to Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, to the following 
effect : 

"Kichard, by the grace of God, king of England, duke of 
Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, to the venerable 
father in Christ, Hubert, by the same grace, archbishop of 
Canterbury, primate of all England, greeting. Know that, by 
the grace of God, who in all things has consideration for the 
right, we have taken Tailleburge and Marcilliac, and all the 
castles and the whole of the territories of Geoffrey de Eancon, 
as also the city of Angouleme, and Neufchatel, Munciniac, 
La Chese, and all the other castles, and the whole of the 
territories of the viscount of Angouleme, with all things 
thereto appendant and appurtenant. The city of Angouleme 
and the borough we took in a single evening ; while on the lands 
which we have captured in these parts, we have taken full three 
hundred knights and forty thousand armed men. "Witness, 
myself, at Angouleme, on the twenty-second day of July." 

In the meantime, some members of the household of the 
king of France and of that of the king of England, by the 



A.D. 1194. LETTER OF DROGO, ANSELM, AXD URSIX. 329 

consent of both kings, met between Vernueil and Tillers, for the 
purpose of a conference, in order to treat upon a truce between 
them ; on which an agreement was made between them upon 
the terms hereafter stated. 

The Letter of Drogo and Anselm on the truce made letween the 
kings of France and England. 

" Drogo de Merlot, constable of France, Anselm, dean of 
Saint Martin at Tours, and Ursin, chamberlain of our lord the 
king of France, to all to whom these present letters shall come, 
greeting. Know ye, that, by command of our lord Philip, 
king of France, we have made oath, and have, as his envoys, 
by our hand pledged our faith, that our lord the king of France 
shall observe the truce as here underwritten, and the covenants 
of the said truce. Now, the said truce has been made on the 
following terms : Our lord the king of France, God so dis- 
posing him, at the prayers of the cardinal and of the abbat of 
Cisteux, grants to the king of England and his people a truce, 
and further grants that he may, if he shall be so disposed, for- 
tify Meubourg, Driencourt, Concas, and Breteuil. The other 
fortresses which were dismantled in the war, either by the 
king of France or by their own people, shall not be repaired 
during the time of this truce, unless it shall so happen that 
they are repaired during a peace which shall be made between 
the king of France and the king- of England. The king of 
France and his people shall be in all respects in the same posi- 
tion as to their tenures in which theV were on the day on which 
the truce was made. As to the Yal^Jlodol, the following shall 
be the terms agreed on : The king of prance shall hold the Val 
Kodol in such manner as he has hitherto done, that is to say, 
Ilodol itself, and the whole of that town, with the churches ; 
also Lovers, Aquigenere, Laire, and the other places as far as 
Haie Malherbe, and as far as Pont d' Arches. But from Haie 
Malherbe and beyond, and from Pont d' Arches and beyond, 
shall belong to the king of England. Also, as to all the for- 
tresses which the king of France shall hold on the day of 
this truce, it shall be agreed as follows : the king of France 
shall, during the continuance of the truce, fortify, or destroy, 
or burn the same if he shall think fit; and he shall be at liberty 
to act according to his will and pleasure as to all the lands 
which he holds. The king of England shall in like manner 
fortify, or destroy, or burn all the fortresses which ho shall 



330 ANXALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1194. 

hold on the day of this truce; but the king of England 
shall not be at liberty to fortify any one of the fortresses that 
have been dismantled by the king of France or by his own 
people, with the exception of those four which have been men- 
tioned above. Further, the king of Prance includes in this 
truce all those who before the war were more liegemen of him- 
self than of the king of England ; as also these [places] which 
were [held by] vassals of the king of England, whom we will 
here name : Arches, and Driencourt, as the king himself now 
holds the same and his people ; the county of Auge, as he now 
holds the same and his people ; Mortemer, and the lands which 
William de Chahou holds ; the lands of the earl of Boulogne, 
which he held on the day on which the truce was made ; 
Hugh de Gournay, and Aumarle, and the feud of Beauvais 
and its lands, as he now holds the same ; Neumarche and 
the lands thereof, as William de Garland and his people now 
hold the same ; Gisors, and Vexin, in Normandy, as the king 
of France and his people now hold the same; Yernon and Gal- 
lon, and the lands thereto belonging, as the king of France 
and his people now hold the same ; Pascy and the lands thereto 
belonging, as the king and his people now hold the same ; Hers 
and Marcilliac, and the lands thereto belonging, as the king 
and his people now hold the same ; Loy and the lands thereto 
belonging, as the king and his people now hold the same ; No- 
vancourt and the lands thereto belonging, as the king, and earl 
Eobert, and his people, now hold the same ; Thiellerie and the 
lands thereto belonging, as the king, and Gervaise, and their 
people, now hold the same ; Nevelon and his people, and Fret- 
teval and the lands thereto belonging, as they now hold the 
same ; the count of Bruttie, and his people and lands, if he has 
any, as he now holds the same ; the count of Angouleme, and 
his people, his lands, and his fee, as he now holds the same; 
also, John de Rouvere, Baldwin de Aquigny, and the count 
of Mellent, and his lands, as he now holds the same : both 
the lands aforesaid, as also the people that are upon them ; 
and the said truce shall remain in force for one year from the 
feast of All Saints next ensuing. The king of France has men- 
tioned all the persons aforesaid by name, because he wishes 
the king of England to mention by name those men of con- 
sequence whom he shall wish to be comprehended in the truce, 
within a period of fifteen days from the said truce : for if, after 
the fifteenth day from the said truce being made, he shall wish 
to naine any, the king of France will decline to include them ; 



A.D. 1194. LETTER OF EROGO, AtfSELM, AND URSLtf. 331 

and if they shall confess that they have aided the king of Eng- 
land, they shall be included in the truce. All supporters of 
either side within fortified places shall also be included in the 
truce. The king of France has chosen two arbitrators, and, in 
like manner, the king of England two, by whose award, or by 
that of the greater part of them, if either of the kings shall take 
anything from the other, or any one of their subjects shall do 
so, reparation shall be made for the same within forty days 
therefrom. And the said arbitrators shall make oath on the 
holy Evangelists, that they will neither for love, hate, fear, 
nor reward, be guilty of any omission, but will with good faith 
make their award. And if it shall so happen that any seizure 
shall be made beyond the Loire, in the direction of Bourges, 
then the arbitrators shall meet between Exodun, and Chateau 
Raoul, for the purpose of compensation being made, and the 
arbitrators of the territory in which the seizure shall have been 
made shall summon the other arbitrators ; and they, on hearing 
the summons, shall with good faith meet on fitting days at one 
of the places above named ; and if any seizure shall happen to 
be made on this side the Loire, in the direction of Normandy, 
then the arbitrators shall meet between Vernueil and Tiliers, 
for the purpose of compensation being made. And if there 
shall happen to be any misunderstanding between the arbi- 
trators, then. Master the legate of the highest standing, 19 shall, 
with good faith and at peril of his soul, enquire into the truth 
thereof, and shall pronounce upon him who shall refuse to 
make satisfaction for the seizure and the offence, sentence of 
excommunication, all right of appeal being withdrawn, and 
shall place his lands under interdict. But it' the evildoer shall 
belong to the territory of the king of France, then the king of 
France shall, in good faith, aid in obtaining reparation for 
the same, without any loss to himself ; and the king of England 
shall do the same, in good faith, as to his subjects. If the 
king of France shall make any aggression upon the king of 
England, or the king of England upon the king of France, 
then the cardinal shall place an interdict upon the lands of the 
party making the aggression, if he shall refuse to make amends 
for such aggression, at the award of the arbitrators, or the major 
part of them. Richard, king of England, and his people, shall 
hold their lands on this side the Loire, towards Normandy, in 
the same manner in which they were holding them on the day 
19 The legate of France or of Normandy. 



332 ANNALS OF ROGEE DE HOTEDES". A.D. 1194. 

on which the truce was made, and beyond the Loire they shall 
hold' them in the same manner in which they held them on 
the day on which he and his people were able, within so many 
lawful days, to hear of the truce being made. 20 The king of 
England includes in the truce all those who were more liege- 
men of himself than of the king of France before the truce. 
As to the prisoners, it shall be thus agreed on both sides : those 
prisoners whom the king of France detains, shall be rescued 
upon giving such security as they shall offer, if it shall so 
please the said king ; but if it shall not please him, then his 
arbitrators shall upon oath declare what security shall be 
given in addition thereto, in order that the king of France 
may be secure that the prisoner will return to the custody 
of the king of France fifteen days before the end of the truce, 
if the prisoner is then alive ; and the same shall be done 
as to the prisoners of the king of England by his arbitrators. 
All these things both kings shall swear to observe with 
good faith, and shall make oath at the hand of the cardinal; 
and they shall give their letters patent as to keeping and observ- 
ing the aforesaid truce and covenants. Before us, on part of 
the king of France, Gervaise de Chatillon has made oath and 
sworn, on behalf of the king of France, that this truce shall 
be observed ; such persons also shall make oath, both clergy as 
well as laity, subject to the arbitration of the umpires, as 
the king of England shall require. In addition to which, be 
it known to you that we who have sworn to this agreement 
for a truce, have hereupon had letters patent on behalf of the 
king of France for the confirmation of the same, expressing 
that whatever we shall ordain as to observing the truce, that 
same he will ratify and confirm. Done between Vernueil and 
Tiliers, in the year from the Word made Incarnate one thousand 
one hundred and ninety-four, on the twenty-third day of July." 
After the king had crossed over, on Hugh, bishop of Dur- 
ham, returning home, Hugh Bardolph demanded of him the 
earldom of Northumberland, JSTewcastle-upon-Tyne, and the 
castle of Bamborough, which the said bishop had promised 
to the king that he would deliver up. However, the bishop 
delayed doing this, because his messenger, by whom he had 
made offer to the king of two thousand marks of silver for 
retaining the said earldom and the above-mentioned castles, 
had not yet returned. When he returned, he brought with 
20 Probably a certain distance being reckoned for each lawful day. 



A.D. 1194. APPEAL OF THE CAXONS OF YOKE. 333 

him a letter from the king, by which the king informed Hugh 
Bardolph that if the said bishop of Durham should give him 
security for the payment of the said two thousand marks, he 
was to deliver to the said bishop the before-named earldom, 
together with the castles. 

On the king's letter being delivered to Hugh Bardolph, he 
accordingly made answer to Hugh, bishop of Durham, say- 
ing: "If you wish me to act according to the king's com- 
mands, deliver up to me the castles and the earldom, and I 
will re-deliver them to you, as the king has commanded, if 
you give me security for the receipt of these two thousand 
marks, on behalf of the king." To this the bishop of Dur- 
ham replied : " There is no need for me to deliver them to 
you to deliver them to me again, as I have got them, and 
hold them in my possession." On hearing this, Hugh Bar- 
dolph immediately sent word to our lord the king, what answer 
he had received from the bishop ; at which the king being 
incensed, ordered the bishop of Durham to be disseised of 
the castles and the earldom above-mentioned, and the two 
thousand marks to be demanded of him. The king also, 
in the fury of his anger, ordered the bishop of Durham to be 
dispossessed of the manor of Sedbergh, with the knight's fees 
and wapentake which the said king had given to Saint Cuth- 
bert and the Church of Durham, and the said bishop, as a pure 
and perpetual alms-gift, and by his charter had confirmed the 
same, in manner previously stated; which was accordingly done. 

In the meantime, the canons of the church of York, making 
complaint to the archbishop of Canterbury, the king's jus- 
ticiary, of the injuries that had been done them by the arch- 
bishop of York, the archbishop of Canterbury, by the royal 
authority with which he was invested, sent to York, earl 
Roger Bigot, William de Warenne, "William de Stuteville, 
Hugh Bardolph, William Bruyere, Geoffrey Habet, and Wil- 
liam Fitz-Richard, a clerk, to hear the dispute between the 
archbishop of York and his canons, and to settle the same 
as justice should require. Having accordingly come thither, 
and heard the appeals of the canons, and the answer of the 
archbishop and his adherents, they ordered the men of the 
archbishop who had been charged with robbery, to be seized 
and thrown into prison. And although the archbishop was 
ready to give his warranty for what they had done, he 
still was unable to bail them. After this, they summoned 






334 ANXALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1194. 

the archbishop to come and receive their judgment, and, be- 
cause he refused, they dispossessed him of all his manors, with 
the sole exception of the manor of Rip on, to which the arch- 
bishop had retired ; after which, they caused the canons to be 
reinstated in their stalls of which the archbishop had dispos- 
sessed them. On their departure, they appointed William de 
Stuteville, and Geoffrey Haget, to exercise supervision in York- 
shire over the archbishop and his shrievalty. 

Shortly after, in the month of September, justices itinerant 
Were sent in the king's behalf throughout each of the counties 
of England, and proceeded, in giving their judgments, in con- 
formity with the tenor of the heads hereunder stated. 

THE FORM 20 OF PROCEBTJRE IN PLEAS OF THE 
CROWN OF THE KING. 

" In the first place, four knights are to be chosen from out 
of the whole county, who, upon their oaths, are to choose two 
lawful knights of every hundred and wapentake, and these two 
are to choose upon their oath ten knights of every hundred or 
wapentake, or, if there shall not be knights sufficient, free and 
lawful men, in order that these twelve may together make in- 
quisition on each of the following heads in every hundred or 
wapentake. 

Heads of Pleas of the Crown of the King. 

" Of Pleas of the Crown, both new and old, and all those 
which have not yet been concluded before the justiciaries of 
our lord the king. Also, of all Recognizances and all Pleas 
on which summons has been issued before the justiciaries, by 
writ of the king or of the chief justice, or which have been 
sent before them from the supreme court of the king. Also, of 
Escheats, what these now are, and what they have been, since 
the king set out on his expeclition to the land of Jerusalem, 
and what there were at that time in the king's hands ; and 
again, what there are now in his hands or otherwise ; and of 
all Escheats of our lord the king, if they have been taken out 
of his hands, how, and by whom, and into whose hands 
they have come, and of what kind, and if any person has had 
any profits from the same, and what they are, and what 
was the value thereof, and what is the present value ; and if 
there is any Escheat, which belongs to our lord the king, 
which is not at present in his hands. Also, of Churches which 
20 The text of Wilkins has been followed here. 



A.D, 1194. PLEAS OF THE CEOWN. , 335 

are in the gift of our lord the king. Also, of Wardships of 
children, which belong to our lord the king. Also, of Mar- 
riages 21 of maidens, or of widows, which belong to our lord 
the king. Also, of Malefactors, and their harbourers and 
abettors. Also, of forgers. Also, of Murderers of the Jews, 
who they are, and of the pledges of Jews so slain, their chat- 
tels, lands, debts, and writings, and who has the same ; and 
how much each person owes them, and what pledges they had, 
and who holds the same, and how much they are worth, and 
who has the profits thereof, and what they are ; all the 
pledges and the debts of the Jews so slain are to be seized for 
the king ; and those who were present at the murder of the 
Jews, who have not made a composition thereon with our 
lord the king, or with his justiciaries, are to be arrested and 
are nbt to be liberated except by our lord the king, or his 
justiciaries. Also, of all Aids given for the ransom of our 
lord the king, how much each person promised, and how 
much he has paid, and how much is still due from him. 
Also, of the adherents of earl John, and such of them as have 
made a composition -with our lord the king, and such as have 
not. Also, of the Chattels of earl John or his adherents, which 
have not been converted to the use of our lord the king ; and 
how much the sheriffs and their bailiffs have received; and who 
has given anything contrary to the ancient customs of the king- 
dom. Also, of all the Lands of earl John, of his Demesnes, 
and Wards, and Escheats, and his gifts, and for what reason 
the same were given to him, and all the gifts to earl John 
are to be seized for our lord the king, except those which 
have been confirmed by the king. Also, as to the Debts 
and Fines which are due to earl John, and for what causes ; 
and all the same are to be demanded on behalf of our lord 
the king. Also, of Usurers, and the Chattels of such of them 
as are dead. Also, of Wines sold contrary to the assize, and of 
false measures for wine as also for other things. Also, of such 
Crusaders as have died before setting out for the land of Jeru- 
salem ; and who possesses their chattels, and what they are, 
and to what extent. Also, of Grand Assizes, which are of lands 
a hundred shillings in value or less. 

Also, in every county there are to be three knights chosen, 
and one clerk, who are to be keepers of the Pleas of the Crown ; 

21 " Maritagiis," the right of giving them in marriages and receiving a 
fee for the same. 



336 A1WALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1194. 

and no sheriff is to be justice in his shrievalty, nor yet in anv 
county which he has held since the first coronation of our lord 
the king. Also, an inventory is to be made of all the Cities, 
and Boroughs, and Demesne Lands of our lord the king. 

Also, the said justices, together with the bailiffs of Wil- 
liam of the Church of Saint Mary, Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, Wil- 
liam de Chimelli, William Bruere, Hugh Bardolph, and the 
sheriff of each place, are to cause the knights mentioned on 
the roll to be summoned in their respective counties, to appear 
at a time and place which they shall signify to them, and to 
make them swear in their presence that they will use all their 
lawful endeavours to restore the Lands and Escheats belonging 
to pur lord the king, and to value the same to the advantage 
of our lord the king, and not through hatred, favour, or regard 
for any person, to omit so to do. And the said knights be- 
fore-named shall, upon their oath, make choice of twelve lawful 
knights, or free and lawful men, if knights shall not be found for 
the purpose, in the different parts of each county on the circuit of 
the said justices itinerant, as shall seem expedient; who shall, in 
like manner, make oath that they will use all their lawful endea- 
vours to restore, and to value and establish the rights of Ward- 
ship and Escheat in those parts, and will give their counsel 
and assistance to advantage the king therein, as before-men- 
tioned. The said jurors shall also, upon oath, choose from free 
men as many and such as they shall think necessary for the 
performance of the aforesaid business of our lord the king 
as to Escheats and Wardships, in such manner as may be best 
done for the advantage of our lord the king. It is also to 
be known, that the said Wardships and Escheats shall be 
made good out of the revenues arising therefrom up to the 
feast of Michaelmas, as also from the revenues at that time 
due ; and, if they shall not suffice, then the deficiency shall 
be supplied by a toll of our lord the king : it being under- 
stood that those who hold the said Wardships and Escheats 
to farm, shall, after the feast of Saint Michael, answer for 
the same thenceforward as for farms in husbandry. And 
as for those who shall hold the said Wardships and Escheats 
to farm, our lord the king shall give them warranty for 
the same from year to year until the termination thereof; 
so that, although our lord the king should give any of them 
to any person, the farmer shall still hold his farm, to hold 
the same by farm till the end of the year, by paying to 



A.D. 1194. PLEAS OF THE CKOWff. 337 

him to whom our lord the king shall have so given it, the rent 
which shall be due from him for the same until the end of the 
year. The right to the escheat, however, which he shall have 
so given is to remain with our lord the king, unless our lord 
the king shall have given it by name. The farmer, when he 
shall give up his farm, is to have all his stock which he shall 
have placed upon the farm, and all his property over and above 
the property of the king there, freely and without diminution. 
They shall also have letters patent of our lord the archbishop, 
containing the tenor of the charter of our lord the king made 
relative thereto. 

Most diligent enquiry shall also be made what is the rental 
assessed upon each manor in demesne, and the value of all 
other assessments in the said manors, and how many caru- 
cates there are, and how much they are each worth, not 
estimating them at a fixed value of twenty shillings only, 22 
but, according as the land is good or bad, whether the value is 
likely to increase or decrease. Those persons who shall take 
these farms shall stock their farms as already mentioned, ac- 
cording to the sum named as to the revenues of the escheats 
and wardships. Enquiry is also to be made with how many 
oxen and plough horses each carucate ought to be stocked ; 
and how much stock, and to what amount each manor is able 
to support ; and the result thereof is then to be speedily and 
distinctly reduced to writing. The price set upon a bull shall 
be four shillings, and upon a cow the same, upon a plough- 
horse the same, upon a sheep with fine wool ten pence, upon 
a sheep with coarse wool six pence, upon a sow twelve pence, 
and upon a boar twelve pence ; and when the farmers give 
up their farms they shall be answerable in the aforesaid sums, 
or in animals payable for the same, at the option of the farm- 
ers ; and when all the aforesaid stock shall be placed thereon 
and duly valued, they shall all be enrolled openly and dis- 
tinctly, and the register thereof shall be deposited in the ex- 
chequer. From this assize are to be excepted bishoprics and 
abbeys, and lands of barons who are nearly of age. Also, let 
enquiry previously be made, by the oath of the parties aforesaid, 
as to all wardships and escheats which are not in the hands of 

22 Probably the rental of each carucate, or plough land of one hundred 
acres, was assessed at twenty shillings, for the purpose of collecting the 
carucage or land tax levied thereon. 

VOL. II. z 



338 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1194. 

our lord the king, and they are to be taken possession of by 
our lord the king, and dealt with as other lands and escheats. 

Heads as to the Jews. 

All debts and pledges of Jews are to be enrolled, as also 
their lands, houses, rents, and possessions. Any Jew who 
shall make concealment of any one of these things, shall for- 
feit to our lord the king his body, as also the thing concealed, 
and all his possessions, and all has chattels ; and no Jew shall 
ever be allowed to recover what he has so concealed. Also, 
let six or seven places be appointed at which they shall make 
their loans, and let two lawful Christians and two lawful Jews 
and two lawful scribes be appointed, and in their presence, and 
in that of the clerks of William of the Church of Saint Mary 
and of William de Chimelli, let such loans be made, and let a 
deed describing the loan be made, after the manner of an inden- 
ture. One part ^ is to remain in the hands of the Jew, sealed 
with his seal to whom the money is paid, while the other part 
is to remain in the common chest ; on which there are to be 
three locks ; whereof the two Christians are to keep one key, 
the two Jews another, and the clerks of William of the Church 
of Saint Mary and of Master William de Chimelli the third ; 
as also three seals, those who have the keys setting thereon 
their seals. The clerks also of the two Williams aforesaid are 
"to have a register containing copies of all the deeds, and as 
the deeds are altered so shall the register be altered. For 
each deed shall be paid three pence ; a moiety thereof by the 
Jew, and a moiety by him to whom the money is lent ; of which 
the two scribes are to have two pence, and the keeper of the 
register the third: and, for the future, no loan shall be 
made, no payment made to Jews, no alteration of the deeds, 
except in presence of the persons aforenamed, or the major 
part of them, if all shall be unable to be present. The said 
two Christians also are to have a register of receipts for pay- 
ments made henceforth to Jews, and the two Jews are to have 
one, and the keeper of the register one. Also, every Jew shall 
make oath upon his register that he will cause all his debts, 
pledges, rents, and all his property and possessions to be en- 
rolled, and that, as above stated, he will not conceal anything ; 
and that, if he shall be able to learn that any one has con- 
cealed anything, he will secretly disclose the same to the 
23 The script, the other part being the rescript. 



A.D. ] 



A. D. 1194. TOURNAMENTS TO BE HELD IX E2TGLAXD. 339 

judges sent to them, and that forgers of deeds and clippers 
of money, when he shall know of such persons, he will give 
information against, and detect the same, and the like with re- 
gard to the deeds so forged. 

Also, inquisition shall be made relative to the holdings of 
and seizures made by all bailiffs of the king, both justices as 
well as sheriffs, and constables, and foresters and their servants, 
since the time of the first coronation of our lord king Eichard, 
and why such seizures were made, and by whom; and of all the 
chattels, gifts, and promises made on the occasion of seizure 
of the lands of earl John and his supporters; and who re- 
ceived the same, and what they were, and what delay was 
caused by command of Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, at 
that time the king's chief justice." 

In the meantime, Eichard, king of England, having settled 
his affairs in Poitou to his satisfaction, returned to Anjou, and 
fined all his bailiffs, that is to say, forced them to pay a fine ; 
and did the same in Maine. After this, he came into Normandy, 
and was vexed with what had been done in relation, to the 
truce above-mentioned, and imputing it to his chancellor that 
this had been done through his agency, took away from him 
his seal, and caused a new seal to be made, and had pro- 
clamation made throughout all his territories, that nothing 
would be held as ratified that had been done by means of 
his old seal, both because his chancellor had wrought more in- 
discreetly with it than was becoming, as also because that 
seal had been lost when Eoger Malchine, his vice-chancellor, 
was drowned at sea, before the island of Cyprus. The king 
also gave orders that all persons who had charters should come 
to renew the same with the new seal. 

The king also ordered tournaments to be held in England, 
and by his charter confirmed the same ; upon condition that 
whoever should wish to tourney, should pay him a sum accord- 
ing to the terms underwritten, namely ; an earl was to give, 
for permission to tourney twenty marks of silver, a baron ten 
marks of silver, a knight, holding land, four marks of silver, 
and a knight, not a landholder, two marks of silver ; and the 
king gave orders that no knight should come near the places 
where the tournaments were held unless he had first paid him 
the said sum of money. The charter of this grant the king 
delivered into the custody of William, earl of Salisbury; 
and Hubert Fits-Walter, the king's chief justice, appointed 

z 2 



340 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1194. 

his brother, Theobald Pitz- Walter, to be collector of this 
money. 

In the same year, Koger, the son of Tancred, king of Sicily, 
whom his father had caused to be crowned king of Sicily, and 
who had married the daughter of Tursac, emperor of Con- 
stantinople, departed this life ; after whose decease, king 
Tancred caused his son William, brother of the said king 
Iloger, to be crowned king of Sicily. Shortly after this, the 
said Tancred died : on hearing of which, Henry, emperor of 
the Eomans, assembling a large army, entered Apulia in the 
beginning of the month of August, and subdued it, and, fifteen 
days before the feast of Saint Michael, took Salerno by storm ; 
and because the people of Salerno had behaved treacherously 
towards him, as above stated, in delivering the empress Con- 
stance into the hands of king Tancred, to avenge the said be- 
trayal he either put to death all the more powerful citizens of 
that city, or else condemned them to exile, and put up their 
wives and children for sale to his troops. He also found in the 
great Tower there a large treasure, valued at two hundred 
thousand ounces of gold, and his army was enriched by the 
spoils of the 'people of Salerno. After this, the emperor pro- 
ceeded to the city of Amain, which was immediately surren- 
dered to him ; and, while he was staying there, all the cities 
of Apulia w r ere surrendered to him, three of which he levelled 
with the ground Salerno, Spinchola, and Polichore. 

Before the feast of All Saints, he came to the city of Mes- 
sina, in Sicily, with such honor and glory, that it had never 
been heard of any person entering that territory with greater 
honor and glory. Here he was honorably received by the 
archbishops, bishops, earls, and barons of the kingdom of 
Sicily, and departing thence proceeded to Palermo; having 
arrived at which place, the queen of Sicily, formerly the wife 
of king Tancred, and Richard de Theme, her brother, surren- 
dered to him the palace of the king of Sicily, as also, king 
William, son of king Tancred, the widow of king Iloger, 
daughter of Tursac, emperor of Constantinople, and the king's 
treasure of gold and silver inexhaustible, which the kings of 
Sicily had laid up. After this, all the cities and fortresses of 
the kingdom of Sicily were delivered up to him, and the ad- 
miral Margarite surrendered to him the castle at the port of 
Palermo, on which the emperor gave him the dukedom of Du- 
razzo, the principality of Tarento, and the principality of La 



A. D. 1194. SWEHE CROWNED KING OF NORWAY. 341 

Mare. There also came to the before-named emperor of the 
Romans all the pagans and Jews who were in the kingdom of 
Sicily, and, paying him certain sums, remained in the king- 
dom of Sicily, each in his own place, in the same condition in 
which he had been before. 

The emperor then caused himself and the empress Constance, 
his wife, to be crowned at the city of Palermo, in presence 
and with the consent of the archbishops, bishops, and princi- 
pal men of the kingdom. The emperor then caused the bodies 
of king Tancred and king Eoger, his son, to be disinterred, and 
spoiled them of their crowns and sceptres, and other royal 
ornaments, saying that they were not kings by right, but 
rather usurpers of the throne, and holders thereof by violence. 
The emperor next gave in marriage to Philip, his brother, duke 
of Suabia, the above-mentioned daughter of Tursac, emperor 
of Constantinople, and put out the eyes of king William, son 
of king Tancred, and had him emasculated. 

In the same year, the citizens of Borne elected fifty- six sena- 
tors, and placed them in authority over themselves : whereas, 
previously, they had had but a single senator, whose name 
was Benedict, a worthy man, who had ruled over them two 
years, and after him they had had another senator, who was 
called John Capuche, and had similarly reigned over them an- 
other two years ; in whose times Borne was better governed than 
at the present day, in the time of the fifty- six senators. 

In the same year, Swere, prince of Norway, contrary to the 
prohibition of our lord the pope, had himself crowned king of 
Norway ; on hearing of which, Eustace, archbishop of Droii- 
theim, chose rather to go into exile than be present at his co- 
ronation ; he accordingly departed, and the said Swere, son 
of Siward, king of Norway, gave orders that all the bishops of 
Norway should meet together at Bergen, on the feast of the 
Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, for the purpose of crown- 
ing him. Among these was the bishop of Wie, whose name 
was Nicholas. He declared that he was unwilling to be present 
at the coronation, because of the absence of the archbishop ; on 
hearing which, Swere caused the bishop to be seized, and to 
be bound on the sea- shore on a small eminence, so that the 
waves of the sea, flowing on, nearly entered his mouth ; upon 
which, the bishop being terrified, assented to the wishes of 
Swere Birkebain, and crowned and consecrated him king at 
Bergen, on the feast of the Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, 



342 AXNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1194. 

the bishops, Martin of Bergen, Eric of Stavangre, Thore of 
Burgunde, 24 and Absalom, being present and assenting thereto. 
On the same day, when the said Swere, the king and priest, 
was dining in regal state with the bishops and principal men of 
his kingdom, he caused the head of Si ward, the son of Adestan, 
the former king of Norway, to be cut off, and to be brought 
before him and his guests, as they sat at table. It is worthy 
of remark that this Swere Birkebain conquered fifteen kings in 
fifteen naval battles, and slew them, with all their followers, 
before he was able to secure the crown ; their names were as 
follows, king Magnus, king Borgher, king Siward, king 
Ordus, king Guthrum, king John Cuvelung, king Belue, king 
Zether, and six others, with the above Siward, son of Adestan. 
It also deserves to be known, that it is the custom of the 
kingdom of Norway to the present day that every one who 
is known to be the son of any king of Norway, although ille- 
gitimate, and the issue of a bondwoman, has equal right to 
lay claim to the kingdom of Norway with the son of a king 
legally married, and being the son of a free woman ; the con- 
sequence of which is, that there are battles going on between 
them without ceasing, until one of them is conquered and 
slain. 

The same year, a little before the feast of Saint Michael, 
there came to York, Hamo, praecentor of the church of York, 
Geoffrey de Muschamp, archdeacon of Cleveland, and Master 
William Testard, archdeacon of Nottingham, who had gone to 
Rome with Master Simon of Apulia, and Ralph, the arch- 
deacon of the West Riding, relative to the injuries which 
Geoffrey, archbishop of York, had inflicted on them and their 
fellow-canons, he having excommunicated them and all who 
held communion with them, and, on their appeal to the Su- 
preme Pontiff, laid an interdict on their churches. They 
also brought with them letters of absolution both from the 
excommunication and the interdict, and letters for the re- 
stitution of what had been taken from them ; undertaking the 
execution of which at the mandate of pope Celestinus, Hugh, 
bishop of Durham, came to York, and on Saint Michael's day 
celebrated mass in the mother church there, declaring be- 
fore the clergy and the people, that the sentence which Geof- 
frey, archbishop of York, had pronounced upon his canons 
and those holding communion with them was null and void. 
2i Perhaps meaning Alborg. 




LETTEK OF EICHARD, KINO OF ENGLAND. 343 

But Ralph, the archdeacon of the West Riding, died while on 
his return from Rome; on which, Geoffrey, archbishop of 
York, gave his archdeaconry, first, to his own brother, Peter, 
and afterwards to Peter de Nunant. The said archbishop 
then making appeal against his canons and their acquisitions, 
crossed over from England, to Normandy, to Richard, king of 
England, his brother, and obtained from him a letter to the 
following effect : 

The Letter of Richard, Icing of England, on the reconciliation of 
the archbisho-p of York, 

" Richard, by the grace of God, king of England, duke of 
Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, to his dearly 
beloved and faithful subjects, William of the Church of Saint 
Mary, and Hugh Bardolph, greeting. We do hereby inform 
you, that Geoffrey, archbishop of York, our brother, has come 
to us, and over and above those thousand marks which he 
paid us in England, has done our will as to the other thousand 
marks ; and, as he has informed us by a certain person, 
would willingly have before this made satisfaction for the 
debt if he had been able so to do, and has long been greatly 
vexed that he has thus long delayed so to do. Accordingly, 
we have received him into our favour and protection, and 
have granted him in the fullest manner our kind interest 
in his behalf. We have also sent our messenger to Eng- 
land with his messenger, to the end that he may see in what 
way he makes satisfaction to us for the remaining thou- 
sand marks ; for he has made a promise to us that he will 
satisfy us thereupon as soon as he possibly can. Wherefore 
we do command you to make restitution to him of his lands 
and all his property in full, without delay ; and whatever of his 
rentals or of his property shall have been sold on account of 
the said debt, whatever of the same we have had, you are 
reasonably to set off the same against the residue of his debt ; 
and if any part thereof shall have been sold at a less price 
than it ought, either through love or hatred for any person, 
you are to cause reparation to be made for the same by those 
who have so done, and the same to be credited to the arch- 
bishop on account of his debt. His men also who have been 
taken or detained, both clergy as well as laity, you are to 
cause to be held on bail and set at liberty without delay, ac- 
cording to the custom of England. Also, you are not to allow 



344 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1194. 

the lay power to disturb him in exercising his right of ec- 
clesiastical censure throughout the whole of his archiepis- 
copate, as in reason he ought. You are also to compel the 
men of Beverley to make good the injuries they have done 
him, and to do towards him what they are bound to do, 
and what they have been accustomed to do to his predeces- 
sors. Witness myself, at Mamerz, on the third day of No- 
vember." 

The said archbishop of York also obtained another letter 
from our lord the king to the following effect : 

" Richard, by the grace of God, king of England, duke of 
Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, to "William, of 
the Church of Saint Mary, and Hugh Bardolph, greeting. 
Know ye, that we have learned, that at the time of the death 
of our father, without our command and consent, Geoffrey de 
Muschamp obtained letters under his seal to hold the arch- 
deaconry of Cleveland ; and William de Stigandby and Master 
Erard, similarly obtained letters to hold prebendal stalls in 
the church of York, which were then vacant, and at our dis- 
posal. Wherefore, we do command you, without delay, to 
deprive the persons aforesaid of the archdeaconry, and the 
said prebends, and exact from them whatever they have re- 
ceived, since they have so fraudulently and surreptitiously 
gained possession of the said revenues. Witness myself, at 
Mamerz, on the third day of November." 

Oh shameful disgrace ! " 'Tis base for the censurer to be 
himself convicted of the fault." 25 For the said archbishop, 
while still chancellor of the king, his father, had that seal 
in his own possession ; by means of which the said arch- 
deaconry and those prebendal stalls had been given to the per- 
sons before-named. 

In the same year, John Belesme, archbishop of Lyons sur 
Rhone, resigned his archbishopric ; and, being content with a 
revenue of one hundred pounds sterling belonging to the arch- 
bishopric of Lyons, lived an unspotted life, pleasing to God 
and man, to the end of his existence, in the house of Clairval. 

In the same year, while Leopold, duke of Austria, was still 
remaining under the sentence of excommunication which our 
lord the pope had pronounced upon him for the captivity of 
Richard, king of England and, not repenting thereof, the Lord 

25 " Turpe est doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum." The reason for his 
saying this, is shown in the following lines. 



A.D. 1195. HEXET CEOWNED KING OF SICILY. 345 

scourged his territories in the following manner. In the first 
place, all of the cities of his dominions were destroyed by 
fire, and yet the cause of none of these fires was known. In 
the second place, the adjoining country was overflowed by an 
inundation of the river Danube, in which ten thousand per- 
sons or more perished. In the third place, whereas all the 
earth in the middle of summer ought to, and usually does, pos- 
sess vitality, at that period the whole of his territory, contrary 
to the usual and ordinary course of things, became parched 
up. In the fourth place, when the seeds of corn ought to have 
shot up into blade, they were changed into worms. In the 
fifth place, the most noble persons in his dominions were smit- 
ten with a mortality. 

Although the Lord had smitten his territory with plagues 
so many and so great, he still was unwilling to repent, but his 
heart was hardened, so much so, that he took an oath that all 
the hostages of the king of England whom he had in his hands 
should undergo capital punishment, unless all the covenants 
were speedily performed which the king of England had made 
with him. Consequently, Baldwin de Bethune, who was one of 
those who had been given as hostages to the duke of Austria 
for the ransom of the king of England, by the common con- 
sent of the hostages, was sent to the king of England to 
declare to him the duke's purpose; and, on his arrival, the 
king, taking compassion on them, delivered to him the sister of 
Arthur, duke of Brittany, and the daughter of the emperor of 
Cyprus, to escort to the duke of Austria ; the sister of Ar- 
thur for the purpose of being married to the son of the duke 
of Austria, and the daughter of the emperor of Cyprus to be 
delivered into the hands of the duke. 

In the year of grace 1195, being the sixth year of the reign 
of Eichard, king of England, the said king Eichard was at 
Eouen, in Normandy, on the day of the Nativity of our Lord, 
which fell on the Lord's Day, being intent on supplying 
himself with all things necessary, in money and men, against 
Philip, king of France. For the truce which had been agreed 
upon between them as to last until the feast of All Saints 
was far from observed, the subjects of both kingdoms making 
excessive ravages. On the same day of the Nativity of our 
Lord, Henry, emperor of the Eomans, was crowned at Palermo, 
in Sicily, with the crown of the kingdom of Sicily. 

In the same year, before the Nativity of our Lord, on the 



346 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1195. 

day of Saint Stephen the Protomartyr, when the heart of 
Leopold, duke of Austria, was hardened, nor could be soft- 
ened by means of the plagues previously mentioned which 
the Lord inflicted on his territories, the Lord scourged his 
body in the following manner. Having convened the elders 
of his territory to celebrate the festival of the Nativity of 
our Lord, while the said duke was on his road, on Saint 
Stephen's day, to take recreation with his knights, his horse 
fell upon him and crushed his foot, in such a manner that the 
bones, being broken on both sides, projected through the middle 
of the skin, and were exposed to the extent of the palm of 
one's hand : the surgeons, however, when they came, applied 
to the foot what they thought best for it. On the follow- 
ing day the foot was found to have turned black, and to be in 
such a state that it ought, in the opinion of the surgeons, to be 
taken off; but, upon his ordering this to be done, there was 
not a person found to acquiesce in his wishes : for no one dared, 
or could for sorrow, lay a hand on his master. 

At length, he sent for his son and heir, and begged and com- 
manded him to cut off his foot, and put an end to his pain ; 
and, on his refusal as well, he sent for his chamberlain, who 
being compelled so to do, the duke himself, with his own hand, 
held an axe close to the bone of the leg, while the chamber- 
lain, wielding a mallet, after three blows, with great difficulty, 
cut off the foot; the surgeons, however, after applying re- 
medies, on visiting him the next day, found in him no hopes of 
life. The duke, being consequently reduced to despair, caused 
the archbishops, bishops, and great men of his dominions, who 
had come to be present at the festival, to be assembled together; 
and, on asking to be absolved from the sentence which our 
lord the pope had pronounced against him, for the injuries 
which he had done to the king of England, was answered by 
the whole of the clergy that he could, under no circumstances, 
procure absolution, unless, by making oath, he should give secu- 
rity that, as to the said injuries, he would abide by the judg- 
ment of the Church ; and, unless others of the chief men of 
his dukedom should join him in the said oath : and if he should 
be overtaken by the common destiny of man, they would use 
their exertions in every way that satisfaction might be made 
to the Holy Church, in order that the judgment of the Church 
might not be carried out with respect to him. Accordingly, being 
absolved through means of the j udgment of the Church, he ordered 



A. D. 1195. ENQUIRY INTO CASE OF THE AECHBISHOP OF YOEK. 34? 

all the hostages of the king of England that he had in his pos- 
session to be set at liberty, and forgave the sum of money 
owing to him from the king of England. After his decease, 
his heir, with some of the nobles, opposed the things before- 
mentioned being done ; on which, the clergy would on no 
account allow the body of the duke to be buried : consequently, 
his body was kept above ground for eight days, until all the 
hostages given by the king of England had been set at liberty ; 
some of whom, on their coming to England, related all these 
things as what they had seen and heard. They also asserted 
that, at their departure, there was produced and oifered to them, 
four thousand marks and more, money belonging to the king of 
England, to be brought back ; but that, on account of the perils 
of the journey, they had not dared on any account to take 
charge thereof. 

All these things were done by God, that He might abase the 
haughty, and manifest His power before mortals ; and when 
He pursues with His deserved vengeance the injuries done to 
Him and His, we are to believe that the same has happened 
not only for our sakes, but also to assert His power ; nor must 
we boastfully ascribe to ourselves what has been wrought solely 
by the mercy of the Lord. In the meantime, when Baldwin 
de Bethune had come near the territories of the said duke 
of Austria, and heard of his death, he did not proceed any 
further, but returned to the king of England, and brought back 
the ladies before-named, and restored them to the king. 

In the same year, Walter, archbishop of Eouen, gave to 
Philip, king of France, one thousand pounds of money Anjouin 
for the ransom of his lands, which the said king of France had 
taken possession of during the war ; and, at the same time, Ro- 
bert, earl of Leicester, offered to Philip, king of France, for his 
ransom, one thousand pounds sterling, and to release him from 
all claim for ever, by himself and his heirs, to the castle of Passy 
with all its appurtenances, and to ask a confirmation of the same 
from our lord the pope, and a confirmation from the king of 
England. But, as there was not yet an end of the war between 
himself and the king of England, he put off for the present the 
consideration of the offers which the earl of Leicester had made 
him. 

In the same year, in the month of January, being the Lord's 
Day next after the octave of the Epiphany, Hugh, bishop of 
Lincoln, Master Winmer, archdeacon of Northampton, and 
Hugh, prior of Pontefract, to whom our lord the pope, Ce- 



348 ANNALS OF BOGEB, DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1195. 

lestinus, had entrusted the charge of enquiring into the ex- 
cesses of which Geoffrey, archbishop of York, was accused by 
his canons of the church of York before the pope and cardinals, 
arrived at York, and proceeded in conformity with the man- 
date of our lord the pope ; which was to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Celestinus, directing an inquisition to le 
made into the alleged excesses of the archbishop of York. 

" Celestinus, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his venerable brother, the bishop of Lincoln, and his dearly 
beloved sons, the archdeacon of Northampton, and the prior of 
Pontefract, greeting. Jesus Christ, the mediator between 
God and man, whose foresight in His ordinances is not deceived, 
has willed that the source of the discipline of the whole 
Church, and the direction of the holy Church of Rome should 
be reserved for Himself, and that all other [churches] should 
also be subject to His government and supervision : that so, 
the plenitude of power being expressly reserved unto Him, 
it may belong to Him to correct the excesses also of other 
[churches], and, with the authority of the Apostolic sway, 
approve of what is done in a manner deserving of praise. 
Wherefore, inasmuch as by Divine providence we have been 
chosen to the governance thereof, it is our wish so to love our 
brethren and fellow-bishops, with due considerateness and dis- 
cretion, that we may not seem to prefer their affection and 
friendship to the duties unto which we are called ; and the 
more especially, as love has its limits, and each is bound to 
love the man, but not the errors of the man. And whereas, 
it has come to our hearing, from the information of the clergy 
and the chapter of the church of York, and the testimony of 
our dearly beloved sons Robert of York, and Roger of Selby, 
and of eleven other abbats of the Praamonstratensian order, 
seems manifestly to declare the same, that our venerable bro- 
ther, Geoffrey, the archbishop of York, disregarding the oaths 
of the office entrusted to him, being uselessly engaged in 
hunting, hawking, and other military pursuits, has given 
neither hand nor thought since his promotion to the ordina- 
tion of the clergy, the dedication of churches, or the cele- 
brations of synods, nor yet has pronounced a blessing upon 
any abbat, although with sufficient indiscretion he has accus- 
tomed his tongue at his own pleasure to pronounce male- 
dictions against and to excommunicate both clerks and abbats ; 



A. I). 1195. LETTEE OF POPE CELESTIJSTUS. 349 

the liberties and approved customs of his church he nullifies 
and subverts ; appeals which are wont to be the refuge of the 
oppressed, he has, to the injury of the Eoman See, brought into 
contempt. Many, because they have made appeals to our- 
selves, he has ordered to be thrown into prison and placed in 
irons ; the beneficed clergy of his church, after appeal made 
to us, he has spoiled of honors and benefices, and some of the 
canons, despising their appeal, he had subjected to excom- 
munication. In his presence, the privileges of the Koman 
Pontiffs are utterly deprived of all authority ; and he, who 
otherwise would probably have been safe by pleading our 
privileges in his presence, loses the benefit of the protection 
he thereby hoped to gain. When it so happens that any one 
has been restored to a church or 26 possession by the judges de- 
legated by our authority, the person by whom the said judg- 
ment is to be put in execution, he immediately looks upon as 
an enemy. Indeed, many so restored, he has reduced to des- 
titution ; and entering their churches by force, by means of his 
servants, is said to have broken down the doors of the churches, 
and to have by violent means expelled them. Many persons 
also he has perniciously made to incur the danger of perjury, 
withdrawing them by means of violent compulsion from the 
obedience which by oath they had canonically promised his 
archdeacons to observe. Still more, attacking the greater 
church with a multitude of armed men, he has caused the 
doors of the chapter-house to be broken open by force and 
carried away ; the property of the canons, and that of many 
other persons who had deposited their possessions in the 
church as in a treasury, he has caused by violence to be 
withheld from them ; respecting all which matters, the chap- 
ter of York has made appeal to our presence. "VVe have also 
understood from the testimony of the persons before-named, 
that sometimes when churches have been vacant, he has not 
admitted fit and proper persons when presented by those to 
whom the presentation belongs, but has given the same to 
either youths or persons of bad character, thus discharging the 
duty both of him who presents and of him who institutes ; or 
else at his own sole will he causes them to be vacated, in 
order that their revenues may be applied to his own use, and 
that which was intended for the sustenance of some worthy 
clerk, he does not hesitate to retain in his own hands. They 
26 <i ut" is probably a misprint for " aut. 



350 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1195. 

have also stated in addition, that, whereas spiritual gifts 
ought to be bestowed without reward and without corrupt- 
ness, frequently, when he gives a benefice, he either splits 
it into two parts, contrary to the canonical statutes of the 
church, or else retains upon it a new and unusual charge ; 
many, too, who have been excommunicated or suspended, he 
has absolved, through the intervention of nothing else than 
money. In his sight, religious and honest men are despised 
and contemned ; while low and suspected persons easily ob- 
tain his familiar acquaintanceship and favour. Wherefore, if 
such is his mode of life, and among such is his conversation, 
it is to be feared lest he may prove to the flock entrusted to 
his charge, rather a rock of oifence and a stumbling-block, 
than an example of erudition, or a solace or protection against 
spiritual wickedness. Wherefore, inasmuch as the things that 
have been here stated, demand the care of an enquiry, we 
have thought proper to entrust to your discretion, in which 
we have full confidence, the enquiry into these matters, 
giving you, by these Apostolic writings, our commands forth- 
with to repair to the church of York, and, convoking the 
abbats, priors, and other ecclesiastical persons of the diocese of 
York, to make diligent enquiry whether he has thus negligently 
and perniciously treated the church and province of York. And 
if, upon the matters above stated, lawful accusers shall come 
forward, you are to hear what they shall think proper to 
allege against the aforesaid archbishop, and, after diligently 
hearing and learning the same, to make it your care to 
transmit to us their attestation, enclosed under your seals, 
assigning to the parties a fitting time within which, being 
sufficiently instructed thereon, they are to appear at the 
Apostolic See, there to receive, the Lord so providing, what 
is directed by the canons of the Church. If, however, ac- 
cusers shall not be forthcoming, and if public report shall be 
in his disfavour, then you are, by our authority, to call upon 
him to clear himself by [the oaths of] three bishops and as 
many abbats, all obstacle of appeal removed. And if he shall 
chance to make any default therein, you are to cause him to 
be suspended from his archiepiscopal duties and administra- 
tion, and to appear in the Apostolical presence, to the end 
that, the Lord instructing him, he may there be taught how it 
befits him, and those like him, to minister in the house of 
the Lord. And if the said archbishop shall think fit to allege 



A. D. 1195. EXQUIKYINTO CONDUCT OF THE AECHBISHOP OP YOKE. 351 

anything against them, you are to hear the same as well, and 
to transmit it to us, enclosed under your seals, in order that a 
determination may, in due conformity with the canons, be come 
to thereon. Moreover, if the said archbishop shall, for the pur- 
pose of eluding our mandate, before your citation shall reach 
him, have interposed an appeal, or have commenced his jour- 
ney on his way to the Apostolic See, you are to appoint him 
a^time within three months, upon which he is to be bound, in 
his own person, to appear in our presence. And if he shall 
fail so to do, you shall, by our authority, from that period, 
pronounce him suspended from all pontifical duties, and from 
the administration of the archbishopric, all power of appeal 
set aside. And if you shall be unable all of you to take part in 
carrying out these instructions, then any two of you shall carry 
out the same. Given at Saint Peter's, at Home, on the sixth day 
before the ides of June, in the fourth year of our pontificate." 
Accordingly, upon the authority of these letters, the said 
bishop of Lincoln and his colleagues came to York for the pur- 
pose of making the said enquiry, and, having summoned before 
them in the cathedral church, the abbats, priors, and ecclesiasti- 
cal personages of the diocese of York, proceeded, according to the 
tenor of this Apostolic mandate, to make diligent enquiry upon 
all the heads which were contained in the said writing. Many 
abbats, priors and other persons of good character, accused the 
said archbishop on all the above heads, in presence of the 
clerk and people of the household of the said archbishop, who 
excused him as far as they could, and said that before their 
citation the said archbishop had made an appeal, and had set 
out on his road to the Supreme Pontiff : alter hearing whom, 
the said bishop of Lincoln and his colleagues, attentively hearing 
the accusations of the adversaries of the archbishop of York, 
and having committed the same to writing with all care, had 
the same transmitted to the Supreme Pontiff, enclosed under 
the testimony of their seals, assigning the archbishop a time 
within three months, in obedience to the precept of the Supreme 
Pontiff ; and of their own kindness they gave him an additional 
term of six weeks, within which he was personally to appear 
in the Apostolical presence : adding, that if he should not 
do so, he was to know that he was from thenceforth suspended 
from all pontifical duties by the Apostolic authority, as also 
from the administration of the archbishopric. They also 
assigned to the adversaries of the archbishop a time at the 






352 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1195. 

beginning of the calends of June, by which, having made all 
sufficient preparations, they were to present themselves at the 
Apostolic See, there to receive, the Lord so providing, what is 
adjudged by the canons of the Church. 

Accordingly, the aforesaid adversaries of the archbishop 
appearing at Rome in the presence of our lord the pope, at 
the time named, urgently made accusation against their 
archbishop ; but the archbishop did not come at the time ap- 
pointed, both by reason of the king's prohibition, and the 
pestilence which at that time prevailed at Rome. His clerks, 
however, appeared at the given time at the Roman court, and 
alleging these as the causes of his absence, obtained that 
whatever had in the meantime been done against the archbishop 
since his appeal, should be repealed as null and void : and the 
pope then appointed as the time for his coming to Rome, the 
octave of Saint Martin next ensuing. But because not even 
then did he make his appearance at the Roman court, either 
himself or by a sufficient proxy, at the feast of the Nativity 
of our Lord next ensuing, he was suspended from all episcopal 
duties. 

During the before-mentioned meeting of abbats, that took 
place at York, to oppose the archbishop, Roger, abbat of Selby, 
died, and was buried at Selby ; and, at the presentation of king 
Richard, was succeeded by Richard, prior of the same house, 
who received his benediction from Hubert Eitz- Walter, arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, at this time, legate of all England. 

In the same year, while the king of England was staying at 
Chinon, in Anjou, certain assassins, fifteen in number, came 
to the king's court. But when they attempted to approach the 
king of England, for the purpose of killing him, some of them 
were taken and made prisoners, on which they stated that the 
king of Prance had sent them to assassinate the king of England; 
but the king of England pretending not to know that these had 
been the designs of the king of France, deferred pronouncing 
judgment upon them, until such time as their associates should 
have been arrested. 

In the same year, in the month of February, Master Si- 
mon of Apulia, dean of the church of York, returning from 
the parts beyond sea, with the plenitude of the king's favour, 
and his confirmation of his appointment to the deanery of the 
church of York, on his approaching the city of York, there 
went forth to meet him the clergy and people of the city in 



A.D. 1195. HUGH, BISHOP OF DUKHAM, DIES. 353 

great multitudes ; among whom were some of the household 
of archbishop Geoffrey, namely, Master Otui and William de 
Bonville, and two others, who forbade the said dean, on behalf 
of our lord the pope and the archbishop of York, to approach 
the mother church as dean thereof, until the dispute which 
existed between the archbishop and himself, as to the said 
deanery, should have been duly disposed of by the Roman 
Pontiff, and appealed thereon to our lord the pope. And be- 
cause the said dean would not desist from his purpose, they 
laid violent hands on him ; but being immediately excommu- 
nicated themselves, on account of this violence, they allowed 
him to go ; on which he proceeded on his way and came to the 
mother church, and the canons of the church received him in 
solemn procession, this taking place on the Lord's day next 
before the beginning of Lent : and, at the beginning of Lent, 
Hugh, bishop of Durham, came to York, and confirmed the 
sentence of excommunication pronounced upon those who had 
laid violent hands upon the dean. While the said bishop of 
Durham was on his road thence to London, and had arrived at 
Doncaster, he fell ill, and being unable to proceed any further, 
was carried by ship to his vill of Hoveden. 

In the same month of February, in the country of the king 
of Scotland, died Gregory, bishop of Ross, who was succeeded 
by Reginald, surnamed " the Lean," a monk of Melrose. It is 
stated, that in the cathedral church of the bishopric of Ross, 
which is called Rosmarein, Saint Boniface, the pope who was 
the fourth from Saint Gregory, was buried. About this Boni- 
face we read in the Ecclesiastical histories, that he prevailed 
upon Phocas Ca3sar, the emperor of the Romans, to present the 
Temple at Rome, which was previously called the Pantheon, 
to the church of God; and, after banishing therefrom the 
abominations of Devils, he dedicated it in honor of the blessed 
Mary, the Mother of God and ever a virgin, and of all the Saints, 
appointing that festival to be celebrated every year, at the be- 
ginning of the calends of November. 

In the same year, in the month of March, on the third day 
of that month, being the sixth day of the week, Hugh, bishop 
of Durham, departed this life, at his vill of Hoveden, and was 
buried at Durham, in the chapter house of the monks ; but 
before his body had entered Durham, Walter de Ferlington 
delivered to Hugh Bardolph the castle of Durham, and hung 
up the keys of the castle over the shrine of Saint Cuthbert. 

VOL. II. A A 



354 ANNALS OP EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1195. 

Rodolph de Stavely inconsiderately rushing on for the purpose 
of seizing them, fear suddenly came upon him, and, going back, 
he hung up the keys over the shrine where they previously 
were ; but before leaving the church, by the judgment of God 
he was scourged with a severe attack of illness, and died in a 
few days after. The said keys, however, were afterwards 
delivered by the hands of the prior and of the monks to Hugh 
Bardolph, who made oath that he would faithfully keep them 
to the honor of Saint Cuthbert and the king. After this, Hugh 
de Ferlington delivered to Hugh Bardolph the castle of Nor- 
ham, by command of the king's justiciary. 

In the meantime, at the instance of the canons of York, 
pope Celestinus wrote to the following effect to Eoger de Lei- 
cester and Winemer de Northampton, archdeacons of the church 
of Lincoln: 

The Letter of pope Celestinw against Geoffrey, archbishop of 
York. 

" Celestinus, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his dearly beloved sons, Haimo, dean of Lincoln, Roger de 
Leicester, and Winemer de Northampton, archdeacons ap- 
pointed in the diocese of Lincoln, health and the Apostolic 
benediction. Our most dearly beloved sons, Simon, the dean, 
and the chapter of the church of Saint Peter at York, have 
informed us that, after appeal made to us, the clerks of the 
chapel of our venerable brother, the archbishop of the said church, 
and some other persons, have been intruded into the cathedral 
church of the said city, to the great prejudice of the canons, 
the vicars and clerks of the said church being excluded there- 
from, for the purpose of ministering therein, and, contrary to 
the ancient and approved custom, usurping the places and stalls 
of the clergy in the choir and chapter, have presumed to contravene 
the regulations of the church. "Wherefore, wishing, as is right 
and proper, to put an end to presumptuous acts of this nature, 
we do by our precept, by means of these our Apostolical writings 
command, that, if what we have before stated is true, you will 
compel these presumptuous persons, by force of ecclesiastical 
censure, all power of appeal being taken away, in your pre- 
sence to make due satisfaction for these matters to the church 
of Saint Peter, and the canons thereof. You are also to cause 
reparation to be made for the losses which shall appear to have 
been inflicted by the same clerks upon the aforesaid chapter in 



A.D. 1195. HUGH, BISHOP OF COVENTBY, IS PABDONED. 355 

such manner as shall be just. And if you shall not be able 
all of you to take part in the performance hereof, then two of 
you are to carry out the same. Given at Saint Peter's, at 
Borne, on the second day before the calends of June, in the 
fourth year of our pontificate." 

Accordingly, on the authority of these letters, the said dean 
of Lincoln and his colleagues appointed for the parties a time 
and place, first at Torkesey, and next at Avechester, where, in 
their presence, they proved the losses of the priors and canons 
of the church of York, which they had sustained by the arch- 
bishop of York and his intruders, to be of the value of one 
thousand marks of silver. 

In the same year, Bichard, king of England, forgave his 
brother, John, all the wrath and displeasure he felt towards 
him, and restored to him the earldom of Mortaigne, the honor 
of Eye, and the earldom of Gloucester, and all the appurte- 
nances thereto belonging, with the exception of the castles : 
and, instead of all his other earldoms and lands, the king gave 
him eight thousand pounds of money Anjouin per annum. 

In the same year, the Supper of our Lord approaching, on 
John, bishop of Whitherne, the suffragan and deputy of Geof- 
frey, archbishop of York, coming near to York, that he might 
there, according to usual custom, consecrate the chrism and the 
oil at the Supper of our Lord, the dean and clergy of the church 
of York refused to receive him. Consequently, he went to 
Sewell, and there consecrated the chrism and oil at the Supper 
of our Lord, and delivered them to the officials of the arch- 
bishop to distribute to the churches in the archbishopric. It is 
even said that Geoffrey de Muschamp, archdeacon of Cleveland, 
received the chrism and oil, and immediately threw them upon 
a dunghill. However, the other canons of the church of Saint 
Peter declined to receive any part thereof, but sent to Hugh, 
bishop of Lincoln, to obtain the oil and chrism of him ; they 
were deceived, however, in their expectations : for Peter, arch- 
deacon of Lincoln, brother of archbishop Geoffrey, forbade the 
bishop to give them the oil and chrism, and appealed on the 
matter to the Roman Pontiff. 

In the same year, the king forgave his wrath and displea- 
sure against Hugh, bishop of Coventry, and restored to him the 
bishopric, for five thousand marks of silver, which he paid to 
him ; but Robert, the brother of the said bishop, died in the 
custody of our lord the king, at Dover. 

AA2 



356 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D.1195. 

In like manner, our lord the king forgave his brother Geof- 
frey, archbishop of York, his wrath and displeasure, and re- 
ceived him with the kiss of peace ; in consequence of which, 
the said archbishop being beyond measure elated, so exaspe- 
rated the king by his insolent speeches, that he ordered him to 
be deprived of his archbishopric and the shrievalty of York. 
Would that the archbishop had read the warning of the philo- 
sopher, who says : " Stir not the fire with the sword." The 
Lord, also, inculcating humility in us, says, by the mouth of 
His Apostle, " Servants, be obedient to your masters in the 
Lord." 28 I say not only to the wise and modest, but also 
to the morose: "Be ye subject to the king as pre-eminent, 
and to his ministers sent by him for the punishment of the 
wicked and the praise of the good. Behold the ships ! large 
though they be, and are threatened by mighty winds, by a 
small helm are they turned round, wherever the intention 01 
him who steers shall guide them : so, too, though the tongue 
is a small member, it leads to great results. Behold ! the fire, 
however small, how great the wood it can burn ! The tongue 
is truly a fire, and from the tongue all iniquity is carried into 
effect, which pollutes and inflames the whole body ; and no 
one is able to control the tongue, but he who is wise and cir- 
cumspect. Therefore, let us circumcise our hearts ; for, from 
the uncircumcised heart proceed fornications, adulteries, mur- 
ders, thefts, false- witness, blasphemies, contentions, and strifes, 
and the like to these, which are the things that defile a man ; 29 
and on the contrary to this, out of the clean and circumcised 
heart proceed charity, cheerfulness, peace, patience, long- 
suffering, kindness, benignity, meekness, fidelity, modesty, 
continence, chastity, and other things like unto these, which 
are the fruits of the soul, and lead it unto God its Creator, for 
* out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh,' 30 
whether it be good or whether bad." 

In the same year, there came a hermit to king Richard, 
and, preaching the words of eternal salvation to him, said : 
" Be thou mindful of the destruction of Sodom, and abstain 
from what is unlawful ; for if thou dost not, a vengeance worthy 
of God shall overtake thee." The king, however, intent upon 
the things of this world, and not those which are of God, was 
not able so readily to withdraw his mind from what was un- 

28 Eph. vi. 5, not quite correctly quoted. 

29 According to St. Matt. xv. 19, and St. Mark, vii. 21, 22. 

30 St. Matt, xii 34. St. Luke, vi. 45. 



A.D. 1195. KING RICHARD AMENDS HIS CONDUCT. 357 

lawful, unless the revelation should come to him from above, 
or he should behold a sign. For he despised the person of his 
adviser, not understanding that sometimes the Lord reveals to 
babes the things that are hidden from the wise ; for the lepers 
announced good tidings to Samaria, 31 and the ass of Balaam 
recalled its master from the unlawful way. "Wherefore, the 
/lierrnit/ leaving the king, went his way, and hid himself from 
oeTore his face. In process of time, however, although the be- 
fore-named king despised the admonition of the poor hermit, 
still, by the inspiration of the Divine grace, he retained some 
part of his warning in his memory, having faith in the Lord 
that He who recalled the publicans and the Canaanitish woman 
to repentance, in His great mercy would give to him a penitent 
heart. 

Hence it was, that on the Lord's day in Easter week, the Lord 
visited him with a rod of iron, not that he might bruise him, 
but that he might receive the scourging to his advantage. For 
on that day, the Lord scourged him with a severe attack of 
illness, so that, calling before him religions men T he was not 
ashamed to confess the guiltiness of his life, and, after receiving 
absolution, took back his wife, whom for a long time he had 
not known : and, putting away all illicit intercourse, he re- 
mained constant to his wife, and they two became one flesh, 
and the Lord gave him health both of body and of soul. Oh ! 
happy the son, whom, in this pilgrimage," thlHather's severity 
chastens for his correction, and not for his destruction ! For 
the father corrects his son sometimes in kind words, and 
sometimes in harsh, that, by the one means or the other, he 
may recall him to do what is right. And thus, in the furnace 
of justice does the Lord try His gold ; there does He in 
adversity prove His holy one, that He may promote him to a 
crown. Truly, great and inexpressible are the works of the 
Lord, and His mercies are over all His works. For this king, 
over whose head his iniquities had passed away, was adopted 
by Christ as His son, and turning from his wickedness unto the 
Lord, was received by Him as a son. 

For God, in whose hands are the hearts of kings, and who 
turneth them whichever way He thinketh fit, instilled it into 
the heart of the king, that he should so quickly change his life 
and conversation for the better : for, rising early every day, he 
first sought the kingdom of God and its justice, and did not 
31 Alluding to 2 Kings, vii. 



358 ANNALS OF ROGER BE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1195. 

depart from, the church until, after the usage of the Church, 
the whole of the Divine service had been performed. A glo- 
rious thing indeed is it for a prince to begin his daily actions, 
and to finish them in Him who is the beginning without 
beginning, and who judges the limits of the earth. 

The said king, mindful also of those words which say, 
" Blessed is he that considereth the poor and needy ; the Lord 
will deliver him in time of trouble," 32 ojded_each_day, many 
poor to be fed, both ip his nnnr^ ^g also in cities Main" his 
viUs, whom he daijj^increased.^^ccQrdingL .as -ihejre was need. 
For there was a great famine in this land, and the poor resorted 
to him that they might be fed. By the example of such, is 
faith confirmed, hope upraised, charity nourished, humility 
protected, devotion increased, and a desire to do good excited. 
The said king also caused many chalices of gold and silver to 
be made, which he distributed among the churches, from which 
their chalices had been taken for the purpose of paying his 
ransom. "Woe unto that man through whom the offence 
cometh;" 33 for it ought not to be imputed to the king that 
through him those chalices had been given for his ransom, but 
rather it ought to be laid to the charge of those who gave such 
counsel to him, inasmuch, as "Evil communications corrupt 
good manners," 34 and we read in the Gospel, 35 "Wherefore he 
hath the greater sin who hath delivered me up unto thee." 

In the same year, pope Celestinus, at the prayer of Richard, 
king of England, appointed Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, 
legate of the whole of England ; on which occasion, the said 
pope wrote to him to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Celestinus on the legateship of Hubert, 
archbishop of Canterbury. 

" Celestinus, the pope and bishop, servant of the servants of 
God, to his venerable brother, Hubert, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, legate of the Apostolic See, health and the Apostolic 
benediction. That sincerity in its duteousness and in its 
established faith, which the church of England has always 
maintained towards the holy Church of Eome, has, as we fully 
trust, flourished once again under your energy and prudence, 
and has received an acceptable increase of tranquil fervour 
For such an opinion of your brotherhood has gone forth to the 
Church of Rome, that by the odour of your good works we are 
32 Psalm xli. 1. * St. Matt, xviil. 7. 34 1 Cor. xv. 33, 35 St. John, xix. 11. 






A.D. 1195. LETTER OF POPE CELESTIXTJS. 359 

refreshed, and are strengthened by the vigour of the constancy 
which you manifest ; so much so, that we may now more openly by 
our deeds disclose the confidence we have placed in your probity. 
"Wherefore, at the entreaty of our most dearly beloved son in 
Christ, Eichard, the illustrious king of the English, and all the 
suffragans of the church of Canterbury, that the church of 
England might have a legate from the Apostolic See, for its 
own advantage, as also that of the kingdom ; as also, in con- 
sideration of the feelings of devotion which we entertain towards 
the church of Canterbury for the merits of its glorious martyr, 
and out of respect for your virtues and honesty, we have given 
our assent and favour to their prayers; and this in especial, 
because we believe that it will greatly conduce to the advan- 
tage of the Church and of the kingdom if she receives such a 
person, acting in the above-named kingly office, as the urgent 
prayers of the said king and of others pronounce you to be, 
in commendation of the meritoriousness of your life, and of 
your devotion to the faith. Therefore we do for the honor 
of God, for the safety of the church of Canterbury, and 
for the peace of the whole kingdom of England, all excep- 
tions or privileges granted to our venerable brother, Geoffrey, 
archbishop of York, or to his church, or any other, notwith- 
standing, grant unto you the office of legate, enjoining you by 
these Apostolic writings, to receive the same with the humility 
of fraternal obedience, and, in accordance with the powers 
granted you by heaven, for the purpose of amending the things 
that require amendment, and of enacting what requires to be 
enacted, to apply the hand of diligence to the exercise of 
the authority of the legateship : so observing in all things, 
with ready dutifulness, the respect, due to your mother, the 
lloman Church, that, through the profitableness of the ministry, 
which with joy she entrusts to you, you may, by your acts, 
render her even more joyful. Given at the Lateran, on the 
fifteenth day before the calends of April, in the fourth year of 
our pontificate." 

The said pope Celestinus wrote also to the following effect 
to Geoffrey, archbishop of York, and all the bishops, abbats, 
priors, and others, appointed prelates of churches throughout 
the kingdom of England : 

" Celestinus, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his venerable brethren in Christ, the archbishop of York, and 
all bishops, abbats, priors, and others, appointed prelates of 



360 ANNALS Of KOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1195. 

churches throughout the kingdom of England, health and the 
Apostolic benediction. The inscrutable depths of the Divine 
wisdom have established the Holy Church throughout the 
breadth of this world, and have, in its inimitable foresight, so 
willed its rule and governance to be carried out, that, for the 
purpose of its healthful governance, many should be associated 
in the care thereof, although, for the purpose of establishing 
ecclesiastical unity, the Roman Church has received the fulness 
of power therein. For it has willed that, in accordance with 
what is said by the Prophet in reference to the Church, some 
should be born unto the fathers, who, being appointed princes 
over the earth, might by the merits of their virtues, and by the 
words of doctrine, train those ignorant of the faith, when more 
advanced, to righteousness. Wherefore, the holy Church of 
Rome, to which Church the Lord has given rule over the others, 
has, in her motherly care, had regard for the others from the 
beginning, and has with a laudable practice, hitherto used all 
watchfulness, that she might from different parts of the world 
appoint prudent men to undertake the ministry of them, whose 
authority and doctrine, under the control of the Roman Pon- 
tiff, may minister to churches far distant those things which he 
himself is not able. Accordingly, we, who, insufficient as our 
merits may be, have been raised to the lofty elevation thereof, 
following in the footsteps of our forefathers, so endeavour with 
the help of God to perform the duties enjoined on us in 
reference to the neighbouring churches, that a due and proper 
foresight may not be withdrawn from those, from 'which, by 
distance, we are far separated. Wherefore in especial, looking 
with the eye of our fatherly regard at the present state of the 
English Church, for its safety and for its especial advantage in 
Christ, we have, by the common advice of our brethren, decreed 
that our venerable brother, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, 
in whose merits and virtue, wisdom and learning, the whole 
church rejoices, taking upon himself the duties of the legate- 
ship, shall, at will, perform our functions to the honor of 
the Church, and the safety and peace of the entire realm, 
throughout the whole kingdom of England, all exceptions or 
privileges granted to you or to your church, or to any other 
brother archbishop, notwithstanding. Therefore, by our au- 
thority, we do command the whole of you, through these 
Apostolic writings, to show to him all due reverence and 
honor as legate of the Apostolic See, and humbly to receive 



A.D. 1195. THE POPE'S LEGATE ARRIVES AT YORK. 361 

his healthful warnings and commands, and to obey the same, 
steadfastly observing the things that, by the authority of the 
legateship, which by the will of the Lord he holds, he shall 
think fit and proper to ordain. Given at the Lateran, on the 
fifteenth day before the calends of April, in the fourth year of 
our pontificate." 

Accordingly, upon the authority of these letters, the said 
archbishop of Canterbury, legate of the Apostolic See, sent 
to York Master Peter, the prior of Bineham, in Norfolk, and 
Master Gervaise, with the letters of our lord the pope, and letters 
from himself to the canons of York, and to the officers of the 
archbishop of York, sending word to them, that he should 
shortly come thither on the authority of his legateship, for the 
purpose of amending the things that required to be amended, 
and of enacting the things that, with the sanction of the Lord, 
required to be enacted; and he commanded them, convoking 
the clergy, to show to him, as the legate of the Apostolic See, due 
honor and obedience, adding, that he had already pronounced 
sentence of excommunication upon all those who in this respect 
should contravene the mandates of our lord the pope. He also 
sent, relative thereto, his letters patent to Simon, the dean of 
York, instructing him, if he should find any rebellious against 
the said mandate of our lord the pope, to denounce them as ex- 
communicated. Accordingly, both the canons, as also the officers 
of the archbishop of York, answered the messengers of the le- 
gate, that they would receive him in his character of legate of 
the Apostolic See, but not as archbishop of Canterbury, or pri- 
mate. 

The legate arrived at York, on the feast of Saint Barnabas 
the Apostle, being the Lord's day, and was received by the 
clergy in solemn procession ; and, being escorted to the church 
of the Cathedral See, on the Monday following caused assizes 
to be held by his servants, of all pleas of the crown of the 
king, and of novel disseisin and of mort d' ancestor ; while he 
himself and his officers held pleas of spiritual matters. On the 
following day, being the third day of the week, the legate pro- 
ceeded to the abbey of Saint Mary of York, and was there re- 
ceived in solemn procession by the monks of the said church. He 
then entered the chapter-house of the monks, and on the monks 
making complaint to him that Robert their abbat could not, by 
reason of sickness, and his bad state of health, discharge his 
duties to the house, he removed him from his pastoral charge, 



362 ANNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 11?5. 

and from the government of the house, protesting against the 
same, and appealing thereon to the Supreme Pontiff. 

On the two following days, namely, the fourth and fifth days 
of the week, there being assembled in the church of Saint Peter 
at York, Simon, the dean of that church, Hamo, the praecentor, 
William Testard, and Geoffrey de Muschamp, the archdeacons 
of Nottingham and Cleveland, John the chancellor, and Robert, 
the prior of Beverley, together with some of the canons of the 
said church, and nearly all the abbats, priors, officers, deans, 
and parsons of the churches of the diocese of York, the legate 
sat installed in an elevated place, and held a full synod ; in 
which he enacted that the following statutes should be ob- 
served. 

The Decrees of the Synod of York. 

" Whereas, among the other Sacraments of the Church, the 
host of salvation is pre-eminent in importance, therefore 
ought the devoutness of the priesthood to pay the more earnest 
attention thereto, that the same may be made with humility, be 
received with fear, and be dispensed with reverence ; and the 
minister at the altar ought to be certain that the bread and 
wine, and water, are placed ready for the sacrifice, nor should 
it be celebrated without a literate minister officiating thereat. 
Care is also to be taken, that the host is kept in a clean and 
fair pyx, and is received on each Lord's day." 

" As often as a communion is to be celebrated for the sick, 
the priest in his own person, in a clerical dress befitting a Sa- 
crament so important, is to carry the host, a light going before 
him, unless the inclemency of the weather, or the difficulty of the 
way, or some other reason shall prevent it ; because the mys- 
tery of the mass is frequently found to be corrupted, either by 
errors in the writing, or through the age of the books, so as 
not to be able to be distinctly read. 

" The attention of the archdeacon is also to provide that in 
each church the canon of the mass is compared with all dili- 
gence, with a true and approved copy thereof. 

"We do also forbid any priest through cupidity to enjoin any 
layman when he comes to receive absolution, to have masses 
performed ; and we have thought proper to forbid that any 
priest shall make a bargain for the celebration of mass at a 
stated price, but he is to receive that alone which is offered at 
the mass. 



A.D. 1195. DECBEES OF THE SYNOD OF TOIIK. 363 

" We do also enact, that in baptism not more than three spon- 
sors shall receive a child from the holy font, two males and 
one female a male child, and two females and one male a female 
child. 

"Also, where a child, the fact of whose previous baptism is 
unknown, is found exposed, whether with salt or whether with- 
out salt, 36 it is to be baptized, since ' that is not known to be re- 
peated which is not known to have been already done.' 

" We do also decree, that, unless under the pressure of great 
and urgent necessity, no deacon shall baptize, or shall dispense 
the body of Christ to any person, or shall impose penance on 
one making confession ; as, according to the tenor of the canons 
of our forefathers, antiquity determines to have these things of 
right to belong to the order of the priesthood. 

" According to the tenor of the same institutions, we do also 
enact, that as often as a priest is called upon to baptize a child, 
or to communicate with a sick person, he shall not presume to 
be guilty of delay. 

" Whereas, in the house of prayer, which is called * The house 
of God,' there ought to be nothing unbecoming, nothing left 
unprepared, we do order that the parsons and vicars of churches 
shall make it their object to provide, in proportion to their 
incomes received, according as reason demands, and approved 
custom requires, in order that those churches which stand in 
need of repair may be repaired. 

" Also, Divine service is to be performed with the furniture 
suitable to that service. 

"Also, the sacrament of the Eucharist is to be celebrated with 
a silver chalice, where there are means for so doing ; and as the 
time for carrying out this ordinance, we do appoint one year 
from the beginning of our legateship ; and if, in the meantime, 
this ordinance shall not have been carried into execution, we 
do decree that before the expiration of that time our order shall, 
out of the revenue of the churches, be carried into effect. 

"We do also enact, that clerks who have received the tonsure 
from the bishops, shall retain that tonsure and shorn head ; 
and if they shall neglect to retain the same, then they are to be 

38 By the decrees of the church, salt was ordered to be placed about 
the persons of children exposed, signifying that they had not been bap- 
tized. Judging from the present enactment, it seems to have been con- 
sidered that no confidence could be put in the observance of this order ; 
and, indeed, it was not likely that those who exposed their children, would 
be very particular about their welfare in another existence. 



364 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1195. 

compelled so to do by deprivation of their benefices, if they 
have any ; and as for those who have not any benefices, let 
them, whether they will or no, be shorn by the archdeacon or 
by the deans. 

" We do also command that priests shall not go in hoods with 
long sleeves, but rather in vestments suited to their order ; that 
in the same degree in which they excel others in dignity of 
station, they may more fully set the pattern and example of 
propriety. 

" Inasmuch as the Scripture testifies that he is blessed 'who 
shaketh his hands from holding of bribes,' 37 attention must be 
paid with earnest zeal that justice is done without reward, and 
no one is to presume to receive any reward whatever for doing 
the same in causes ecclesiastical, or for withholding it, or for 
accelerating it, or for deferring it, that so at the fitting time 
the just Judge may give him the reward of justice. 

" Inasmuch as tithes are the tribute of souls that stand in need, 
and are bound to be given in obedience to the command of 
God, it is not for him that pays them to diminish the same. 
We do therefore enact, that of those which are yearly renewed, 
the due and customary tithes shall be paid entirely and in full ; 
so that in the first place tithes are to be given without any dimi- 
nution to the Church, and after that, out of the remaining nine 
parts, the wages of the reapers and of the other servants are to 
be paid at discretion. 

"The profession of religious sanctity demands that monks and 
canons regular and nuns should be kept religiously and in obedi- 
ence to rules. To the end, therefore, that all opportunity of going 
astray may be taken away from them, we do forbid that they 
shall hold those revenues to farm which go under the name of 
obediences, 38 or shall go upon distant pilgrimages, or beyond the 
monasteries, without a certain and reasonable cause, and they 
are not to go without the society of other persons whose cha- 
racter is assured and beyond all doubt. Also, as to nuns, we 
do especially add, that they are not, without the society of 
the abbess or prioress, to go beyond the precincts of the mo- 
nastery. 

"We do also, in addition, forbid any layman to take any church 

*7 Isaiah xxxiii. 15. 

38 " Obedientiae" was the name given to cells, farms, and granges that 
paid certain rentals to abbeys, and were often presided over by monks 
delegated for that purpose from the abbey. 



A.D. 1195. DECREES OF THE SYNOD OF TOEK. 365 

or tithes to farm, whether solely, or whether in partnership 
with a clerk. 

" That the dishonesty of calumniators, and the wickedness of 
rash swearers may be checked, through fear of the Divine judg- 
ment, we do order that, for the future, every priest, three times 
in the year, with candles lighted and bells ringing, shall 
solemnly excommunicate those who, in recognizances and other 
matters of testimony, shall have knowingly and wilfully been 
guilty of perjury, and those who shall wickedly cause others 
to be guilty of perjury, and shall on every Lord's day denounce 
them as excommunicated ; to the end that the frequent repetition 
of the malediction may withdraw those from their iniquity, 
whom the accusation of their own conscience does not deter 
therefrom. But if they repent of their perjury, let them be 
sent before the archbishop or bishop, or, in the absence of the 
archbishop or bishop, general confessor of the diocese, for the 
purpose of receiving absolution from him. But in cases where 
persons are in the last extremity, penance is to be suggested, 
and not to be enforced ; and they are to be strictly enjoined, if 
they shall survive, to go before the archbishop or bishop, or, in 
the absence of the archbishop or bishop, the general confessor 
of the diocese, to the end that due penance may be imposed 
on them. 

" Because it is the word of the Lord, l If any priest shall sin, 
he will make my people to sin,' 39 and ' A wicked priest is the 
ruin of the people,' the excellence of so high an order requires 
that priests should abstain from public drinkings, and from 
taverns, and that those who are bound by a vow of chastity, 
should by no means give way to acts of uncleanness. We do, 
therefore, forbid them to have harlots in their houses, or, when 
expelled therefrom, in fraud of our enactments, to have access 
to them in the houses of others. But if they shall persist in 
their uncleanness, and the superiors, concealing it, shall not 
bring the same to the notice of their prelates, they shall be sus- 
pended from their duties ; but those who, inflamed by zeal 
for God, have told the prelates of their excesses, shall obtain 
the favour of the Divine blessing. 

" Also, the punishment of those who publicly keep harlots, 

shall be as follows : as being infamous, they shall be disabled 

from making accusation against others, and from bearing 

39 These words do not appear in Scripture ; though, of course, the 

meaning of them is to be found there. 



366 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEff. A.D. 1195. 

witness : but if, not even through a fear of this punishment 
they shall come to a sense of their duty, then let them know 
that they shall be suspended from their offices and benefices. 

" A person who is suspected of a crime by common report, or 
by probable tokens, is to be admonished in a friendly manner 
by the superior of the place, a first, second, and third time, 
to amend his life ; and if he shall not do so, then the superior, 
taking with him two or three others, to whom the common 
report in his disfavour is known, shall rebuke him for the same ; 
and if even then he shall not seem to be changed for the better, 
let it be told unto the Church, that is to say, let him be accused 
in the chapter, in order that, being convicted, or having con- 
fessed, he may be canonically punished. But if he cannot be 
convicted, then let him be called upon to make canonical purga- 
tion of himself ; so however, that the number of his witnesses 
may not exceed twelve, within which number, more or less may 
be received according to the condition of the person, and the na- 
ture and extent of the infamy, according to the opinion of those 
giving judgment. And forthwith, on the first day on which he, 
who is under the stigma of infamy, shall be in a condition to 
exculpate himself, let the purgation take place, that, through 
fear of vexation arising from delay, money may not be ex- 
torted. This and the above enactments we have made, saving 
in all things the authority and dignity of the Holy See." 

At this synod, also, Master Peter De Dinant demanded full 
restitution to be made to him of the archdeaconry of the West 
Biding, which Geoffrey, archbishop of York, had given him, 
instructing the chapter of York, by his letters, to receive and 
instal him; on which Simon, the dean, and the chapter of 
York, made answer, that the archbishop could not give that 
archdeaconry to any one, because he had delayed to present to 
it beyond the time appointed by the statute of the council of 
the Lateran, in which council pope Alexander the Third enacted 
that when it shall happen that prebends, livings, or any offices 
shall be vacant in any church, they shall not remain too long in 
a state of suspense, but shall, within six months, be conferred 
on persons who shall be able worthily to discharge the duties of 
the same. And if the bishop, when the presentation shall be- 
long to him, shall delay to present, then be it performed by the 
chapter ; and if the election belongs to the chapter, and, within 
the time prescribed, it shall not so do, then let the bishop, with 
the aid of the Lord, and with the counsel of religious men, 



A.D. 1195. BOBEKT, ABBAT OF TOTTE2s T AT, IS DEPOSED. 367 

perform that duty : or in case all shall happen to neglect so 
to do, let the metropolitan of the bishops, with the aid of the 
Lord, dispose thereof, without any gainsaying on their part. 

Accordingly, on the authority of this enactment, and under the 
protection of the privilege granted to the church of York by the 
indulgence of pope Celestinus the Third, the said dean and chapter 
of York asserted that to them belonged the presentation of the 
aforesaid archdeaconry, and of the other benefices vacant in the 
church of York, to which their archbishop had not presented 
within the time fixed by the council of Lateran. But the 
deputies of the archbishop of York, namely, Master Gerard de 
Rowelle, and Master Honorius, made appeal against this pri- 
vilege, and renewed the appeal which their lord the arch- 
bishop had made on his departure, in regard to the state of 
his church, before the legate and the whole synod ; and al- 
though in that privilege it was stated to be one without appeal, 
the legate still deferred to the appeal of the deputies of the 
archbishop of York. 

In the same year, William, king of the Scots, fell ill at a 
vill of his, the name of which is Clackmannan, and named 
Otho, son of Henry, duke of Saxony, and nephew of Richard, 
king of England, his heir to the kingdom of the Scots, upon 
condition that the said Otho should marry his eldest daughter, 
and take her with the kingdom. Although the king had a 
great many who consented to his wishes herein, still earl Patrick 
and many others opposed them, saying, that they would not 
receive the daughter as queen, because it was not the custom 
in that realm that a woman should possess the kingdom, 
so long as there was a nephew, or brother, of her race, who 
might, according to law, possess the kingdom. However, shortly 
after, by the mercy of God, the king of the Scots recovered from 
his illness, abiding in the same determination that he had 
made, as to giving his daughter in marriage to the said Otho, 
together with his kingdom. 

In the same year, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, legate 
of the Apostolic See, and justiciary of the whole of England, 
deposed Robert, abbat of Tournay, he protesting against the same, 
and appealing to the presence of our lord the pope; and 
he kept him in prison and in irons for a year and a half, at 
Gloucester. In the same year, the said archbishop, as jus- 
ticiary of the whole of England, sent throughout England a 
form of oath to be taken as follows : 



368 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1195. 

" That all subjects of the kingdom of England, shall, to the 
best of their power, keep the peace of their lord the king ; 
that they shall not be thieves or robbers, nor yet harbourers 
of them, nor shall in any way abet them ; and that whenever 
they shall be able to know of any malefactors of that cha- 
racter, they shall, to the best of their ability, endeavour to take 
them, and deliver them up to the sheriffs, and they shall 
on no account be liberated but by our lord the king, or his 
chief justice ; and if they shall not be able to arrest them, they 
shall give notice of them, whoever they may be, to the bailiffs 
of our lord the king. When a hue and cry' is raised for the 
pursuit of outlaws, robbers, thieves, or the harbourers of 
such, all shall join in pursuit of them to the best of their abi- 
lity ; and if they shall see any one, and it shall be clear that 
he has not joined in the said pursuit, or that he has, without 
permission, withdrawn himself therefrom, they shall take such 
same persons, as though they were the offenders, and deliver 
them to the sheriffs, not to be set at liberty, but by the king, 
or by his chief justice. 

" Also, the knights who are appointed for that purpose, shall 
make all persons of their respective districts, of the age of fif- 
teen years and up wards, appear before them, and shall make them 
swear that they will keep the peace of our lord the king, in 
manner above-mentioned, and that they will not be outlaws, 
robbers, or thieves, nor yet harbourers of them, nor will in 
any way abet them ; and that they will, in manner above 
stated, make full pursuit of them, and, if they shall take any 
one in the commission of an offence, will deliver them to 
the knights placed over them in their respective districts and 
for that purpose appointed, who shall deliver him into the 
custody of the sheriff ; and in like manner, on a hue and cry 
being raised for the purpose of pursuing the said offenders, if 
they shall see any person, or it shall be known to them that 
any person does not join in the pursuit, or if he shall, without 
leave, withdraw himself from the pursuit, they shall take 
him as the offender, and deliver him to the aforesaid knights, 
for the purpose of being delivered into the custody of the 
sheriff, as though he were the offender himself ; and he shall 
not be liberated, except by the command of our lord the king, 
or his chief justice." 

Accordingly, for the purpose of carrying out these orders, 
select and trustworthy men were sent throughout all the 






A D.I 105. CONFERENCE OF THE KINGS OF FRANCE AND ENGLAND. 369 

counties of England, who, upon the oaths of trusty men, ar- 
rested many in their respective neighbourhoods, and put them 
in the king's prisons. Many, however, being forewarned 
thereof, and having bad consciences, left their homes and pos- 
sessions, and took to flight. 

In the same year, after the Nativity of Saint John the Bap- 
tist, Henry, emperor of the Romans, sent to Eichard, king of 
England, a massive crown of gold, of great value, as a token 
of their mutual affection ; requesting him, by the fealty which 
he owed him, and as he took an interest in his hostages, that 
they might not come to harm, to make a hostile invasion of the 
territories of the king of France, on which the emperor him- 
self would give him ample succours for the purpose of avenging 
the injuries done him by the king of France. However, the 
king of England, fearing that in this message there might be 
some treachery lying concealed, sent to the emperor, William, 
bishop of Ely, his chancellor, for the purpose of enquiring 
what kind of succours, and when and where the emperor would 
give him aid against the king of France. For it was well 
known to the king of England that the said emperor, above all 
things, desired that the kingdom of France might become sub- 
ject to the Roman empire ; while, on the other hand, the king of 
England conjectured that if an alliance were formed between 
the emperor and the king of France, the whole would redound 
to his own detriment. 

Accordingly, the king of France, being aware that the chan- 
cellor of the king of England would pass through his territory, 
attempted to take him ; but being deceived in his expectations, 
sent word to the king of England that there was an end to the 
truce ; immediately on which, the armies of both, engaging, did 
the greatest damage on both sides in the destruction of men, 
and in ravages and conflagrations. The king of France, how- 
ever, seeing that he could in nowise defend himself against the 
king of England, destroyed many castles in Normandy, which 
the king of England soon after rebuilt, and rendered still 
stronger than they had been before. 

However, one day, before the destruction of the castle of 
Val Rodol, the said kings came to hold a conference near that 
castle ; but while they were holding it, a great part of the 
walls of the castle fell, through the operations of the miners 
of the king of France ; seeing which, the king of England left 
the conference, and made an attack upon the army of the king 

VOL. n. B B 



370 ANNALS OP EOGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1195. 

of Prance ; on which the king of France and his men took to 
flight, and while he was crossing a bridge, the bridge fell 
down, and he himself with his people was almost drowned in 
the river Seine. However, at last, with great difficulty reach- 
ing the opposite side, he pitched his camp there on the banks 
of the river ; on which, the king of England returned to the 
castle of Rodol, and' took many of the household of the king of 
Prance, and then levying a large army from all his territories on 
both sides of the sea, entered the territories of the king of 
Prance ,in many places, and made a great slaughter of those 
who resisted, reaped the standing corn though not yet ripe, 
rooted up the vines and fruit-bearing trees, and burned the 
towns. 

In the same year, on the occasion of the dissensions that 
existed between Philip, king of Prance, and Richard, king of 
England, Boyac El Emir Amimoli, emperor of Africa, with a 
large army, entered the territories of the Christians of Spain, 
and defeated them, and took their cities, castles, and fortresses, 
and destroyed them ; he also defeated Alphonso, king of Castille, 
in a pitched battle, and after he had driven him from the field, 
besieged him in his city of Toledo ; but being able to effect 
nothing there, withdrew with his army. 

When the king of Prance and the king of England came to 
hear of this, they met to hold a conference upon making peace 
between themselves, and came to an agreement to the fol- 
lowing effect : Louis, son and heir to the king of France, 
was to marry the sister of Arthur, duke of Brittany, the niece 
of the said king of England ; and the said king of England was 
to quitclaim to them and to their heirs Gisors, and Nefle, and 
Baudemont, with the Norman Vexin, Vernon, Ivery, and 
Pascy, and was also to give them twenty thousand marks of 
silver, while, on the other hand, the king of France was to quit- 
claim to the king of England all that he demanded of him in 
the county of Angouleme, and was to restore to him the county 
of Aumarle, the county of Auch, the castle of Arches, and 
many other castles which he had taken from him in Normandy 
and other of his territories in the war. 

All these arrangements, however, were delayed until the 
octave of All Saints, in consequence of the prohibition of the 
emperor of the Romans, who forbade the king of England to 
make peace with the king of Prance, unless with his advice 
and consent. Moreover, at the same conference, the king of 



A. I). 1195. 31ETT7B3J OF THE ENVOYS OF THE KING OF ENGLAND. 371 

England restored to the king of France his sister Alice, whom 
he shortly after gave in marriage to John, count de Pontif. 

In the meantime, the pagans, laying waste the territories 
of Sancho, king of Portugal, came to the abbey of Alcobaca, 
and slew the monks of the Cistercian order, who were there 
serving God, and those who offered resistance to them. Next 
going thence, they came to another house of the same order ; 
on which the monks, coming forth to meet them, fell at the 
feet of the pagans, asking for life and mercy ; and the pagans, 
taking compassion on them, granted them their lives ; and, hear- 
ing of their life and conversation, praised them, saying that 
they would wish to be saved with that order, if they only had 
women ; for it must be known that the especial religion of the 
pagans is sensuality. 

In the same year, Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, gave to Eichard, 
king of England, one thousand marks of silver, for the pur- 
chase of the freedom of the church of Lincoln ; for the king, 
according to the custom of his English predecessors, demanded 
yearly of the bishop of Lincoln, one mantle furred with sable, 
and, for the release of all claims for ever on the part of the said 
king and his heirs of the said mantle, the said bishop of Lin- 
coln gave to the before-named king the said sum of money, and 
received from the king his charter quitclaiming the same. 

In the meantime, William, bishop of Ely, and the other envoys 
of the king of England who had been sent to the emperor, re- 
turned, stating that that form of peace which had been agreed 
to between him and the king of Prance did not please the 
emperor, because it seemed disgraceful to the emperor that the 
king of England should quitclaim anything that was not in his 
power ; and for the purpose of recovering what the king of 
England had lost in consequence of his captivity, the emperor 
forgave him the sum of seventeen thousand marks of silver for 
his ransom. Accordingly, the time for the conference approach- 
ing, which the king of England and the king of France had 
agreed on, to be held between them near Verneuil on the octave 
of All Saints, the king of England made haste, the hour for the 
conference being at hand, to have this interview with the king 
of France : however, William, archbishop of Eheims, came to 
meet him, and told him, on behalf of the king of France, that 
there was no necessity for him to be in such haste, because 
the king of France was still in consultation with his people. 
Accordingly, the king of England believed him, and returned 

B B 2 



373 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOYEPEX. A.D. 1195. 

to the place from which he had set out ; and, having waited 
until the ninth hour, he declined to wait there any longer, but 
approached, in order that he might hold the conference with 
the king of France. On this, Philip, bishop of Beauvais, said 
to him, in presence of the king of France, "My master the 
king of France charges you with breach of faith and perjury ; 
because you swore and gave your word that you would come 
to-day at the third hour, and did not come, therefore he de- 
nes you ;" accordingly, the conference was broken up, and 
each king returned into his own territory. 

The third day after this, the people of the king of France 
made fierce ravages in Normandy, and in the other territories of 
the king of England, attended with great tumult ; and coming to 
the town of Dieppe, which the king of England had built 
shortly before, they burned it, and the ships in the harbour, to 
ashes by discharging Greek fire against it. After this, Philip, 
king of France, after many and various casualties of war, came 
with his army to Issodon, and took the castle. On this being 
told to the king of England, who at this time was staying in 
Normandy, at Yal Rodol, laying aside all other matters, he made 
three days' march into one, and came to Issodon, and entered 
his castle which the king of France had been besieging ; upon 
which a numerous multitude of troops nocked to him from 
every side. 

The king of France, being greatly terrified at his arrival, 
asked permission to depart thence with his army without mo- 
lestation, which being refused him, he requested to have an 
interview with the king of England, and the same accordingly 
took place. At this interview, through the mediation of the 
archbishops, bishops, and many of the men of either party, an 
oath was taken by both sides, to the effect that, from that day, 
that is to say, from the Saturday next after the feast of Saint 
Nicholas, they would agree to peace and reconciliation between 
themselves, and their subjects, and territories, until the feast 
of Saint Hilary next ensuing ; at which time, they would meet 
at Louviers, for the purpose, in a larger assemblage of their 
subjects, of making peace and a final reconciliation between 
them. And as the Nativity of our Lord was close at hand, and 
the said kings had not in those parts means enough to suffice 
for the expenses of royalty, during such a high festival, they re- 
turned into their respective territories. The king of England 
proceeded thence to Poitou, where he was at the feast of the 



A.D. 1135. THE KING OF DEXMAEK COMPLAINS TO THE POPE. 373 

Nativity of our Lord, which fell on the second day of the 
week. 

In the meantime, Alphonso, king of Castille, levying an 
army, and having faith alone in the mercy and goodness of 
God, fought a battle with the army of the Pagans, and defeated 
them, and slew the greater part of them with the sword, and 
drove the rest from his territories. 

In the same year, the canons of the church of York often 
and repeatedly pressed Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, to pronounce 
sentence of interdict and suspension upon Geoffrey, archbishop 
of York. For it was known that the said archbishop had not 
made his appearance in the presence of our lord the pope, at 
the time appointed for him so to do. The bishop of Lincoln, 
however, made answer to them that he would rather be sus- 
pended himself than suspend the archbishop ; on hearing 
which, the before-named canons sent messengers to Rome, to 
pope Celestinus, complaining that the bishop of Lincoln, and 
his other judges delegate, had not proceeded according to the 
tenor of the Apostolic mandate. 

In the same year, Henry, bishop of Worcester, departed this 
life, and was succeeded in the bishopric by John de Coutances, 
dean of the church of Eouen. In this year, also, died William 
de Fortz, earl of Aumarle, and was succeeded in the earldom 
by Baldwin de Bethune, at the presentation of Richard, king 
of England ; who also married the countess of Aumarle. In 
this year, also, died Isaac, the former emperor of the island of 
Cyprus, whom Richard, king of England, had taken. 

In the same year, also, died Guido, the former king of Jeru- 
salem, to whom Richard, king of England, had sold the island 
of Cyprus ; after whose decease, his brother Aymer became 
ruler of Cyprus. 

In the same year, Philip, king of France, took to wife the 
daughter of the duke of Genest, in Germany ; on which, Ca- 
nute, king of the Danes, brother of the before-mentioned Botilda, 
queen of the Franks, made complaint to pope Celestinus, of the 
injury which the said king of France had done to his sister, in 
having divorced her without a cause being known for his so 
doing. He also made complaint against William, archbishop 
of Rheims, who, without the Apostolic authority, sitting in 
judgment, had effected the divorce between the said king of 
France and Botilda his wife, without enquiry into the cause. 
He also made complaint against Stephen de Noyon, Philip, 



3*74 AXtfALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1196. 

bishop of Beauvais, Reginald, bishop of Chartres, Guido, bishop 
of Orleans, and Hotrod, bishop of Chalons ; and against Robert, 
count de Drues, Louis, count de Blois, Theobald, count de 
Champagne, and Stephen, count de Nevers ; also, against the 
barons, Simon de Castelane de 1'Isle, Peter de Mainil, and 
Walter, chamberlain of the king of France, who had made oath 
before the archbishop of Rheims, that the said Botilda, and the 
daughter of the earl of Hainault, who had been the wife of the 
said king of France, were so closely related in consanguinity, 
that the said king of France ought on no account to, nor indeed 
could, take the said Botilda to wife. But, although the said 
king of the Danes was ready to prove that they had borne false 
testimony against her, and that the said divorce was null and 
void, and ought not to hold good, still, on account of his good 
understanding with the king of France, pope Celestinus de- 
clined 40 to listen to him relative thereto. 

In the year of grace 1196, being the seventh year of the 
reign of Richard, king of England, the said king was at Poitou, 
on the day of the Nativity of our Lord, which fell on the se- 
cond day of the week ; and on the same day, Hubert, arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, justiciary of all England, and legate of 
the Apostolic See, was at York, being sent, on the king's be- 
half, to hold a conference with William, king of the Scots, on 
the subject of contracting a marriage between Otho, son of 
Henry, duke of Saxony, and nephew of Richard, king of Eng- 
land, and his daughter Margaret. For there had been an agree- 
ment made between Richard, king of England, and William, 
king of Scotland, that the said king of Scotland should give to 
the before-named Otho his daughter Margaret in marriage, 
with the whole of Lothian ; and that the king of England 
should give to Otho, and the daughter of the king of Scotland, 
and their heirs, the whole of Northumberland, and the county 
of Carlisle ; and that the king of England should have in his 
charge the whole of Lothian, with its castles ; and the king of 
Scotland should have in his charge the whole of Northumber- 
land, and the county of Carlisle, with its castles. But, because 
the queen of Scots was at that time in a state of pregnancy, 
the king of Scotland was unwilling to abide by the said agree- 
ment, hoping that the Lord would give him a son. 

40 Roger of Wendover, however, says that the pope pronounced the 
divorce to be null and void, and gives a copy of this Apostolic letter to 
that effect. 



A.D. 1196. LETTER OF POPE CELESTINTJS. 375 

In the same year, on the fifth day of the Nativity of our 
Lord, Bertram, prior of the church of Durham, met Hubert, 
archbishop of Canterbury, at Alverton ; and there, in his pre- 
sence, elected Master Philip, a clerk, and one of the household 
of the king of England, bishop of Durham. 

In the same year, pope Celestinus, at the urgent request of 
the envoys of the dean and canons of York, wrote to the fol- 
lowing effect to Simon, dean of the church of York. 

The Letter of pope Celestinus to Simon, dean of York, on the 
administration of that diocese. 

" Celestinus, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his dearly beloved son, Simon, dean of York, health and the 
Apostolic benediction. Whereas, insufficient as we are, the 
government of the universal Church has been, by the favour 
of the Divine grace, entrusted to ourselves, and we are bound 
in everything to take due precautions against casualties, and 
to provide for the interests of the same, so are we bound with the 
greatest care to use all precaution that churches may not incur 
any injury in things temporal or spiritual, in those matters on 
which it is our object to consult their honor and convenience. 
And whereas, on considering the merits of persons, and dili- 
gently examining into the same, a person may, according to 
the merits of his actions, be found deserving to be suspended 
by us from the exercise of his dignity, and to be removed for a 
time from the prelacy of churches, to the end that matter may 
not be furnished to private persons, placed under his pastoral 
care, for speaking ill of him, and that all occasions for litiga- 
tion may be removed ; we are still bound in such case to pro- 
vide them with a person who shall know how to decide the 
disputes of those engaged in litigation, and to correct the ex- 
cesses of those subject to him, and, so far as the duties of his 
office will allow, to love and cherish them with all affection. 
Wherefore, inasmuch as, his deeds so requiring and his con- 
tumacy demanding it, for abusing our patience, and not ceasing 
from his iniquities, nor yet presenting himself before us within 
the term, mercifully, by our indulgence, granted him, the arch- 
bishop of York has been, by our authority, suspended both 
from the use of the pall, from the discharge of Episcopal duties, 
and from all ministration, in things spiritual as well as 
temporal, and from the receipt of all profits thereof ; we have 
thought proper, on the authority of these presents, to show 



376 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1196. 

our indulgence to your discreetness, that thereby, with the 
sanction of the canons residing in the church of York, you may 
be enabled to correct the excesses of the clergy of the diocese 
of York, and canonically to settle the disputes of clergy, as well 
as laity, in the diocese of York, engaged in litigation, which 
require to be terminated by ecclesiastical judgment ; that so, 
all power of appeal taken away, you may be able to smite him 
with canonical rigour who shall think fit herein contumaciously 
to oppose you, until such time as, in our solicitude, it shall 
have been otherwise provided for the Church. Therefore, be it 
lawful for no man to infringe upon this page of our conclusion 
so made, or, with rash presumption, to contravene the same : 
but if any person shall dare attempt so to do, let him know 
that he will incur the indignation of Almighty God, and of 
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, the Apostles. Given at the Lateran, 
on the tenth day before the calends of January, in the fifth 
year of our pontificate." 

Another Letter of pope Celestinus relative to the same matter. 

" Celestinus, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his dearly beloved sons, all the abbats, priors, archdeacons, 
deans, and other clergy, and to the earls, barons, and other 
persons in the province of York appointed, health, and the 
Apostolic benediction. How mercifully the Eoman Church has 
dealt with the deeds of the archbishop of York, is easily to be 
seen, if you, with due care, consider the tenor of our letters 
which both parties have at different times obtained from the 
Apostolic See. For when, our dearly beloved sons, the dean and 
chapter of York, and not a few of the abbats, priors, and other 
prelates of the church in the kingdom of England established, in- 
forming us thereon, it had come to the hearing of our Apostolate 
that the said archbishop, neglecting the duties of his Apostolic 
office, was involved in secular affairs, and not in his sacred duties, 
not in ordaining the clergy, not in dedicating churches, not in 
holding synods, not in pronouncing benedictions on abbats, but, 
on the contrary, was giving the whole of his attention to hunting 
and hawking, and was engaged in other things which were dero- 
gatory in no slight degree to the pontifical office entrusted to 
him and to his honor, we did not immediately form a judgment 
against him, but thought proper to entrust the enquiry into 
these reports to our venerable brother the bishop of Lincoln, 
and our dearly beloved sons the archdeacon of Northampton and 
the prior of Pontefract, calling upon the said archbishop, under 



A.D. 1196. LETTER OF POPE CE.LESTINUS. 377 

penalty of suspension, if those things which had been signified 
unto us should be established, or, if the same should not be 
lawfully proved, then through canonical purgation, which we 
had caused to be prescribed to him with three bishops and as 
many abbats, to withhold him from such excesses, and thereby to 
recall him to the path of truth. But, inasmuch as the said 
archbishop, before the citation of the said judges had reached 
him, had made appeal to the Apostolic See, the said judges, in 
accordance with the tenor of our letters, indulging him with a 
space of three months, were careful to assign the same to him 
as the period within which he was not to delay the prosecu- 
tion of his said appeal. And further, after the said archbishop 
had commenced his journey for the purpose of coming to the 
Apostolic See, fearing lest, through the inclemency of the wea- 
ther, some danger might befall his person, when by letters and 
messengers he begged us mercifully to extend the time that had 
been granted to him, we, assenting to his requests, and ima- 
gining that on that account he would more speedily repent of 
his excesses, as he had found us so propitious and ready to listen 
to his prayers, appointed until the octave of Saint Martin last past 
as the time for presenting his appeal for the purpose of exculpat- 
ing himself ; giving it as our command, nevertheless, to the 
aforesaid judges, that, if by such time the archbishop should 
have neglected to present himself before us, in such case they 
were from that time to proceed in his cause according to the 
tenor of our letters, and make it their object to carry out the 
instructions given them therein. And whereas the said time 
has now expired, and he has neither come to the Church of 
Kome nor sent any proxy in any way to make excuse for his 
absence, and, in consequence thereof, considering his disobe- 
dience and contumacy, we have thought proper to suspend him 
from the use of the pall, and from the performance of his pon- 
tifical duties, and from all ministration in things temporal 
as well as spiritual, and from the receipt of profits, giving 
orders by our Apostolic writings to the aforesaid judges, pub- 
licly to announce throughout the whole diocese and province 
of York, that he has been suspended by us. Wherefore, we 
do command the whole of you, by these Apostolic writings, that 
you will not henceforth presume to make answer to the said 
archbishop or to his officers, either in matters spiritual or tem- 
poral. But if it shall happen that any questions shall arise 
between any of you in the diocese of York, which ought to be 
settled by ecclesiastical judgment, you are to take the same 



378 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1196. 

questions for the hearing of our dearly beloved son, Simon, 
dean of York, and to receive his judgment thereon with humi- 
lity and firmness ; knowing that we, in accordance with the 
customary mercy of the Apostolic See, have shewn indulgence 
in appointing the said dean, that, with the advice of the canons 
residing in the church of York, he may correct the excesses of 
the clergy, and may settle such questions of them and the laity 
in the diocese of York as require an ecclesiastical decision. 
Given at the Lateran, on the tenth day before the calends of 
January, in the fifth year of our pontificate." 

Another Letter of the same pope on the same subject. 

" Celestinus, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his venerable brother, the bishop of Lincoln, and his dearly 
beloved sons, the archdeacon of Northampton and the prior of 
Pontefract, health and the Apostolic btfoediction. Inasmuch 
as the holy Roman Church, being founded with perpetual stabi- 
lity upon an immoveable foundation, that is to say, upon a stone 
squared and true, the Truth, thus speaking of Himself ' Upon 
this rock will I build my church,' 41 has, through the merits of 
Saint Peter, received the governance and primacy over all 
other churches, the Lord commanding the chief of the Apostles, 
1 If thou lovest me, feed my sheep ;' 42 and has received ju- 
dicial power not only over bodies, but over souls, the same 
Chief of the Apostles hearing it said by the Lord, ' Whatever 
thou shalt bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven' 43 we, 
whom not our own merits, but the Divine mercy alone, has 
summoned to the elevation of the Supreme Pontificate, if we 
wish to form our judgments with true and prudent delibera- 
tion, and not to abuse the power to us entrusted, ought, so far 
as human frailty will permit us, to follow the example of him 
by whom the Apostolic See was founded, and from whom she 
has received the care of the other churches, and the fulness of the 
power of binding and of loosing. For God is wondrous above all 
things, and inscrutable are the depths of the divine wisdom; and 
yet, although incomprehensible are His judgments, and unsearch- 
able His ways, still, from the things that He works among us here 
below, if we look upon them aright, He suggests to us and the 
other prelates of the churches something for imitation in the 
form of His judgments ; inasmuch as, when, according to the 

St. Matt, xviii. 18. St. John, xxi. 16, 17. 

43 St. Matt. xvi. 19, xviii. 18. 






A.D. 1196. LETTEK OF POPE GELESTDSTTTS. 379 

account contained in the Gospel, he gave orders for the bar- 
ren tree in his vineyard to be cut down, that it might not 
cumber the ground, he prefaced the same, saying : ' Be- 
hold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig-tree and 
find none ; therefore cut it down ;' 44 we, though but the least, 
and subject to the defects of human frailty, considering the 
same with constant meditation within ourselves, on hearing 
the excesses of the archbishop of York, and the rumours of 
his disgraceful mode of life and his frivolous conversation 
being repeated in the hearing of ourselves and of our brethren, 
we did not immediately form a judgment against him, but, 
after the manner of Him whose mercies are beyond the rest of 
His works, ceased not, by multiplied letters and mandates, 
to exert ourselves, for no small period of time, for his correc- 
tion, that the barren tree might shoot forth to fruit, and recover 
the vigour which it had lost ; at one time, by our admonitions, 
recalling him to the ways of salvation, at another, by threats 
of suspension from his duties and benefices, deterring him from 
the paths of his iniquity and error, as, indeed, we believe is 
manifest to yourselves, who have known the whole circum- 
stances of the case, and the whole process of these matters, in 
the order in which they have taken place. And whereas it 
has come to our hearing, from the information of the clergy 
and the chapter of the church of York, and the testimonies of 
our dearly beloved sons, Robert of York, and Roger of Selby, 
and eleven other abbats of the Pramonstratensian order, seem 
manifestly to declare the same, that Geoifrey, archbishop of 
York, disregarding the oaths of the office entrusted to him, 
uselessly occupying himself with hunting and hawking, and 
other military pursuits, has, since his promotion, given neither 
hand nor thought to the ordination of the clergy, dedication of 
churches, or the celebration of synods, nor yet has pronounced a 
benediction on any abbat, although both against clergy and abbats 
he has accustomed himself indiscreetly to let loose his tongue, 
at his own will and pleasure, for the purpose of uttering male- 
dictions and pronouncing sentence of excommunication. The 
liberties and approved customs of the Church he nullifies and sub- 
verts, appeals, which are wont to be the refuge of the oppressed, 
he has, to the injury of the Roman See, brought into contempt, and 
many persons, because they have made appeal to ourselves, he 
has ordered to be thrown into prison and placed in irons. The 
44 St. Luke, xiii. 7. 



380 ANNALS OF KOGEll DE IIOVEDEN. A.D. 119G. 

beneficed clergy of the church, after appeal made to us, he has 
spoiled of dignities and benefices, and some of the canons, des- 
pising their appeal, he has subjected to excommunication. In 
his presence the privileges of the lloman Pontiffs are utterly de- 
prived of all authority, and he who, under other circumstances, 
would probably have been safe by pleading our privilege in his 
presence, loses the benefit of the protection he thereby hoped to 
gain. When it so happens that any one has been restored to a 
church or possession by the judges delegate through our autho- 
rity, the person by whom the said judgment is to be put in exe- 
cution, he immediately looks upon as an enemy. Indeed, many 
so restored he has reduced to destitution, and entering their 
churches by means of his servants by force, is said to have 
broken down the doors of the churches, and by violent means 
expelled them. Many persons also he has perniciously made to 
incur the danger of perjury, withdrawing them by means of 
violent compulsion from the obedience which by oath they had 
canonically promised his archdeacons to observe. Still more, 
attacking the greater church with a multitude of anped men, 
he has caused the door of the chapter house to be broken open 
by force, and to be carried away ; the property of the canons, 
and that of many other persons who had deposited their posses- 
sions in the church as though in a treasury, he has caused to 
be violently withheld from them ; respecting all which matter the 
chaplain of York has made appeal to our presence. We have 
also understood, from the testimony of the persons before-named, 
that sometimes, when churches were vacant, he has not ad- 
mitted fit and proper persons when presented by those to whom 
the presentation belongs, but has given the same to either 
youths or persons of bad character, thus discharging the duty 
both of him who presents and of him who institutes ; or else 
at his own will and option, he causes them to be vacated, in 
order that their revenues may be applied to his own use : and 
that which was intended for the sustenance of some worthy 
clerk, he does not hesitate to keep in his own hands. They 
have also stated, in addition, that whereas spiritual gifts ought 
to be bestowed without reward and without corruptness, fre- 
quently, when he bestows a benefice, he either splits it into 
two parts, contrary to the canonical statutes of the church, or 
else retains upon it a new and unusual charge ; and many who 
had been excommunicated or suspended, he has absolved through 
the intervention of nothing else than money. In his sight 



. 1196. LETTER OF POPE CELESTINTJS. 381 

religious and honest men are despised and condemned, while 
low and suspected persons easily obtain his familiar acquaint- 
anceship and favour. "Wherefore we, hearing of rumours so 
disgraceful, not once but many times, and that by the letters 
both of the aforesaid parties as also of others in the kingdom 
of England and in the province of York, after having frequently 
given ear thereto, wishing to withhold him from these ex- 
cesses, and to recall him to the performance of the duties of the 
pastoral office, have thought proper to entrust to you the in- 
quiry into these reports, that convening the abbats, priors, 
and other ecclesiastical persons of the diocese of York, you 
might make diligent enquiry on the matters aforesaid, and if 
lawful accusers should come forward against him, after hearing 
what is alleged on the one side and on the other, reducing the 
deposition of the witnesses to writing, make it your duty to 
transmit to the Apostolic See their attestations, signed with 
your seals, assigning to each party a fitting time within which 
to present themselves before us, for the purpose of hearing sen- 
tence pronounced. "We also remember that there was inscribed 
in the some letters, that in case of accusers not being forth- 
coming, and if public report should be in his disfavour, you 
were, all obstacle of appeal removed, to call upon him to 
clear himself with [the oaths of] three bishops and as many 
abbats. And if he should chance to make any default 
therein, you were of our own authority to denounce him as 
suspended from all pontifical duties, and the management of 
the archbishopric. But inasmuch as the said archbishop, be- 
fore he was cited by you to a hearing, as he informed us 
by his letters and his deputies, had thought fit to appeal to 
the Apostolic See, and you assigned him the calends of January 
as the term for prosecuting the said appeal, being disposed to 
be considerate of his exertions and expenses, and fearing that 
if he should come to the city in the hot season, some danger 
might result to his person from the inclemency of the weather, 
as soon as it had been intimated to us that he had set out 
upon his journey, for the purpose of coming to the Apostolic 
See, and was prepared to make answer on the offences im- 
puted to him, we, in accordance with the wonted benefi- 
cence of the Apostolic See, thought proper to put off the 
time of making his appeal from then until the octave of 
Saint ^iartin last past, suspending all that had been deter- 
mined on against him until the said time, and recalling to its 



382 ANJTALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEX. A,D. 11DG. 

former state whatever had been done by us or by others after 
appeal made to us on presentation of his first letter. We did 
also, by our Apostolic writings, distinctly command you, that 
unless he should present himself before us, on the octave of 
Saint Martin, according to the form of our first commission, in 
such case, all obstacle of any gainsaying or appeal whatsoever 
removed, you were on no account to delay to proceed against 
him. But inasmuch as the before-named archbishop, abusing 
our patience, has neither come to the Roman Church, nor sent 
any proxy to excuse his absence, even when in our mercy, 
we made it our. care to wait for him no small time beyond 
the period that had been appointed for him, although he 
seemed to have made confession as to the changes, in neglecting 
to appear before us, we have only thought proper to suspend him 
from the use of the pall, and from the execution of all episcopal 
duties, and from the administration of all matters, spiritual as 
well as temporal, and from the receipt of the revenues of the 
church of York, and of that province ; that so, at least, coming 
to a proper sense, from the pertinacity of his iniquity, he may 
not require the censures of canonical severity to be exercised 
against him with still greater rigour. "We do, therefore, by 
these Apostolic writings, command your discretion, and en- 
join that you will publicly announce him as suspended by us 
throughout all the churches of the diocese and province of 
York, strictly enjoining all the clergy and laity of that pro- 
vince, in our name, not to presume to make answer to the said 
archbishop, or to his officers, in matters temporal or spiritual, 
until we shall have thought proper to come to some other deter- 
mination as to the said archbishop. We do also command and 
will, that it shall be announced by you in the diocese of York, 
that, if any questions shall chance to be mooted between any 
persons, which ought to be determined by ecclesiastical decision, 
they are to take the same for the hearing of our dearly beloved 
son, Simon, the dean of York, to whom, in conjunction with 
the council of the canons residing in the same church, we both 
entrust the correction of the excesses of the clergy, and the 
decision of controversies existing between both clergy and 
laity, and humbly to receive his judgment, and strictly to ob- 
serve the same. In addition to which, all provisions, which on 
the authority of our letters, before our second notification had 
reached you, you have prudently and reasonably made in matters 
relative to the said archbishop, both as to the restitution of what 



A.D. 119G. DEPRIVATION OF THE AltCHBISHOP OF YOEK. 383 

has been taken away by him, as also other matters, we have 
thought proper to remain in force, as fully ratified by us ; and 
we do command you, relying upon our authorization, to repair 
to the church of York, according to the tenor of our first letters, 
both for the purpose of enquiry into these evil reports, and for 
making restitution to the canons of the things of which they 
have been deprived, and to proceed therein, appeal or absence of 
the aforesaid archbishop, or any letters hitherto obtained to the 
prejudice of our first letters, notwithstanding. And further, on 
the authority of these presents, we do enjoin you, that you 
pronounce to be utterly null and void the sentence of excom- 
munication pronounced upon certain canons, vicars, clerks, and 
servants of the canons of the church of York, by the said arch- 
bishop, after appeal made to us ; taking care, however, for the 
sake of greater precaution, to absolve the said canons, and others 
named in the said sentence, by the authority of the Apostolic See. 
Also, all those who have rashly laid hands upon Benedict, clerk 
of the above-named dean, Walter, the priest, Richard de Semare, 
and the five clerks of Cavel, and other clerks of the church of 
York, or have commanded violence to be used against them, you 
are to pronounce, all power of appeal removed, to be placed under 
the ban of excommunication, until they shall have made fitting 
satisfaction to those who have suffered this injury, and have 
come, with the testimony of your letters, to the Apostolic See, 
for the purpose of there obtaining absolution. If all of you 
shall be unable to take part in carrying out these injunctions, 
then any two of you may carry out the same. Given at the 
Lateran, on the tenth day before the calends of January, in the 
fifth year of our pontificate/' 

Accordingly, upon the authority of these letters, the officers 
of the archbishop of York were deprived, although Hubert, 
archbishop of Canterbury, the legate of the Apostolic See, had 
again given them leave to continue in performance of their 
duties, after having first suspended them because they had re- 
fused to entertain him at York, as legate. All power was, there- 
fore, according to the tenor of the Apostolic mandate, handed 
over to Simon, the dean of York ; and the king's servants put 
in the royal purse all the property and possessions of the said 
archbishop. 

In the meantime, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, wrote 
to the officers of the archbishopric of York, to the following 
effect : 



384 ASTXALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 119G. 

The Letter of Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, to the officers of 
the archbishopric of York. 

" Hubert, by the grace of God, archbishop of Canterbury, 
primate of all England, and legate of the Apostolic See, to his 
dearly beloved sons in Christ, the officers of the archbishopric 
of York, health in the Lord. We have received letters from 
our lord the pope to the following effeet : ' Celestinus, the 
bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his venerable brother 
Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, and legate of the Apostolic 
See, health, and the Apostolic benediction. On your part it 
was alleged, in our presence, that there are many in England 
who have assumed the cross of our Lord, in order that they 
might visit the sepulchre of the Lord, and give opportune aid 
to that holy land upon which had stood the feet of our Lord ; 
and although they are in a position to be able to fulfil their 
vow, still, to the danger of their souls, they are withholding 
themselves therefrom. There are some also, who, although 
they have assumed the cross, are still unable to fulfil the vow 
they have undertaken in such manner as they ought, in conse* 
quence of poverty, infirmity of body, or other just cause. But, 
inasmuch as your brotherhood has thought proper to consult 
us with reference to what was to be done with these, we do, 
on the authority of these presents, give you for answer, and by 
these Apostolical writings enjoin you, that all those who have 
taken such vow as above- stated, and have means enough to 
enable them to do the same, unless they shall have a just 
reason to prevent them from so doing, you will, by ecclesias- 
tical censure, all power of appeal removed, compel to perform 
the vow which they are said gratuitously to have made. But 
as to those who, through poverty and infirmity of body, or 
any other just impediment, are unable, as they ought, to fulfil 
a vow which they are known to have taken, we do will that 
when the truth as to these matters shall have been declared 
unto you, enjoining on them a suitable penance, you shall give 
them leave to remain ; strictly enjoining them that, as soon as 
full liberty shall have been given them of carrying out their 
vow, they are without delay not to postpone doing the same. 
But as to those who, on account of infirmity, you shall be satis- 
fied cannot possibly, under any circumstances, in their own 
persons fulfil their vows, let them send one fit and proper per- 
son, or more (according as their means will allow), beyond 



A.D. 1196. LETTER OF THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY. 385 

sea, at their own expense, to serve for one year or more at their 
will, there to serve in obedience to Jesus Christ. Given at the 
Lateran, on the second day before the ides of January, in the 
fifth year of our pontificate.' Therefore, inasmuch as it is a 
perilous thing to vow and not to perform, since the result of 
vows that have been solemnly made and not performed, is both 
the anger of the Lord, and the rise of offences in His house, we 
do, on the authority of the letter which we have transcribed, 
by our precept, command you forthwith to make diligent and 
anxious enquiry throughout each parochial church of the arch- 
bishopric of York respecting those who, having assumed the 
cross for the purpose of repairing to the sepulchre of the Lord, 
have not performed their vow so made to the Lord ; forbidding 
universally under threat of excommunication, that through the 
insane taciturnity of any person the truth shall be suppressed to 
the prejudice of this scrutiny ; and after either their own ad- 
missions, or your unerring enquiries, shall have signified the 
names of each person, let the same, distinctly stated by a trusty 
messenger, be made known to us before the Lord's day on which 
is sung ' Latare Jerusalem'^ In addition to which, we do 
command and enjoin your discreetness, that, maintaining with 
constant zealousness the cause of Him who was crucified, you 
will try to prevail upon all such in the diocese of York, by 
means of charitable exhortations and frequently conversing 
with them thereupon, persuading them, under the form of ad- 
vice, that they should faithfully fulfil what they have liberally 
promised, and that what they have vowed unto the Lord in 
the sight of all His people, they should perform with His prophet 
in the midst of Jerusalem, in the courts of the house of the Lord. 
And thus, by their voluntary sacrifices may the most High be 
appeased, and, their payments duly made, may the annoyance 
of these offences be nullified. You are also to advise the persons 
aforesaid, all and each of them, that they shall, as a sign of 
true devotion, before the day of our Lord's Passion next ensuing, 
reassume the cross which they have laid aside, and, bearing the 
same with reverence and veneration, protest by this outward 
sign against the perverseness by which they are inwardly en- 
thralled ; and let them not from poorness of spirit be ashamed 
of that from which they will obtain full and abundant fruit. 
But if they shall rather despise warnings of this nature as vain, 

45 " Rejoice, Jerusalem." The beginning of the introit of the fourth 
Sunday in Lent. 

VOL. II. C C 



386 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1196. 

or shall pertinaciously close their ears against listening to the 
same as obdurate, to the end that lawlessness may not be 
granted them by reason of their going unpunished, you are to 
take care to have it published by general notice, that all who 
shall not for the performance of their vow have resumed the 
cross which they had laid aside, within the time named, shall, 
at the ensuing Easter of our Lord, beyond a doubt be excluded 
from receiving the body of Christ and the communion of the 
faithful. But, in order that the words of such warning may 
not be thought or deemed to be frivolous, or to be wanting in 
due effect, we do will, and, by the Apostolic authority, com- 
mand, that the aforesaid punishment shall, on the said day, be 
inflicted entirely according to the form, and quite as fully as is 
herein-before stated, upon all who shall show themselves contu- 
macious. For in this way from the homely seed of rigour, it will 
shoot up hereafter as the fruit thereof, that the authority of 
prelates will be weighed with a truer balance against canonical 
severity ; 46 and those who shall be ready to rush into contempt, 
will be less audacious in expecting a full indemnity. Fare- 
well." 

In the same year, after the feast of Saint Hilary, Philip, 
king of France, and Richard, king of England, had an interview 
at Louviers, where, after holding conference with their retainers, 
the following terms were agreed to : the king of France quitted 
claim to the king of England and his heirs, on part of himself 
and his heirs, of Issodun with its appurtenances, and of all right 
which he had in Berry, Auvergne, and Gascony, and gave him 
quiet possession of the castle of Arches, the county of Auch, 
the county of Aumarle, and many other castles which he had 
taken during the war. In return for this, the king of England 
quitted claim to the king of France of the castle of Gisors, and 
the whole of the Norman Yexin ; and that all these terms 
might be ratified, they determined between themselves on a 
penalty of fifteen thousand marks of silver, so that he who 
shouMbreak this peace, should pay to the other fifteen thousand 
marks of silver ; and, as to the same, they found sureties on 
either side. 

The king of France also demanded for himself Andely, a 
manor which belonged to the archbishop of Rouen ; and when 
he could on no account obtain it, he demanded fealty to be done 

46 /. e. the rigour will be more on an equality with the authority. 




A.D. 1196. EAHL OF LEICESTEE LIBERATED FliOM CAPTIVITY. 387 



to him, by Walter the archbishop of Eouen, for that part of the 
archbishopric which lies in France, namely, in the French 
Vexin. However, the archbishop of Rouen, seeing that this 
was grievous and disgraceful to himself, appealed to our lord 
the pope, as to the interests of his church, and departed, fear- 
ing lest his lord, the king of England, would compel him to 
do this, to gain the favour of the king of France. 

ambition, how ever blind ! presumption most disgraceful ! 
0, how much does he lose of his right, who grasps at what is 
not his right ! For Philip, king of France in attacking an earthly 
kingdom, assaults a heavenly one; hankering after things worldly 
he rushes upon things Divine ; doomed to wickedness, prompt 
to run into peril, ready for criminality, he considers not the 
cause of innocence, repudiates all justice, confounds right and 
wrong ; vice is his companion, equity is his hate, iniquity is ever 
his friend; he lives by slaughter, he fortifies himself by bloodshed, 
he reigns amid cruelty, with him everything is determined by 
death, nothing is settled by love." "If Jove should hurl his 
thunders as oft as men should sin, in a short time he would be 
disarmed." 48 

However, in process of time, the king of France repented 
that he had made such an agreement with the king of England, 
and, collecting a large army, laid siege to Aumarle ; on which, 
the king of England ordered seizure to be made in every place 
in his dominions, on either side of the sea, of all the goods 
and possessions of the abbats of Marmoutier, Cluny, Saint 
Penis, and la Charite. For the said abbats were sureties to the 
king of England, that the king of France would observe the 
above-named treaty ; and if he should not do so, they were to 
pay to the king of England fifteen thousand marks. 

In the same year, Eobert, earl of Leicester, after giving to 
Philip, king of France, two thousand marks of silver, and quit- 
ting claim to him of his castle of Pascy, was liberated from 
captivity. In the same year, the king of England sent Philip, 
the bishop elect of Durham, and the abbat of Caen to England, 
for the purpose of making enquiry as to the levies of the justices 
and the sheriffs, and their servants ; but while the said abbat 
of Caen, on the Lord's day, being the day of the Passion of our 
Lord, was dining with Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, and 

48 A quotation from Ovid : 

" Si quoties peccant homines sna fulmina mittat, 
Jupiter, exiguo tempore inermis erit." 

cc2 



388 ANNALS OF HOGEE DE HOYEDEX. A.D. 1196. 

chief justiciary of all England, he was taken ill at table, and 
died on the fifth dav after, at London. In the meantime, Philip, 
king of France, took the castle of Aumarle by assault, and de- 
stroyed it, on which, the king of England gave him three 
thousand marks of silver, as a ransom for the knights and their 
followers, who had been taken at Aumarle. After this, the 
king of Erance took Novancourt by assault, while John, earl of 
Mortaigne, brother of Richard, king of England, took the castle 
of Jumieges. 

In the same year, a disturbance arose between the citizens 
of London. For, more frequently than usual, in consequence 
of the king's captivity and other accidents, aids to no small 
amount were imposed upon them, and the rich men, sparing their 
own purses, wanted the poor to pay everything. On a certain 
lawyer, William Fitz-Osbert by name, or Longbeard, becoming 
sensible of this, being inflamed by zeal for justice and equity, 
he became the champion of the poor, it being his wish that every 
person, both rich as well as poor, should give according to his 
property and means, for all the necessities of the state ; and 
going across the sea to the king, he demanded his protec- 
tion for himself and the people. Hubert Fitz- Walter, arch- 
bishop of Canterbury and the king's justiciary, being greatly 
vexed at this, issued orders that wherever any of the common 
people should be found outside the city, they should be ar- 
rested as enemies to the king and his realm. Accordingly, it 
so happened, that at Mid-Lent some of the merchants of the 
number of the common people of London were arrested at the 
fair at Stamford, by command of the king's justiciary. 

The said justiciary then gave orders that the above named 
William Longbeard should be brought before him, whether he 
would or no ; but when one of the citizens, Geoffrey by name, 
came to take him, the said Longbeard slew him ; and on others 
attempting to seize him, he took to flight with some of his 
party, and they shut themselves in a church, the name of which 
is the church of Saint Mary at Arches, and, on their refusing 
to come forth, an attack was made upon them. When even 
then they would not surrender, by command of the archbishop 
of Canterbuiy, the king's justiciary, fire was applied, in order 
that, being forced by the smoke and vapour, they might come 
forth. At length, when the said William came forth, one of 
them, drawing a knife, plunged it into his entrails, and he 
was led to the Tower of London, where he was condemned to 



A.D. 1196. THE AKCHBISHOP OF YOBK PEOTES HIS INNOCENCE. 389 

be hanged. Accordingly, lie was tied to the horse's tail, and 
dragged through the lanes and streets of the city to the gibbet, 49 
where he was hanged, together with eight of his confederates. 
The other citizens of London who had joined him, threw them- 
selves upon the king's mercy, and gave hostages as security 
that they would keep the peace towards the king and his realm. 

The monks, however of the Holy Trinity at Canterbury, on 
hearing that their church at London, called Saint Mary at 
Arches, 50 had been thus subjected to violence by order of their 
archbishop (who, although he was a servant of the king, ought 
still to have kept the rights of the Church inviolate), were indig- 
nant thereat, and their heart was grieved at him, and they were 
unable to hold communication with him on any matter in a 
peaceable manner. 

In the same year, Bichard, king of England, gave to his 
nephew, Otho, the earldom of Poitou. In the same year, also, 
when the countess of Brittany had come, by command of king 
jRichard, into Normandy, for the purpose v of holding a con- 
ference with him, Ranulph, earl of Chester, her husband, went 
to meet her at Pont D'Urse, and took her and shut her up in 
his castle at Saint James de Beverun. "When her son Arthur 
found himself unable to procure her release, be became an 
adherent of the king of France, and ravaged the territories of 
the king, his uncle, with conflagrations, on which the king of 
England, collecting a large army, entered Brittany in a hostile 
manner, and laid it waste. 

In the meantime, Geoffrey, archbishop of York, having at 
length arrived at the Apostolic See, made a long stay there, 
and, in transacting all matters relative to himself, he found 
the pope very hard to be moved, and vexed with him beyond 
measure. In process of time, however, a hearing was given 
to him, and his adversaries then present; and when the matters 
previously mentioned, and many other things, were alleged 
against him, all of which the archbishop steadfastly asserted 
to be false, his adversaries, being asked whether they were 
ready to prove their allegations, made answer, after time for 
deliberation had been asked and conceded to them, that they 
were not willing to undertake the burden of proving the same. 

The archbishop, however, sufficiently proved that he was 
not guilty of the matters charged against him; and conse- 
quently our lord the pope, by the advice of his whole court, 
* 9 At Tyburn. M Bow Church, in Cheapside. 



390 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1196. 

restoring him to his office and benefices, gave it as his com- 
mand to all the prelates and other clergy appointed throughout 
the diocese of York, that they should pay him due respect and 
obedience in all things as archbishop ; stating also in his re- 
script how the archbishop had shown that he was not guilty 
of the matters charged against him, and that all that had 
been spread abroad by his adversaries about him, was false 
and fictitious. 

On notice, however, of his restoration coming to the king of 
England, who had already despoiled the archbishop of his tem- 
poralities, and, as was said, was aiming, together with his ad- 
versaries, at his deposition, he was greatly disturbed, and 
commanded two of his adversaries to take upon themselves the 
care of spiritual matters, and not allow the archbishop, or his 
officers, to have any share in the management thereof. The 
king, also, at his own will, gave and distributed among his 
clerks the prebends of the church of York, and the other bene- 
fices that were vacant. Accordingly, the archbishop of York 
being on his return, and staying in France, did not dare to enter 
the king's territories, on seeing that he could not find grace 
in the sight of the king, so as to congratulate himself on being 
in possession of either temporalities or spiritualities, but turned 
back, and set out on his return to the Roman court. 

In the meantime, our lord the king of England, at the re- 
quest of Arthur, duke of Brittany, and of other influential 
men, gave leave to Peter de Dinant to take proceedings against 
Adam de Tournouere, as to the archdeaconry of the West Riding, 
which the king had given to the said Adam. At length, an 
agreement was come to between them, on the following terms : 
Master Simon of Apulia, dean of the church of York, and the 
chapter of that church, by the concession and consent of the 
said Adam, were to receive Peter de Dinant as archdeacon of 
the "West Riding, and instal him both in the chapter and the 
choir ; and the said Peter gave the office of deputy, and the 
management of the said archdeaconry, to the said Adam de 
Tournouere, subject to an annual payment of sixty marks, provi- 
ding that the said Adam should hold the said archdeaconry, and 
every part thereof, all the days of his life, and should make 
him thence an annual payment of sixty marks ; and if Peter 
should survive Adam, then he was to receive the archdeaconry 
of the West Riding, without any contradiction or diminution. 
It was also agreed between them, that when they should both 



A.D. 1196. THE KIXG OF SCOTLAND ENTERS MORAY. 391 

be in York at the same time, one of them should occupy the 
stall in the choir, as archdeacon, on the one day, and the other 
the same on the next day, and that they should thus take their 
turns every other day, so long as they should be staying at the 
same time at York ; and, that this agreement, made between 
them, might be ratified, and remain inviolate, the chapter of 
York confirmed the same with their seal. But before knowledge 
of this agreement had reached the archbishop of York, he sent 
his letters patent into England, to the following effect : 

" Geoffrey, by the grace of God, archbishop of York, and 
primate of England, to the deans, priests, and all the clergy 
throughout the archdeaconry appointed, health and the paternal 
benediction. Be it known to all of you, that we, in considera- 
tion of the love we bear to him, have given to Peter de Dinant, 
our clerk, the archdeaconry of the West Riding, into which, as 
we have been most credibly informed by many persons, Adam 
de Tournouere has, by whose authority we know not, intruded 
himself, and has usurped the name of archdeacon, although the 
disposal of archdeaconries, dignities, and churches, in our arch- 
bishopric, belongs to ourselves alone, on whom the same has, 
by the Divine mercy, been bestowed. The said Adam has 
also, by the instigation of the devil, since restitution made to 
us by our lord the pope, exerted himself in the administration 
of spiritual matters, against ourselves and our officers. Where- 
fore we, rendering void, and by our authority, utterly nullifying 
whatsoever the said Adam has done in institutions, in excom- 
munications, in suspensions, and in other things which he has 
done, under the name of archdeacon, do now excommunicate 
the said Adam, enjoining you, and by virtue of your obedience 
commanding you, not to answer him in any orders given by 
him, but to consider him as excommunicated. We do also 
notify unto you, that we do ratify and confirm the sentence 
pronounced upon Paulinus de Eburford and others, who, con- 
trary to the obedience which they owe to ourselves and others, 
have obstructed our officers, Master Ralph de Kime, and Mas- 
ter Honorius. Farewell." 

In the same year, in the month of July, Philip, bishop elect 
of Durham, was ordained priest, by Henry, bishop of Llandaff, 
in the church of Saint Cuthbert, at Durham, on the seventeenth 
day before the calends of July, being Saturday in the week of 
Pentecost. 

In the same year, William, king of the Scots, having collected 



392 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 11S6. 

a large army, entered Moray, for the purpose of warring against 
Harold Macmanud 50 who had taken possession of that territory; 
but before the king arrived in Caithness, Harold fled to his 
ships, being unwilling to engage with the king. On this, the 
king of the Scots sent his army to Turreham, a town belonging 
to the said Harold, and destroyed his castle at that place. Ac- 
cordingly, Harold, perceiving that the king would entirely lay 
waste his lands, came to the king's feet, and threw himself 
upon his mercy, the more especially, as there was a storm raging 
at sea, and the wind was contrary to him when attempting to 
reach the Orkney islands : he also made oath to the king, that 
he would bring to him all his enemies, on the next occasion 
that the king should return to Moray, and on that account the 
king allowed him to hold the moiety of Caithness : the other 
moiety of Caithness the king gave to Harold the younger, the 
nephew of Eeginald, former earl of Orkney and Caithness. 

The king then returned into his territories, and Harold to 
Orkney. After this, in the autumn, the king of the Scots re- 
turned to Ilvernarran, in Moray, for the purpose of receiving 
his enemies at the hand of Harold ; but, after Harold had 
brought them to the port of Locloy, near Ilvernarran, he allowed 
them to depart. The king returning late from the chase, Ha- 
rold came to him, bringing with him two boys, his nephews, 
for the purpose of delivering them to the king, as hostages ; 
and on being asked by the king where his enemies were, whom 
he was to deliver up to him, and where his son Torphin was, 
whom he had promised to deliver to him as a hostage, he made 
answer, " I let them go, knowing that if I delivered them to 
you, they would not escape out of your hands ; and as for my 
son, I could not bring him, because in this land I have no other 
heir." 

Consequently, because he had not observed the covenants 
which he had made with his master, the king, he was con- 
demned to remain in the king's custody, until his son should 
appear and become a hostage ; and because he had allowed the 
king's enemies to escape, he was adjudged to have forfeited the 
lands which he held of the king. The king accordingly took 
Harold with him to the castle of Edinburgh, and kept him in 
prison until his people in Orkney had brought his son Torphin ; 
on which, delivering him to their lord the king, as a hostage, 
they released Harold from the king's custody, and he returned 
50 V.r. Macmadit. 



A.D. 1196. ARCHBISHOP HUBERT'S APPLICATION TO THE KING. 393 

to Orkney, and there remained in peace and quietness, until 
Harold the Younger, having obtained permission from Swere 
"Birkebain, king of Norway, to claim a moiety of Orkney, 
brought with him Siward Murd from Hegland, and many 
other warriors, and invaded Orkney; on which, Harold the 
Elder was unwilling to engage with him, but leaving Orkney, 
went to the Isle of Man, where he collected a fleet and many 
men. 

Harold the Younger did the same, and came to the Isle of 
Man, wishing to have an engagement with Harold the Elder ; 
but the latter, before the arrival of Harold the Younger in 
Man, departed with his fleet for Orkney by another road, and 
slew all whom he found there. On hearing of this, Harold 
the Younger returned to Wick, in Caithness, and there en- 
gaged with Harold the Elder ; and in this battle the younger 
Harold and the whole of his army were slain. On the death 
of Harold the Younger, Harold the Elder came to the king of 
the Scots, with the safe conduct of Roger and Reginald, the 
bishops of Saint Andrew's and Ross, and offered the king a 
large sum of gold and silver for liberty again to hold Caith- 
ness : on which the king made answer, that he would give him 
the said land if he would divorce his wife, the daughter of 
Malcolm Mathar, and take back his former wife, the sister of 
Duncan, earl of Fife, and deliver to him as hostages, Lauren- 
tius, his clerk, and Bonavar, the son of Iggemund; which 
Harold declined to do. Upon this, Reginald, son of Sumerled, 
king of Man, came to "William, king of the Scots, and pur- 
chased of him Caithness, saving to the king his yearly revenues 
therefrom. 

In the same year, Richard, king of England, gave to Wil- 
liam de Chimely, archdeacon of Richmond, the bishopric of 
Evreux, in Normandy ; and the said king gave to master 
Eustace, his seal-bearer, the archdeaconry of Richmond. 

In the same year, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, pri- 
mate of the whole of England, and legate of the Apostolic 
See, by his messengers, often and repeatedly entreated his 
master, Richard, king of England, to relieve him from the 
government of the kingdom, pointing out that he could not 
possibly attend to both the government of the church and of 
the kingdom. Although the king was unwilling to do this, 
because there had been no one found like to him as a guardian 






394 ANNALS OF ROGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1196. 

of the laws and ordinances of the kingdom ; still listening to 
his entreaties, he expressed himself willing to relieve him of 
the anxieties of government; on which he repented having 
made such a request of the king, knowing by experience 
that, for the guardianship of the laws, a heavy retribution 
would be exacted. After examining his books and auditing 
his accounts, he sent word to the king that, in the two 
years last past, he had acquired for his use eleven hundred 
thousand marks of silver from out of the kingdom of Eng- 
land; adding thereto, that if his services should appear 
necessary to him, he would not refuse the labour, nor yet 
allege his declining years. 0, unhappy prelate ! although 
he had so often read that "no man can love two masters, for 
either he must hate the one and love the other, or else he will 
hold to the one and despise the other;" 51 he still preferred to 
neglect his sacerdotal duties, to which, by his vow, he had been 
bound, he was not ashamed to appear in the camp of the king 
of England. 62 

In the same year, Richard, king of England, granted to 
Philip, bishop elect of Durham, licence to coin money in his 
city of Durham, which for a long period past had not been 
granted to his predecessors. In this year, also, there was in 
England, and in all its borders, a great famine and mortality 
among men. 

In the same year, the earl of Saint Gilles took to wife Joanna, 
the sister of Richard, king of England, and former queen of 
Sicily. In the same year died Henry, bishop of Worcester, 
who was succeeded, at the presentation of king Richard, by 
John de Coutances, dean of Rouen. In the same year died 
William, earl of Salisbury, son of earl Patrick, whose daughter 
and heiress Richard, king of England, gave to wife, together 
with the earldom of Salisbury, to William, his bastard brother. 

In the same year died Maurice, bishop of Paris. In this 
year, also, died Bela, king of Hungary, after whose decease his 
wife Margaret, sister of Philip, king of France, who had for- 
merly been queen of England, and wife of king Henry the 
Younger, assumed the cross and set out for Jerusalem, and 
remained at Acre, in the land of Jerusalem, in the service of 
God, until the end of her life. In the same year died Bu- 

31 St. Matt. vi. 24, St. Luke, xvi. 13. 
53 Probably meaning " in arms." 



A.D. 1196. CONFESSION OF EOGEE OF BIPON. 395 

card, the treasurer of the church of York, whose treasurer- 
ship Richard, king of England, gave to master Eustace, his 
seal-bearer. In the same year died Peter de Ros, after whose 
decease Richard, king of England, gave to Aimeric, nephew 
of Philip, bishop elect of Durham, the archdeaconry of Car- 
lisle ; and Philip, the bishop elect of Durham, gave to the 
said Aimeric, his nephew, the archdeaconry of Durham and 
the church of Acelet, which the before-named Bucard had 
held. 

In the same year, Richard, king of England, fortified a new 
castle in the island of Andely, against the consent and prohi- 
bition of Walter, archbishop of Rouen ; and because the king 
would not desist from his purpose, the said archbishop pro- 
nounced sentence of interdict upon Normandy, and then re- 
paired to the Supreme Pontiff. 

In the same year, a combat taking place between the fol- 
lowers of the king of France and of the king of England^ 
Hugh de Chaumont, a valiant and wealthy knight, and a very 
intimate friend of the king of France, was taken prisoner, 
and delivered to the king of England ; on which the king of 
England delivered him into the custody of Robert de Ros, and 
Robert delivered him to "William de 1'Espinay, his retainer, to 
keep in the castle of Bonville-sur-Toke ; who keeping a negli- 
gent guard over him, by night he descended from the wall, with 
the consent and connivance of the said William de 1'Espinay. 
The king of England being greatly enraged at this, because 
Hugh de Chaumont had thus made his escape from out of his 
hands, took Robert de Ros and imprisoned him ; and exacted 
from him twelve hundred marks of silver as his ransom ; and 
William de 1'Espinay, who was a traitor to his lord, was hanged 
on a gibbet. 

In the same year, Ralph de Wigetof, a clerk of Geoffrey, 
archbishop of York, was taken ill at Rouen, even to the point 
of death, and, in the presence of our lord the pope and all the 
cardinals, made confession that he had obtained many forged 
letters in the court of Rome, both relative to the business of 
his master, the archbishop of York, as also his own private 
business, and that he had now sent them to England : where- 
upon our lord the pope gave orders to Hubert, archbishop of 
Canterbury, that if there should be any letters found relative 
to the business of the archbishop of York, containing anything 



396 ANNALS OF EOGEK DE 1IOVEDEX. A.D. 1197. 

contrary to equity and justice, the same were to be retained in 
his possession. 

In consequence of this, Roger of Eipon, a clerk, the bearer 
of these letters, who also carried poison with him, was found 
at London, who said that Ralph de Wigetof had delivered them 
to him. He also said that the poison had been given to him 
for the purpose of making away with Master Simon, the dean 
of the church of York, and some other persons, canons of 
the said church. Accordingly, at the summons of Hubert, 
archbishop of Canterbury, the king's justiciary, the said dean 
of York came to London, and the poison was delivered to him, 
with golden rings, and a very beautiful belt that was drugged 
for the purpose of burning him ; at the delivery of which an 
immense multitude of men and women assembled at the place 
called Totehil 53 to witness the burning of them, where they 
were accordingly committed to the flames, and reduced to 
ashes : the bearer of them, however, was kept in confinement, 
and the adversaries of Geoffrey, archbishop of York, cast all 
the blame of the crime on him. 

In the same year, John, earl of Mortaigne, the king's bro- 
ther, and Marchades, the leader of the infamous tribe of the 
Brabanters, on the fourteenth day before the calends of June, 
being the second day of the week, made an excursion before 
the city of Beauvais ; and while they were intent on the cap- 
ture of booty, Philip, bishop of Beauvais, and William de 
Merle, together with his son and many knights and armed people, 
came forth from the city, being themselves in arms ; but they 
were very quickly worsted in the combat, and the said bishop 
of Beauvais, and William de Merle and his son, and several 
knights were taken prisoners, and of the common people the 
greater part was slain. On the same day, after this capture, 
the earl John and Marchades proceeded to Milli, the castle of 
the said bishop of Beauvais, and took it by assault, and levelled 
it with the ground : and then, gloriously triumphing, they re- 
turned to Normandy, and delivered to the king of England the 
bishop of Beauvais, and Walter de Merle and his son, and 
many others who had been taken prisoners. 

In the year of grace 1197, being the eighth year of the 

reign of Richard, king of England, the said Richard was at 

Burun, in Normandy, on the day of the Nativity of our Lord, 

which fell on the fourth day of the week, greatly vexed, be- 

63 Tothill, in the vicinity of Westminster Abbey. 



11 



A.D. 1197. THE POPE'S ADVICE TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF EOUEN. 397 

cause Walter, archbishop of Rouen, would not revoke the sen- 
tence of interdict which he had laid upon Normandy ; for the 
bodies of the dead were lying unburied throughout the lanes 
and streets of the cities of Normandy. Accordingly, the king 
sent William, bishop of Ely, his chancellor, to the bishop of 
Lisieux, and Philip, the bishop elect of Durham, to plead his 
cause in the presence of our lord the pope, against the said 
archbishop of Rouen. On their arrival in Poitou, William, bishop 
of Ely, the king's chancellor, fell ill, even unto death, and 
died and was buried ; and, as long as he appeared to be in the 
mortal agony, a wooden crucifix in the cathedral church of the 
same city, which is called the cross of Saint Martial, was 
seen to weep so vehemently, that streams of water, as it were, 
poured down from its eyes, and moistened the face. The people 
indeed said that this now happened for the third time ; the first 
time at the death of a bishop of the said city, the second time on 
the departure of John Belesmains, bishop of that city, and the 
third time on the death of this William, bishop of Ely. 

After his decease, the bishop of Lisieux, and the bishop elect 
of Durham, proceeded upon the business of their master. Our 
lord the king, however, not unmindful of the services which 
the said chancellor had rendered him, gave to his brother Robert, 
prior of Ely, the abbey of Saint Mary at York ; and Hubert, 
archbishop of Canterbury, and legate of the Apostolic See, con- 
secrated him abbat. 

The said archbishop of Rouen, and the bishop of Lisieux, 
and the bishop elect of Ely now meeting in the presence of our 
lord the pope, the archbishop of Rouen asserted his right which 
he had over Andely, and the injury which Richard, king of 
England, had done him in fortifying a castle upon the pos- 
sessions of the church of Rouen thus unjustly, and against his 
will and consent. To this the above-named envoys of the king 
made answer, that the king their master had often and repeatedly 
made him offer, through his envoys, venerable men and dis- 
creet bishops, abbats, earls, and barons, that he would make 
him reparation in every respect, according to the estimate formed 
by honorable men. For, as they asserted on the king' s behalf, he 
could on no account give up the said island of Andely, on which, 
he had fortified the castle, because the king of France and his 
people every now and then were making inroads into Nor- 
mandy, and frequently ravaged it, in consequence of which 
the king of England had fortified that place for the defence of 



398 ANNALS OF ROGER UE HOVEDEN. A .D. 1197. 

his territory against the king of France. Upon these matters 
the said archbishop of Eouen, and the aforesaid envoys of the 
king submitted to the decision of our lord the pope and of the 
Eoman Church. Accordingly, after our lord the pope and the 
cardinals had long deliberated on the matter, considering the 
losses and inconveniences that would result to Normandy, if 
the said place of Andely should not be fortified, they advised 
the said archbishop of Eouen to settle the matter with the king 
his master on amicable terms, and to receive from him a suffi- 
cient recompense for what had been taken from him, accord- 
ing to an estimate formed by honorable and prudent men, saying, 
that the king was fully at liberty, and indeed any potentate 
was, to fortify the weaker portions of his territory, that injury 
might not result therefrom to himself and his people. 

In the meantime, our lord the pope Celestinus consecrated 
Philip, the bishop elect of Durham, to the bishopric of Durham, 
on the Lord's day on which is sung " Misericordia Domini"** 
which in this year fell on the twelfth of May. The bishop of 
Durham having been thus consecrated, pope Celestinus re- 
voked the sentence of interdict which Walter, archbishop of 
Eouen had pronounced against Normandy, on account of the 
fortification of the castle of the island of Andely, and then 
dismissed them. Accordingly, the said archbishop of Eouen, 
and the bishops of Durham and Lisieux returned to our lord 
Eichard, the king of England, with a form of reconciliation 
between the said king and the archbishop of Eouen, drawn up 
by the advice of our lord the pope, and the cardinals. 

On this, the said king, having convened the bishops, abbats, 
earls, and barons of Normandy, gave to "Walter, archbishop of 
Eouen, and his successors, by way of compensation for his town 
of Andely, the town of Dieppe with all its appurtenances, 
the valley of Malendai, the mills of Eobec, in the city of 
Eouen, and Louviers with its appurtenances, and by his charter 
confirmed the same ; in return for which, Walter, archbishop 
of Eouen, quitted claim to Eichard, king of England, and his 
heirs, of Andely with its appurtenances, on the part of himself 
and his successors. 

In the same year, Eichard, king of England, came to Saint 
Valery, and burned that town to the ground, and having de- 

55 The beginning of the introit for the second Sunday after Easter, " The 
earth is full of the mercy of the Lord." 



A.D. 1197. THE KIXG OP FRANCE IS PLACED IN A DILEMMA. 399 

stroyed the monks that were there in the service of God, 
carried away with him into Normandy the shrine, with the 
relics of Saint Valery : in that harbour he also found some 
ships, which had come from England, laden with corn and pro- 
visions, on which he seized them and ordered the sailors in 
them to be hanged, and then burned the ships, and distributed 
the corn and provisions among his people. 

In the same year, the people of Champagne and Flanders, 
and the Bretons, deserting the king of France, 'became ad- 
herents of the king of England, hostages being given on either 
side that they would not come to a reconciliation, nor make 
peace with the king of France, unless with the common con- 
sent of both parties. For the king of England had brought 
over them, and nearly all the most powerful men of the king- 
dom of France, with presents ; as his bounteous hand in its 
gifts surpassed all other gifts. " Nor yet in giving does he 
go beyond all bounds ; nay rather, to each he assigns a purpose 
fixed and definite." 56 

Accordingly, he gave to Baldwin, earl of Flanders, for his 
assistance five thousand marks of silver ; and he gave hostages 
that he would not make peace with the king of France, unless 
with the consent [of the king of England, and the king of 
England did the same with him. After this, William Crespin, 
constable of Anjou, being compelled by force, surrendered to 
Richard, king of England, the castle of Anjou, which the king 
immediately placed in a sufficient state of defence with men, 
arms, and provisions ; and the king of France shortly after 
assembling a large army laid siege to it. While these things 
were going on, Eichard, king of England, proceeded to Auvergne, 
and took ten of the castles of the king of France and of his 
followers. But before the king of England could return to 
Normandy, the king of France took the castle of Anjou, granting 
to the knights and men-at-arms therein safety to life and limb ; 
and after he had levied from them five hundred marks of silver 
for their ransom, he gave them liberty to depart, and fortified 
the castle and retained it in his own hands. 

In the meantime, Baldwin, earl of Flanders, laid siege to 
the castle of Arras ; on hearing of which, the king of France 
came thither with a numerous army. Upon his approach, 
the earl of Flanders raising the siege, returned into his own 

* " Nee tamen in dando mensuram deserit, immo, 
Singula describit certo moderamine finis." 



400 ANNALS OF KOGEE DE HOVEDEX. A. D. 1197. 

territories, the king of France pursuing him. When the king 
of France had proceeded to a considerable distance, the earl of 
Flanders caused the bridges to be broken down that lay both 
in front and rear of the king of France, so that neither pro- 
visions nor his army could come near him. Upon this, the king 
of France being placed in a dilemma, entreated the earl of 
Flanders that he would not cast a blot on the crown of France, 
alleging that he had entered Flanders with the intention of 
making amicable arrangements with him, and swearing that he 
would give him all his rights if he would forsake Eichard, 
king of England, without making peace with him. As the 
earl of Flanders declined to act in contravention of the terms 
which he had made with the king of England, a conference 
took place between the king of France and the king of England, 
on the fourth day of the week after the Exaltation of the holy 
Cross, between Gaillon and Andely ; and so, the king of France, 
escaping capture by the earl of Flanders, returned into France, 
but would observe none of the covenants he had made with 
the earl of Flanders. 

In the same year, Eichard, king of England, gave to Master 
Eustace, his vice-chancellor, the bishopric of Ely. In the 
same year, Joanna, sister of Eichard, king of England, and 
wife of Eaymond, earl of Saint Gilles, was delivered of her 
first-born son, and his name was called Eaymond. In the 
same year died king Eees, the son of Griffin ; 58 after whose 
death a dissension arose among his sons, which of them should 
reign in the place of their father ; for the purpose of putting 
an end to which, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, the king's 
justiciary, repaired to the "Welch territory, and established 
peace between them. 

In the mean time, Philip, bishop of Beauvais, having sent 
his brother, the bishop of Orleans, to Eome, while he was still 
in captivity with the king of England, wrote to Celestinus, the 
Supreme Pontiff, to the following effect : 

The Letter of Philip, bishop of Beauvais, to Celestinus, the 



" To his venerable lord and master, Celestinus, the Supreme 
Pontiff, Philip, bishop of Beauvais, health and duteousness in 
all canonical obedience. The favour of the supreme power has 
raised on high your felicity and your manifold successes, bring- 

85 Rice ap Griffydd. 



97. LETTER OF THE BISHOP OF BEATJVAIS. 401 

ing to mind that maxim of the law, * He invites the guiltless 
to offend who passes the guilty by unpunished.' It is a thing 
now almost notorious to all the churches, how disrespectfully, 
and how inhumanly, the king of England has, for some time 
past, been in rebellion against his lord, the king of tlfe Pranks ; 
like a man who, fastening a rope round a large mountain, tries 
to throw it down. Accordingly, bringing with him fire and 
sword, and supported by apostate companies of Brabanters, he 
has made attacks upon our country, ravaging it on every side. 
Upon seeing this, being not unmindful of the legal maxim, 'It 
is lawful to repel force by force/ and of that other one, ' Fight 
for your country,' mingling in the throng of warriors and 
citizens, and in the ranks of the nobles, I went forth to meet 
the enemy in their onward career. But fortune, that step- 
dame of human counsels, brought my intended purpose to an 
unhappy result ; for there I was taken prisoner, and thrown 
into heavy chains and fetters ; neither the dignity of my order, 
nor reverence for God, afforded me any relief or mitigation. 
In such wise, then, the king of England has not dreaded to 
rage against Christ, our Lord, after the manner of a wolf. Nor 
do I suppose that this has been unknown to your ears. Why, 
then, do you dissemble ? "What father would see his son doing 
wrong, and be silent thereon ? Who would not chasten his 
son with a rod, that he might not run upon a sword ? The 
father despairs of his son, when he chasteneth him not with 
threatening, or with the whip. Indeed, it is clearer than light 
itself, that the king of England, and the rest of his accomplices, 
who have violently laid hands on us, have rendered themselves 
subject to the visitations I have above mentioned ; wherefore, 
attentively listening to the injuries done to ourselves, and the 
grievous enormities committed against your fatherly affection, 
do with mercy condescend to listen to our tears, and to our 
petition. For it were an unworthy thing that the petition, 
made to you by those subject to you, should return useless and 
of no effect ; one too that savours of all humility, and that is 
based on the firm support of reason. ' He, in fact, is not en- 
tirely free from a fault, who, when he can correct it, pretends 
that he cannot rectify it ; nor is he free from some suspicion 
of secret connivance, who forbears to prevent a manifest mis- 
deed.' 59 Wherefore, holy father, do not wonder that I have 
to such a length multiplied the words of sorrow. Perpetual 

S9 Probably a quotation from' the codes of civil law. 
VOL. II. D D 



402 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN'. A.D. 1197. 

grief knows not how to, indeed cannot, be buried in the recesses 
of the breast ! I bid your fatherly goodness farewell." 

The Rescript of pope Cekstinus, to Philip, bishop of Beawais. 

" Celestinus, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his dearly beloved brother, Philip, bishop of Beauvais, health, 
and a speedy return from his course of error. That it has 
turned out unfortunately for you, is not to be wondered at. 
For ' He deserves the hatred of all men, who shows himself to 
be the common enemy of all.' For, throwing aside the peace- 
ful bishop, you have assumed the warlike knight, in your 
rashness perverting the order and course of things, you have 
borne the shield in place of the chasuble, the sword in place 
of the stole, the hauberk for the alb, the helmet for the mitre, 
and the banner for the pastoral staff ; not wishing, as you 
allege, to repel violence but valour, by violence ; not fighting 
for your 'country, but against your country. For, as to your 
Gaul, we may now publicly declare, ' Woe to thee, land, 
when thy king is a child !' 60 For he, having corporeally 
made oath to the king of the English, was bound to observe 
the same, as faithfully maintaining the integrity of his 
cities and of his territories, at least until his return from his 
pilgrimage. Whereas, shamefully contravening his plighted 
faith and his oath, coming to the cities of the aforesaid king, 
he has violently seized them, and, with hostile hand, has cruelly 
laid waste his territories. Eeturning at length from the scene 
of his labours, that king has manfully met your king, placing 
his trust not in multitudes, but in the Lord ; for not by the 
amount of men or of might, but by the virtue of the cause is 
the battle gained. In behalf of the king of England, humility 
has hitherto been fighting against pride, justice and equity 
against injustice, moderation and modesty against arrogance 
and intemperance. For, defended by numerous virtues and not 
by men, do persons gain the victory. The laws and ordinances 
permit an injury, when done by arms, to be repelled by the 
remedy of arms ; consequently, at last, late though it be, the 
king of England has manifested himself and his anger ; inas- 
much as it is hardly possible that valour, closed up, can lie con- 
cealed, the warmth of anger be extinguished and the small 
spark of prowess be shut up ; for valour knows not how to lie- 
concealed, and the smothered fire breaks forth into flame. 
Added to this, you have shown yourself not only the unbridled 
Eccles. x. 16. 






A.D. 1197. TETJCE BETWEEN KINGS OE FEANCE AND ENGLAND. 403 

counsellor of your master's frenzy, but also an accomplice as 
foolish as insolent ; you sought and you have found ; you struck, 
and struck again, you have been levelled with the ground ; into 
the pit which you have made you have deservedly fallen ; where 
you have been found, there you have been judged- accordingly. 
According as we understand from the tenor of your letters 
directed to us, imputing to us the excesses of your country, 
you strive to throw the fault upon us, asserting that we are 
luke-warm and dissemblers. What now, is to be the con- 
sequence if the sheep turn upon the shepherd, if the son rises 
against the father ? There will not be a shepherd who will 
not have cause to repent that he fed the sheep, not a father 
who will not regret that he brought up his son. Wherefore 
it is a hurtful weapon for a man, to soften down malignant 
craftiness under the guise of simplicity. Still, we have ad- 
dressed letters of entreaty to the king of England in your be- 
half; for after examining most thoroughly the circumstances 
of your captivity, we cannot and ought not in such a case to 
command, but only to entreat. The conqueror then must 
be overcome by the resources of wisdom, for it is written, 
' Wisdom excels folly.' 61 For which reason it is that we en- 
treat in your behalf not importunately, but opportunely. For 
an importunate urging of entreaty is a proof of distrust, and 
patient waiting gains its object more easily than importunate 
demands extort the same. But in the meantime, consigned 
to chains and lamentations, do you resignedly and patiently 
endure those chains, according to the words of the poet, 
' Whatever you endure deservedly, you must bear resignedly ; 
the punishment that comes undeservedly, comes as a cause 
for grief;' 62 and that deservedly requires to be expiated with 
lamentations, which the belly has gained at the expense of its 
shame. Given, &c." 

In the same year died William, bishop of Poitiers, and, al- 
though his life had seemed to. men very reprehensible, still after 
his death he was distinguished by miracles. In the same year, 
Philip, king of France, and Eichard, king of England, agreed 
upon a truce for one year from the feast of Saint Hilary, in- 
tending once more to make between them a peace and final 






61 Eccles. ii. 13. 

62 A quotation from Ovid : 

" Leniter ex merito quicquid patiare, ferendumest : 
Quaj venit indigne poena dolenda venit." 

D D 2 



404 ANNALS OF EOGEB, DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1197. 

reconciliation. After this, Baldwin, earl of Flanders, came into 
England on a pilgrimage to Saint Thomas the Martyr, of 
Canterbury. In the same year, the son of Henry, emperor 01 
the Komans, whom the empress Constance, daughter of Roger, 
the former king of Sicily, had borne to him, was baptized, and 
his name was called Frederic. 

In the same year, Jordan de Courcy, brother of John de 
Courcy, prince of the kingdom of Ulster, in Ireland, was slain 
by an Irishman, a member of his household. For the purpose 
of avenging his death, the before-named John, his brother, 
fought a battle with the petty kings of Ireland, of whom he 
put some to flight, slew others, and subjugated their territories ; 
of which he gave no small part to Dunecan, son of Gilbert, the 
son of Fergus, who, at the time that the said John was about 
to engage with the Irish, came to assist him with no small body 
of troops. 

In the same year, Nicholas, bishop of Wic, in Norway, 
fought a battle with Swere Birkebain, and being routed by 
him, took to flight, nearly all his followers being slain. In 
the same year, the before-named bishop of Orleans, who had 
gone to Rome to procure the liberation of his brother Philip, 
died at Sens la Vielle. In the same year, Henry, emperor of 
the Romans, sent a great army into the land of Sulia, under 
the command of the bishop of Mentz, Henry, duke of Saxony, 
count palatine of the Rhine, the duke of Louvaine, the duke 
de Saringes, the duke of Austria, son of duke Leopold, the 
duke of Suabia, the duke of Bavaria, Walran, brother of the 
duke of Lemburg, and many counts. 

The said "Walran landed with his forces, before the rest, in the 
land of Jerusalem, and immediately attacked the pagans, and, 
slaying as many of the pagans as he could, violated the peace 
and truce which the king of England, at his departure from 
the land of Jerusalem, had agreed to between the Christians 
and the pagans. Saphadin, the brother of Saladin, and the 
other pagans, being greatly enraged at this, slew all the Chris- 
tians they could find, and laid siege to Joppa. On this, 
Henry, count of Champagne, who, by the election of the kings 
of France and of England, and of the Templars and Hospitallers, 
had the chief command in the land of Jerusalem, assembled the 
army of the Christians for the purpose of raising the siege ; but 
while he was leaning against the pillar of a window in an upper 
room, addressing the multitude, the pillar gave way, and, falling 



A.D. 1197. AKBEST OF THE NOBLES OF SICILY. 405 

to the ground, he broke his neck, and expired ; shortly after, 
the Saracens took Joppa, and slew in it more than twenty 
thousand Christians. 

After the death of Henry, count of Champagne, the duke of 
Louvaine, and Henry, duke of Saxony, withdrew to the city 
of Acre ; but they were in possession of no territory beyond the 
gates of the city, and no provisions could be brought to them, 
through fear of the pagans. In the meanwhile, the army of 
the emperor, which had proceeded by sea on its road to Jeru- 
salem from Germany and other parts of his territories, made 
its way past Normandy and England ; and then, holding straight 
onward in its course for Spain, rescued the city of Silves from 
the hands of the pagans ; which, however, they utterly de- 
stroyed, not leaving stone upon stone ; for they feared that if 
they should give it into the charge of the king of Portugal, he 
would lose it as he had done before. 

In this pilgrimage of the troops of the people of the said 
emperor, an unusual miracle occurred, and one unheard-of by 
mankind. It so happened that two Germans, who were neigh- 
bours and friends, engaging in a partnership, agreed that during 
the pilgrimage to Jerusalem they would go together, sharing 
their lodging and their expenses. When the time for de- 
parture was close at hand, one of them came to the house of 
the other to lodge there that night ; and after he had shown to 
the master of the house the money which he was going to take 
with him upon the journey, the latter, by the advice of his wife 
murdered him, and took his money, and then placing the body of 
the murdered man on his shoulders, set out for the purpose of 
throwing him into a river ; but [on arriving there] he could 
by no possible means cast him away ; so returning at daybreak 
with the body fast upon his shoulders, he lay in concealment 
for three days. However, when he could endure this no longer, 
he went to the bishop for the purpose of consulting him, what 
was to be done by him in the matter ; on which the bishop 
enjoined him, in virtue of the obedience he owed him, to carry 
the body with him to the land of Jerusalem, that so, expiating 
his crimes, he might restore his soul to the abodes of heaven. 
Accordingly, induced by a feeling of penitence, he proceeded 
with the other pilgrims, carrying the dead man on his shoulders, 
to the praise of the good and the terror of the wicked. 

In the same year, Henry, emperor of the Romans, arrested 
the nobles of Sicily, and threw some of them into prison, 



406 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOYEDEN. A.D. 1197. 

while others he put to death, after inflicting upon them various 
tortures. He also caused the eyes to be put out of Margarite, 
the admiral, to whom he had given the dukedom of Durazzo, 
and the principality of Tarento ; and after that had him emas- 
culated. On this, the empress Constance, seeing the evils that 
the emperor had inflicted upon her people, formed a conspiracy 
against her husband the emperor, and, proceeding to Palermo, 
seized the emperor's treasures which the kings of Sicily had 
laid up from a distant period. In consequence of this, the 
principal men of the kingdom, becoming emboldened, laid 
hands on the German followers of the emperor, and slew them; 
upon which, the emperor, taking to flight, shut himself up in 
a strong fortress, intending, if he possibly could, to return to 
his own country; but his adversaries had so obstructed the 
paths against him, that in no direction was there safe egress 
for him. 

In the meantime, Saphadin, the brother of Saladin, after 
the capture of Joppa, collecting a large army of pagans, fought 
a battle with the chiefs before-mentioned, and the counts and 
army of the emperor of the Eomans, which he had sent into 
the land of Jerusalem ; and the army of the Christians prevailed, 
and in the battle the Christians took the two sons of Saladin, 
and more than sixty admirals, and Saphadin, the brother of 
Saladin, being mortally wounded, made his escape with diffi- 
culty. The Christians also took the city of Sidon, and Laliche, 
and the greater Gybel ; and they were in hopes that the son of 
Saladin, who held the city of Jerusalem, would become a 
Christian, for news had been brought to that effect by the 
messengers that carried the communications between them. 

In the meantime, the pagans who were in the city of Earuth, 
fearing an attack of the Christians, levelled the walls of the 
city, and drew into the castle provisions, necessaries, and arms, 
with the stones of the walls for the defence of the castle. One 
day, however, while they were intent with the greatest dili- 
gence upon this object, having left only five Christian captives, 
in fetters, and a single Saracen gate-keeper in the castle, the 
archbishop of Mentz, chancellor of the emperor of the Eomans, 
suddenly came upon them with a great naval force, and Aimerie, 
lord of the isle of Cyprus, and the before-named leaders and 
chieftains, with an army of horse and foot. The Christians 
who were in the castle, seeing this, ran as well as they could, 
and, shutting the gates of the castle, slew the Saracen gate- 



A.D. 1197. 



A.D. 1197. EXILE OF THE ARCHBISHOP OF DUBLIN. 407 

keeper, and then, ascending to the top of it, shouted with a loud 
voice the war-cry of the Christians, " Christ, the Son of God, 
aid us and his Holy sepulchre." Alarmed at the cry, the pagans 
fled to the mountains, leaving the castle, the city, their pro- 
visions, and their arms, on which the Christians were received 
into the city and the castle with gladness. 

After this, the said archbishop of Mentz, by the advice and 
wish of the chief men of Germany, gave to Aimeric, lord of 
Cyprus, Acre, and Tyre, and Baruth, 63 and the other cities 
which they had taken ; and then gave him Milicent to wife, 
who had been the wife of Henry, count of Champagne, and 
crowned them in the city of Baruth ; on which Aimeric became 
the liegeman of Henry, emperor of the Romans, for the isle of 
Cyprus. 

Of the Exile of John, Archbishop of Dublin. 

In the same year, Hamo de Valence, and the other guardians 
of Ireland, liegemen of earl John, brother of Eichard, king of 
England, did great injuries to John Cumin, archbishop of 
Dublin. Consequently, the said archbishop, preferring to go 
into exile, rather than endure that these enormities against him 
and his church should any longer go unpunished, excommu- 
nicated the said presumptuous men, and, pronouncing sentence 
of interdict upon his archbishopric, took his departure. He 
also ordered the crosses and images of the cathedral church to 
be laid on the ground, and to be surrounded with thorns, that 
thus these malefactors might be smitten with fear, and be 
checked in their intentions to rage against the property of the 
church. But while they were still persevering in their malig- 
nant purposes, a miracle happened, in our times quite unheard- 
of. 

There was, in the cathedral church of Dublin, a cross, on 
which the figure of Christ was carved with great exactness ; 
this, all the Irish, as well as others, held in the greatest vene- 
ration. Now, while this crucifix was lying prostrate on the 
ground, and surrounded with thorns, on the sixth day of the 
week, it fell into an agony, and the face appeared to be suffused 
with an exceeding red colour, just as though it were before a 
heated furnace, and a violent sweat ran down from the face, 
and from its eyes fell drops, as though it were weeping ; and 
at the sixth hour of the day, blood and water came forth from 
63 Now Beyrout. 



408 ANXALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1197. 

the right side, and the right breast. This the ministers of the 
church carefully collected, and sent a deputation after John 
Cumin, the archbishop, stating to him the happening of these cir- 
cumstances, under testimony of the seals of venerable men, for 
the purpose of being mentioned to our lord the pope. 

But as for the rest of the bishops of Ireland, although they 
had often read the proverb, " Your own property is at stake 
when your neighbour's party wall is on fire," 64 still, shutting 
their eyes thereto, they passed by the losses and injuries that 
the above-named servants of John, earl of Mortaigne, had done 
to their brother bishop, and, becoming as rams having no horns, 
fled from before the face of the pursuer. However, John, the 
archbishop of Dublin, going into exile, went to Richard king of 
England, and John, earl of Mortaigne, his brother, but could 
obtain no redress or restitution of what had been taken from him. 

In the same year, Henry, emperor of the Romans, having 
made a reconciliation with his wife, and the chief men of 
Sicily, fell ill, and sent Savaric, bishop of Bath, his relative 
and chancellor, from Burgundy, to Richard, king of England, 
and offered to repay him the money he had exacted from him 
for his ransom, either in gold and silver, or in lands. But while 
the said Savaric was gone on this embassy, the before-named 
emperor of the Romans died, at Messina, in Sicily, on the vigil 
of Saint Michael, being excommunicated by pope Celestinus, 
for his detention of Richard, king of England, and exacting 
from him a ransom ; in consequence of which, the said pope 
forbade his body to IDC buried, although the archbishop of Mes- 
sina made great entreaties in his behalf. 

Accordingly, the said archbishop waited on pope Celestinus, 
for three reasons. In the first place, that the body of the em- 
peror might receive burial ; in the second place, that Marcho- 
wald, the chief justiciary of the emperor, might be liberated 
from the siege by the people of Rome, who were then besieging 
him in the marshes of Guarnero, not allowing him to depart ; 
in the third place, that Frederic, son of the aforesaid emperor, 
might be crowned king of Sicily. To the first of these prayers, 
our lord the pope Celestinus made answer, that he would not 
allow the body of the emperor to be buried, except with the 
consent of the king of England, and unless the money which 
he had received from the king of England, should be returned. 

64 " En tua res agitur, paries cum proxhnus ardet/' 



A.I}. 1197. CELESTINT7S OFFEKS TO DESIGN THE PAPACY. 409 

To the second prayer, our lord the pope made answer, that he 
could not liberate the said Marchowald of his own authority, 
without the consent of the people of Home. To the third 
prayer, our lord the pope made answer, that he would consent, 
if it should please his brother cardinals, that Frederic, the son 
of the before-named emperor, should be crowned king of Sicily ; 
which coronation accordingly took place, a thousand marks of 
silver having been given to our lord the pope on his own be- 
half, and a thousand marks of silver in behalf of the cardinals. 
The empress, also, made oath, touching the Holy Evangelists, 
that the said Frederic was issue of the lawful marriage of the 
said emperor Henry and herself. 

In the same year, Koger, the brother of Eobert, earl of Lei- 
cester, being elected bishop of Saint Andrew's, in Scotland, re- 
ceived priest's orders and pontifical consecration from Matthew, 
bishop of Aberdeen. In the same year, Margaret, formerly 
queen of England and then queen of Hungary, died at Acre. 

On the demise of Henry, emperor of the Romans, a great 
part of Tuscany, which the said emperor and his predecessors 
had taken from the Roman Pontiffs, was restored to our lord, 
Celestinus, the Supreme Pontiff, namely, Aquapendente, Saint 
Crispin, Monte Fiascone, Redecoces, and Saintclere, with all their 
appurtenances ; there were also restored to him Sicily, Cala- 
bria, Apulia, and all the territories which had belonged to the 
king of Sicily, as being the proper patrimony of Saint Peter , 
over which, as above-mentioned, he made Frederic, son of 
Henry, the Roman emperor, king. 

Shortly after this, our lord the pope, Celestinus, gradually 
sickened, just before the Nativity of our Lord, and having called 
before him all the cardinals, recommended them to take mea- 
sures for the election of his successor ; for he was using every 
possible endeavour that the lord John de Saint Paul, cardinal 
priest and titular of Saint Prisca the Virgin, might succeed 
him in the papacy, in whose wisdom, sanctity, and justice, 
he placed great confidence. Indeed, he so greatly loved him 
beyond the rest, that he had appointed him in his own place 
to perform every duty except the consecration of bishops, which 
belonged to the duties of the cardinal bishop of Ostia. 

The pope also made an offer to resign the papacy, if the car- 
dinals would consent to the election of the said John de Saint 
Paul. All the cardinals, however, with one voice, made an- 
swer, that they would not elect him conditionally, and alleged 



410 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1197. 

that it was a thing unheard-of for the Supreme Pontiff to ab- 
dicate. Consequently, a division ensued among them ; for the 
lord cardinal bishop of Ostia used every possible endeavour 
that he might be elected pope, and, in like manner did the 
lord cardinal bishop of Portuenza, the lord Jordan de Fossa 
IsTova, the lord Gratianus, and all the rest, struggle, each to 
the utmost of his power, that he might be made Supreme 
Pontiff. 

In the same year, William, king of the Scots, following a 
good example, caused the subjects of his kingdom to make oath 
that they would keep the peace to the best of their ability, and 
that they would neither be thieves, nor robbers, nor outlaws, 
nor harbourers of them, nor would in any way abet them ; 
and that, whenever they might hear of any such offenders, 
they would use the utmost of their ability in arresting and de- 
stroying them. 

An Assize of Measures made ly Richard, king of England. 

" It is enacted, that all measures, throughout the whole of 
England, shall be of the same capacity, both for corn and for 
pulse, as also for other things of a like nature, that is to say, one 
good and reasonable horseload ; 64 and this is to be the measure 
established, both within cities and boroughs, and without. 
The measure also of wine, ale, and all liquors, is to be of the 
same size, according to the various natures of the liquors. 
Weights also, and scales, and other measures of dimension, are 
to be of the same quantity throughout all the kingdom, accord- 
ing to the different nature of the commodities. Also, in the 
measures of corn, and of liquors, such as wine and ale, 
let pegs 65 of iron be driven into them, that false measure 
may not fraudulently be given. It is also decreed, that 
woollen cloths, wherever they are made, are to be made of the 
same breadth, that is to say, two ells wide within the lists ; and 
all are to be of the same goodness in the middle, and in the 
sides. The ell is to be the same throughout the whole king- 
dom, and of the same length, and is to be made of iron. It 
is also forbidden to all traders throughout the whole king- 
dom of England, that any trader shall hang up before his 

6 * " Equi " appears to be the proper reading, and not " aequi." 

65 Probably at stated distances, to denote the smaller measures into 

v/hich the larger ones were divided, something like the peg tankards of 

the Saxons. 



A.D. 1198. KING EICHARD AT HOTTER. 411 

shop, red or black cloths, or penthouses, or anything else, by 
means of which the sight of the purchaser is often deceived in 
choosing a good cloth. It is also forbidden, that any dye 
shall be sold, or that any, except black alone, shall be made 
anywhere in the kingdom, except in cities, or in county bo- 
roughs. It is also enacted, that in eacji city or borough, four 
or six lawful men of the said place, according to the size 
thereof, together with the sheriff, or together with the chief 
officer of the city or borough, if the same shall not be in 
the hands of the sheriff, 66 shall be appointed to keep this 
assize, in the following manner ; they are to see and be as- 
sured that all things are sold and bought by the same 
measure, and that all measures are of the same quantity, ac- 
cording to the different nature of the wares. And if they 
shall find any person who shall make confession, or be con- 
victed of selling otherwise than by statute measure, let his 
body be seized, and let him be committed to prison, and let 
all his chattels be seized to the king's use ; and such persons 
are not to be set at liberty, except by our lord the king, or his 
chief justice. 

"As to the guardians themselves, it was enacted, that it 
they should exercise the said guardianship so negligently, that 
they should be convicted by means of others than themselves, 
before the justices of our lord the king, of transgressing any 
one of the before-written statutes, either as to the measures of 
provisions, or of other wares, or the width of cloth, the guar- 
dians themselves should be amerced out of their own chattels 
by our lord the king. 

" It was also commanded, that after the feast of the Purifi- 
cation of Saint Mary, no person should sell anything in any 
county, except by the prescribed measure, which was to be of 
the same quantity; and that no one should, after the fair which 
is held at Mid-Lent, at Stamford, sell any cloth of less width 
than two ells within the lists." 

In the year of grace 1198, being the ninth year of the reign 
of Eichard, king of England, the said Eichard, king of Eng- 
land, was at Eouen, in Normandy, on the day of the Nativity 
of our Lord, which fell on the fifth day of the week. On the 
same day of the Nativity of our Lord, Hubert, archbishop of 
Canterbury, primate of all England, legate of the Apostolic 
See, and chief justiciary of all England, was at Hereford, in 
Wales, and there received possession of the castle of Hereford, 
66 The text found in Wilkins has been used here. 



412 AITOALS OF KOGE15. D HOVEDE^T. A.D. 1198. 

the castle of Briges, 67 and the castle of Ludlow, having ex- 
pelled therefrom the keepers, who had long held charge of 
them, and gave them into the care of other keepers on behalf 
of the king. 

After this, the said archbishop came to Coventry, and by 
the mandate of Celestinus, the Supreme Pontiff, reinstated the 
monks in the cathedral church of that city, whom Hugh de 
Eunant, the bishop of that place, had expelled from the said 
church by violence and an armed hand, and had instituted in 
their places canons secular, and endowed them with the pro- 
perty of the church, which had been bestowed for the sus- 
tenance of the monks there serving God ; but the canons being 
now expelled, the property of the church was restored for the 
use of the monks. 

The Letters Apostolic for the reinstatement of the monks in the 
church of Coventry. 

" Celestinus, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his dearly beloved sons the archbishop of Canterbury, the 
bishop of Lincoln, and the abbat of Saint Edmund's, health 
and the Apostolic benediction. Whereas it is our wish that 
such provisions as have been made by enactment by our pre- 
decessors with prudent deliberation, should in nowise be in- 
validated or infringed, so also it is our desire that such things 
as have been surreptitiously obtained from them to the detri- 
ment of ecclesiastical propriety should be corrected, and brought 
into a better state. Wherefore, inasmuch as, according as we 
have heard, or rather indeed, as we well know, the monastic 
order has been established in the church of Coventry, almost 
from the time of the first introduction of the Christian faith into 
England, and has performed therein with such well-regulated 
observance all duties, that it has been deemed deserving to 
receive privileges from the Apostolic See, and to be endowed 
and enriched by kings of England of famous memory, we 
are greatly afflicted that our venerable brother, the bishop 
of Chester (on the pretext of certain letters, which, as it is said, 
but we can hardly believe, he obtained by means of a false 
suggestion from our predecessor pope Clement, of blessed 
memory, without our concurrence, and that of our brethren), 
has with violence expelled our dearly beloved sons, the prior 
and community of monks, from the said monastery, and estab- 
lished canons secular therein. Now, inasmuch as the same 
67 Bridgnorth. 68 See p. 257. 



A.D. 1198. BICHARD SENDS ENVOYS TO GEEHAKT. 413 

may redound to the disgrace of the monastic order and the disci- 
pline of the whole Church, and it is our belief that our said prede- 
cessor wouldnot have granted his authority or favour to so great an 
irregularity, unless he had been imposed upon, we do by these 
Apostolic writings command your brotherhood, and do, in virtue 
of your obedience, strictly enjoin you, the letters aforesaid or other 
privileges of confirmation or indulgence in any way notwith- 
standing, to remove the secular clergy from the said monastery 
who have been instituted therein by the above-named bishop, 
and, without being impeded by any question or doubt whatso- 
ever, to reinstate therein the monastic order, installing therein 
the monks who have been expelled, and who shall return thereto, 
as also such persons as are bound and desire to observe the rules 
of the order of Saint Benedict. You are also, by means of eccle- 
siastical censure, all power of appeal removed, to compel the 
aforesaid bishop, and all withholders of the property of the 
said church, to make restitution of the same. "We do further 
will and command, that, relying on our authority, you will 
render null and void the presentations of the said bishop, as 
also the enfeoffments, leases, alienations, and purchases made 
by the said church since the time aforesaid, smiting those with 
canonical censure who shall presume to contravene the same, 
all obstacle of appeal removed ; and that those who have laid 
violent hands upon the said monks you will denounce as excom- 
municated ; and they must come for absolution to the Apostolic 
See, furnished with the testimony of your letters. Given, &c." 

At the Nativity of our Lord, there came to Rouen, envoys 
from the archbishop of Cologne, envoys from the archbishop of 
Mentz, and envoys from the other nobles of Germany, to wait 
upon king Richard, and to inform him, on behalf of the persons 
aforesaid, that all the nobles of Germany would meet at Cologne 
on the eighth day before the calends of March, for the purpose 
of electing an emperor; and they enjoined him, in virtue of the 
oath and fealty by which he was bound to the emperor and to the 
Roman empire, all denial and pretext whatsoever laid aside, to 
come to Cologne at the time aforesaid, in order that he, as an 
especial member of the empire, might be with them on the 
occasion of their electing, by the help of God, a fit and proper 
emperor for the empire. 

After hearing them, Richard, king of England, having fisrt 
conferred with his people, sent, with the aforesaid envoys 
of the Germans, Philip, bishop of Durham, Eustace, the 
bishop elect of Ely, William de Chimeli, the bishop elect of 



414 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1193. 

Anjou, the bishop elect of Evreux, as also Baldwin de Bethune, 
the earl of Aumarle, "William de Pratelles, William de L'Estang, 
and Brice, his chamberlain, that they might be present at the 
election of emperor in his stead. For he greatly feared to go 
thither, and once more to fall into their hands, unless security 
should be given him for a safe conduct going and returning. 
And no wonder, for he had not yet paid what he had promised 
to give to the nobles of the land for his liberation, and for his 
sake it was that the body of the emperor was lying unburied. 

The king of England, however, used every possible endea- 
vour that Henry, duke of Saxony, his nephew, might be made 
emperor. But as he had not yet returned from his pilgrimage, 
and delay brought danger with it, the said king of England 
wrought so effectually with the archbishops of Cologne and 
Mentz, and some of the other principal men of Germany, that 
they elected his nephew Otho, brother of the before-named duke 
of Saxony, emperor. It deserves to be known, that in the 
election of the emperor of the Romans, the mode of procedure 
is as follows : 

The manner of electing the Emperor of the Romans. 

On the death of the emperor, the archbishops, bishops, abbats, 
dukes, counts, and all the other nobles of Germany, meeting 
together, elect twelve persons in common, "and present them 
to the archbishop of Cologne, the archbishop of Mentz, the 
duke of Saxony, and the Count Palatine of the Rhine ; and 
whosoever these four elect from the twelve so selected as afore- 
said, is to be the king of the Germans, and to be crowned as 
such at the Chapel of Hays, 68 where Charles the Great lies 
buried. 

Accordingly, the before-named Otho, being one of the twelve 
persons so selected in common, as aforesaid, on the urgent 
prayers and intercession made by Richard, king of England, 
[on his election,] was received by the archbishops of Cologne 
and Mentz, and was crowned by them king of the Germans, 
at Aix-la-Chapelle, in presence of the dukes of Lemburg, 
Louvaine, and many other dukes and many bishops, Baldwin, 
earl of Flanders, being also present, and Henry, count of Namur, 
his brother, and many other counts. On this, the said Otho 
took to wife the daughter of the duke of Louvaine, and on the 
day of the coronation of the said Otho, she sat together with him 
on the royal throne, but was not crowned at that time. 
68 Aix-la-Chapelle. 



A.D. 1198. THE BISHOP OF LINCOLN OPPOSES THE KING. 415 

Henry, duke of Saxony, also Count Palatine of the Ehine, 
the brother of the before-named Otho, after his return from 
the land of Sulia, sanctioning what had been done with refe- 
rence to his brother, and expressing his gratification thereat, 
confirmed his election. But, as Philip, duke of Suabia, son of 
Frederic, the former emperor of the Romans, and brother of 
Henry, emperor of the Romans, lately deceased, was one of 
the twelve selected, he would not agree to his election, but 
attacked Otho in every way he possibly could ; and although 
Otho defeated him in a pitched battle, he still refused to desist 
from his attempts. 

In the same year, Aimeric, archdeacon of Durham, dis- 
seised the monks of the church of Durham of the vill which is 
called Hersewell, which Henry Pudsey had given them as a 
free and perpetual alms-gift, for the maintenance of monks at 
Finchale, for the service of God. His servants, who had 
been sent for the purpose of making the said disseisin, broke 
open the doors of the monks' dwellings, and, with violence, 
ejected the monks they found there. When, however, the said 
Aimeric was asked if this violence had been committed by his 
orders, he answered, "No:" on which, the monks of Durham, 
having convened the clergy and people of the city in the church 
of Saint Cuthbert, excommunicated the perpetrators of this 
violence, as also their advisers and abettors, with candles lighted 
and the great bells of the church ringing. 

In the same year, Eichard, king of England, through Hubert, 
archbishop of Canterbury, required that the people of the king- 
dom of England should find for him three hundred knights to re- 
main in his service one year, or else give him so much money as 
to enable him therewith to retain in his service three hundred 
knights for one year, namely, three shillings per day, English 
money, as the livery of each knight. "While all the rest were 
ready to comply with this, not daring to oppose the king's 
wishes, Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, a true worshipper of God, who 
withheld himself from every evil work, made answer, that, for 
his part, he would never in this one matter acquiesce in the 
king's desires, both because, in process of time, it would re- 
dound to the detriment of his church, as also, because his suc- 
cessors would say : " Our fathers have eaten sour grapes, and 
the children's teeth are set on edge." 69 And, turning to Hubert, 
archbishop of Canterbury, he urgently recommended him to 
69 Jer. xxxi. 29; Ezek. xviii. 2. 



416 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1198. 

do nothing of which he would be ashamed, " By reason 
whereof shame might place a mark on his forehead, and self- 
accusation torture his mind, or disgrace blemish the glories of 
his fair name." 70 

In the same year, queen Eleanor, the mother of Richard, 
king of England, came to Rouen, and sent for Hugh Fitz- 
Ernest de Neville and the other keepers who had charge of 
Philip, bishop of Beauvais, in the fortress of Rouen, and begged 
them, for the love they bore her, to allow the said bishop to 
come to her lodging to speak to her : and, although it was a 
perilous matter for them, still, being unable to resist the 
queen's entreaty, they allowed the said bishop, in fetters, to go 
beyond the gates of the fortress, while they accompanied him. 
Now, it so happened that they had to pass by the porch of a 
certain church ; to the door of which, although it was closed, 
the said bishop ran as fast as he could, and, seizing the knocker 
of the said church, cried with a loud voice, saying, " I seek 
the protection of God and of the Church." At these words, his 
guards, being greatly alarmed, laid hands on him, and, dragging 
him away from the door of the church, led him to the fortress 
whence he had come, and kept him in still stricter custody, im- 
puting it to the queen that this had been done by her advice. 
On hearing of this, the king of England sent the said bishop 
to Chinon, to be kept in closer confinement. 

In the same year, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, conse- 
crated Eustace, bishop of Ely, at London, on the Lord's Day 
on which is sung " Lcetare Jerusalem " 7i the ceremony being 
performed at Westminster, on the eighth day before the ides 
of March. 

In the same year, pope Celestinus, sinking "ider the weight 
of old age and a grievous malady, departed this life, at Rome, 
in the month of January, on the sixth day before the ides of 
the said month, being the sixth day of the week, in the seventh 
year of his papacy, and was buried at the Lateran. On the 
day after his death, the cardinals, meeting together, elected 
as Supreme Pontiff Lothaire, a cardinal deacon, a young man, 
about thirty years old or a little more, who assumed the name 
of pope Innocent. Immediately after his election, he wrote 

7 " Unde pudor frontem signet, menteraque reatus 

Torqueat, aut faraae titulos infaraia laedat." 
71 The beginning of the introit for the fourth Sunday in Lent. 



A.D. 1198. LETTEK OF POPE INNOCENT. 417 

to all the archbishops and bishops of England and Scotland to 
the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Innocent, on the occasion of his Election. 

<( Innocent, bishop elect of the Apostolic See, servant of 
the servants of God, to all his venerable brethren, the arch- 
bishops and bishops throughout England appointed, health and 
the Apostolic benediction. The ineffable wisdom of the Deity 
hath so, in His exalted counsels, disposed all things from ever- 
lasting, and, by His wondrous dispensation, so rules them 
through the vicissitudes of ages as they roll on, that there 
occurs neither error in the order thereof, nor defect in the work- 
manship ; inasmuch as, Holy Scripture testifying the same, He 
has made every thing by weight, by number, and by measure. 
Wherefore, although he ordains nothing upon earth without a 
certain cause, and appropriate reason for the same, still, the 
imperfect state of human nature, not only fails in investigating 
the causes of His works, but, even in viewing the results them- 
selves of those causes, can hardly be sufficiently astounded [at 
the marvellousness thereof] ; indeed, it was while considering 
this, that the Apostle exclaimed, ' the depth of the riches 
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God ! How unsearchable 
are His judgments, and His ways past finding out!' 72 For, 
although, the prophet bearing testimony thereto, ' All the ways 
of the Lord are mercy and truth,' 73 and 'All His works are 
done in truth,' 7 * still, to such a degree does the right hand of 
the Lord, great though it is, work out the successes of man- 
kind, both their humiliation and their exaltation, that it is a 
cause to ourselves of no slight astonishment that, in the bestowal 
of power, He sometimes placefc the younger before the elder 
ones, and, as the prophet says, ' Sons are born in place of the 
fathers,' who, being appointed to govern all the earth, are to 
remember the name of the Lord. And so in our case, ' This 
is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes.' 75 For 
Celestinus, of blessed memory, our father and predecessor, 
having gone the way of all flesh, on the sixth day before the 
ides of January, and having been honorably interred, according 
to custom, in the church of the Lateran, our brethren, that is 
to say, the cardinal bishops, priests, and deacons, and ourselves 
with them, met together, that with the more freedom and safety, 

72 Rom. xi. 33. ^ Psalm xxv, 10. Psalm xxxiii. 4. 
75 Psalm cxviii. 23, St. Matt. xxi. 42, St. Mark xii. 11. 
VOL. I. E E 



418 A.WNAL8 OF BOGER DE HOVEDEff. A.D. 1198. 

we might discuss the election of a pontiff, thus great being the 
necessity for holding the said discussion with all due delibe- 
ration, and coming to a conclusion after using the most guarded 
circumspection in so doing. Accordingly, after the solemn 
service of the mass had been performed in honor of the Holy 
Ghost, the wishes of all directed their views upon ourselves, 
insufficient as we are, perhaps thinking, in their human sagacity, 
to find the silver cup in the sack of Benjamin ; although many 
of them might, on the grounds of age, rank, and merit, have 
been more worthily called to the elevation of a dignity so ex- 
alted. And, although our sense of our inefficiency utterly 
recoiled from the weight of a dignity so great, as being a burden 
unsuited to the weakness of our shoulders, still, confiding in the 
example of Him, who strengthened the weakness of Saint Peter, 
which had been previously tested by his three denials, after the 
words of his thrice-reiterated confession, by bestowing on him 
the guidance of His sheep ; that which the manifold imper- 
fections of our nature declined, we accepted at their desire, lest 
our opposition thereto might produce injury, by reason of pro- 
longed divisions, or we might seem, in a measure, to be struggling 
against the ordinance of God, hoping that He who giveth to all 
abundantly and grudgeth not, and who raised the youngest 
son, 76 the man after His own heart, to be king, will raise up 
from the stones a son to Abraham, calling the things which are 
not, even as the things which are, and that by raising up the 
weak, He will put the strong to confusion. "Wherefore, we, 
undertaking the onerous duties of the government of the church, 
and placing no small confidence in you, whom the Lord hath 
willed to be partakers in our cares, to the end that the weight 
of a burden so great may press the more lightly upon US', do 
ask, advise, and exhort the whole of you, in the Lord, to aid 
our inefficiency with your prayers unto the Lord, and, diligently 
and profitably watching over the flock of the Lord that has 
been entrusted to us and to you, to show yourselves ready to 
make up for our defects, and with watchful zeal to aid in sup- 
porting the weight of the ecclesiastical dignity which has been 
conferred upon us. And further, it is our earnest intention to 
show to you all honor as being distinguished members of the 
church, and, so far as the Lord shall aid us in so doing, to assist 
you in your emergencies. Given at the Lateran, on the fifth 
day before the ides of January." 

7 <5 King David. 



A.D.1198. THE DEAN AND CANONS OP YOEK COME TO THE KING. 419 



I Accordingly, upon the election of the said Innocent as Roman 
Pontiff, having been from his infancy acquainted with all the 
blemishes of the Roman court, and wishing to change things 
for the better, immediately after his election he dismissed the 
greater part of the janitors and doorkeepers of the court, in 
order that both clerks as well as laymen, who had any com- 
plaint to make, might enjoy freer access to him. 

On the fifth day before the ides of March, in the same year, 
Mary, countess of Champagne, departed this life, the mother 
of Henry, count of Champagne, who was lord of Acre. The 
said countess was sister of Philip, king of France, on the 
father's side, and sister of Richard, king of England, on the 
mother's side. 

In the same year, Geoffrey, archbishop of York, came into 
Normandy by command of his brother, Richard, king of Eng- 
land, in hopes of making peace with the king. For the king- 
had sent for the deans and canons of York to come to him in 
Normandy, wishing to make peace between the archbishop and 
them ; however, the archbishop, before the canons had arrived, 
had made a reconciliation with the king his brother; upon which 
the king made him full restitution of his archbishopric, and 
ordered Robert his chaplain to cross over into England with 
Master Honorius, the clerk and deputy of the said archbishop, 
to be present at the said restitution, on which the said arch- 
bishop conferred on the said Master Honorius the archdeaconry 
of Richmond ; for the king had made a promise to the arch- 
bishop that for the future he would not throw any difficulty 
in the way of his presentations. As the dean and canons of 
York did not make their appearance before the king at the 
time appointed, nor yet send a sufficient proxy in their behalf, 
the archbishop, having received leave from the king, withdrew 
from the court, for the purpose of going to Rome on the king's 
business as well as his own. 

However, on the third day after, the deans and canons of 
York came to the king, and prevailed upon him to allow the 
restitution which he had granted to the archbishop to be de- 
layed until the archbishop's return; and, having thus impeded 
the business of the archbishop, the dean and canons returned to 
York, making great boasts of the favours they had received from 
the king, and saying that they had the king's charter that he 
would not come to any complete understanding with the arch- 
bishop unless they were included in the reconciliation. 

EE 2 



420 ANNALS OP EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1198. 

In the same year, on the first Sunday in Lent, Innocent; the 
bishop elect of the Eoman See, was consecrated Eoman Pontiff 
at Saint Peter's at Rome, by Octavianus, bishop of Ostia, on the 
fifteenth day before the calends of March, and, immediately 
after his consecration, the prefect, senators, and tribunes of 
the city, and others of the Eoraan people, demanded of him 
the revenues and customs which the Eoman Pontiffs, his pre- 
decessors, had been in the habit of paying them ; to which he 
made answer that he would never do so, inasmuch as if he 
should do so. he would be doing it against the will of God, and to 
the prejudice of the Church of Eome. The Eomans, upon hear- 
ing this, made an attack upon his possessions, and plundered 
them, on which he excommunicated them. 

In the month of March, in the same year, Hugh de Nunant, 
bishop of Coventry, died at Betherlevin, in Normandy, on Good 
Friday, being the sixth day before the calends of April, and 
was buried there in the convent of the monks, being succeeded 
in the bishopric of Coventry by Geoffrey de Muschamp, arch- 
deacon of Cleveland, w r ho was presented thereto by Eichard, 
king of England, and consecrated at Canterbury by Hubert, 
archbishop of Canterbury. 

In the same year, the king of England with the earl of Saint 
Gilles, and Joanna his wife, the former queen of Sicily, were at 
Le Mans, at the festival of Easter, which fell on the fourth day 
before the calends of April. In the same year, Eichard, king 
of England, levied from each carucate or hide of land through- 
out all England five shillings as an aid ; for the purpose of collect- 
ing which, the said king sent through each county of England 
one clerk and one knight ; who, with the sheriff of the county 
to which they were sent, and lawful knights elected for the 
purpose, making oath that they would faithfully perform the 
king's business, caused to appear before them the seneschals 
of the barons of the said county, and the lord or bailiff of every 
vill, and the reeve, together with the four lawful men of the 
vill, whether freemen or villeins, as also two lawful knights 
of the hundred, who made oath that they would faithfully and 
without fraud declare what was the amount of carucates in 
each vill that were in tillage ; namely, how many were held in 
demesne, how many in villanage, and how many in almoign be- 
stowed on religious orders, which the givers thereof were bound 
to make warranty of, or to pay for, or for which the said re- 









A. D. 1198. AID LETIED BY KING EICHAKD. 421 

ligious were bound to do service ; and upon each carucate in 
tillage, by the king's commands, they first levied two shillings 
and then three shillings ; all of which was reduced to writing. 
Of all this the clerk had one register, the knight another, the 
sheriff a third, and the seneschals of the barons a fourth regis- 
ter as to the land of their lords. 

This money was received by the hands of two lawful knights 
of each hundred, and by the hands of theJbailiff of the hundred, 
and they were answerable for the same to the sheriff, and the 
sheriff answerable for the same according to the before-men- 
tioned registers to the exchequer, in presence of the bishops, 
abbats, and barons appointed for the purpose. 

Also, for the punishment of the jurors who, contrary to their 
oath, should be guilty of concealing anything in the said 
matters, it was enacted that whatever villein should be con- 
victed of perjury he should forfeit to his lord the best ox of his 
plough, and should, out of his own property, be answerable 
for as much money for the use of our lord the king as should 
be proved to have remained concealed by means of his perjury ; 
but if a free man should be convicted, he was to be amerced by 
the king, and was to refund as well out of his own property as 
much as had been concealed by him, in the same manner as the 
villein. 

It was also enacted, that every baron should, with the aid 
of the sheriff, make levies upon his tenants ; and, if by default 
of the baron, such levies should not be made, then there was 
to be taken from the demesne of the baron, what should re- 
main payable by his tenants, and the baron was to take the 
same from his tenants. Frank-fees of parish churches were ex- 
empted from the said tallage; and all escheats of barons which 
were held in the lands of our lord the king contributed thereto. 
But serjeanties 78 of our lord the king, which were not attached 
to knights' fees, were excepted, although they were placed 
on the register, as also the number of the carucates of land, 
the values of their lands, and the names of those holding by ser- 
jeanty ; and all' those so holding, were summoned to be at 
London on the octave at the end of Easter, to hear and per- 
form the king's commands. 

The persons who were chosen for that purpose, and ap- 
pointed by our lord the king, according to the estimation of 

78 Freehold lands exempt from all services, but not from homage. 



422 ANNALS OF EOGEE. DE HOVEDEN. A. 

lawful men, set down a hundred acres of land for each caru- 
cate of land in cultivation. 79 

In the same year, the monks of the Holy Trinity at Canter- 
bury, setting out for Home, made complaint to pope Innocent, 
that Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, contrary to his orders 
and his dignity, was acting as justiciary of the kingdom, and 
as judge in matters of life and death, and was so involved in 
secular matters, that he could not possibly give attention to 
the management of the affairs of the church ; it being wisely 
said, that " When the sense is intent on many objects, it is 
less intent on each." 80 They also laid charges against him, 
saying, that it was by his command that the peace of the church 
of Saint Mary at Arches, at London, had been violated, and 
"William Longbeard had been violently dragged therefrom, 
and tied to horses' tails, and dragged away to the gibbet, to- 
gether with nine of his associates similarly torn away from 
that church, and then hanged on the gallows. On this, our lord 
the pope, with a fatherly exhortation, recommended Eichard, 
king of England, as he valued the safety of his soul, not to 
allow the said archbishop any longer to discharge secular 
duties, and in future not to admit him or any other bishop or 
priest to a secular office ; he also ordered all the prelates of 
churches, in virtue of their obedience, not with rash presump- 
tion to undertake the discharge of secular duties. Accord- 
ingly, the archbishop of Canterbury being removed from the 
management of the kingdom, Geoffrey Fitz-Peter succeeded 
him in the same. 

They also accused him, alleging that, to the prejudice of the 
mother church of Canterbury, he had built a new church at 
Lambeth, and had placed therein canons secular, endowed 
with the property and benefices of the monks of Canterbury, 
and had therein, against the custom and dignity of the church 
of Canterbury, consecrated bishops ; and that, unless a remedy 
was speedily put thereto, they feared that the dignity of the 
church of Canterbury might be diminished, and might appear 
to be transferred to this apostate chapel. Our lord the pope, 
being considerably influenced by this, wrote to Hubert, arch- 
bishop of Canterbury to the following effect : 

79 Or more literally, as our law books express it, for the " gainage of 
each carucate." 

80 " Pluribus intentus minor est ad singula sensus." 






A. D. 1198. LETTER OF POPE INNOCENT. 423 

The Letter of pope Innocent to Hubert, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, ordering the demolition of the chapel at Lambeth. 

" Innocent the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his dearly beloved brother, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, 
health and the Apostolic benediction. The more sincere the 
affection with which we love your person, the greater the 
grief with which we are afflicted, so often as we hear of actions 
of yours which are derogatory to pontifical propriety. For, 
whereas the church of Canterbury, over which you are known 
to preside, is considered among the churches of England to 
hold the foremost rank, and in religion has been accustomed 
to stand pre-eminent among the rest, we and our brethren are 
both afflicted and amazed that (as our dearly beloved sons, the 
prior and convent, have with humble complaint showed unto 
us,) you occupy yourself in manifold ways, and exert your 
utmost endeavours in the building of the chapel at Lambeth, 
contrary to the prohibition of Urban and Clement, the Eoman 
Pontiffs, of blessed memory, which were issued against your 
predecessor Baldwin, relative thereto. After multiplied appeals 
to the Apostolic See, to the great prejudice of the church of 
Canterbury, you have still in your rashness proceeded therein, 
and have installed canons in the same, endowed with the pro- 
perty of the said church, whereas, better consulting yourself 
and your honor, you would have entirely desisted from the 
building of the said chapel, if you had been ready to shew that 
respect and obedience which you owe to the Church of Eome, 
and would have sought to make provision and shew all anxiety 
for the church committed to your charge, and would not have 
made it your study to proceed in that which you know to have 
been so strictly forbidden to your predecessor by the Apostolic 
See. Wherefore, inasmuch as we ought not nor will we on 
any account put up with the lessening of the church of Canter- 
bury, walking in the footsteps of our aforesaid predecessors, by 
the advice of our brethren, we do, by these Apostolic writings, 
command your brotherhood and strictly enjoin you, all delay 
and excuses laid aside, that if you should be absent from 
your church, anything whatever notwithstanding, whatever is 
known to have been done in the building of the aforesaid 
chapel, after the appeals made both in the time of your pre- 
decessors as also in your own to the Apostolic See, as also 
the prohibitions thereof by our predecessors, you will, within 



424 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDE1T. A.D. 1198. 

thirty days after the receipt of these presents, not delay to 
destroy at your own expense, utterly revoking as null and 
void, and undoing whatever has been done, or whatever inno- 
vation has been made, contrary to all rule, as to the instalment 
of canons and other persons in the said chapel. The clergy 
also, who, after the Apostolic prohibitions, have performed 
Divine service in the said chapel, you are to hold suspended 
from their duties and benefices until such time as they shall 
have made due satisfaction for the same, all the works being 
destroyed which they have dared to erect at the said chapel. 
All matters of grievance also, 81 which, after appeal made by 
them, they have been subjected to, by the intrusion of strangers, 
and by the invasion of their churches and other rights, you are 
to replace, all power of appeal removed, in their former state 
in which they were before the appeal was made ; the sentences 
also of excommunication or interdict which you are said in 
your rashness to have pronounced upon some of the brethren 
themselves, you are publicly to announce as null and void. 
And for the future, as regards the state of the said monastery, 
you are not on any pretext relative to this matter to presume, 
contrary to our prohibition, to make any innovation therein, 
but are, by the ban of excommunication, to compel the unlaw- 
ful invaders of the vills, possessions, and revenues of the 
brethren aforesaid, to make due and proper satisfaction for the 
same. But if (a thing that we do not believe) you shall ne- 
glect or delay, within the stated time, to fulfil our commands, 
because it is just that obedience should be withdrawn from him 
who neglects to pay obedience to the Apostolic See, we do, by 
these our writings, command our venerable brethren, your suf- 
fragans, thenceforth not to pay obedience or respect to you. 
And if it shall so be, that, contrary to this our prohibition, 
you shall exact obedience and respect to be shewn to you by 
them, or any of them, you are to know that you are thence- 
forth suspended from the episcopal dignity, and that you will 
be subject to the said sentence, until such time as you shall 
present yourself in our presence to make satisfaction for the 
said contempt. And further, we do not make any distinction 
as to whether, in the place forbidden by our predecessors or in 
any other place, you shall proceed to act to the prej udice of the 
church of Canterbury, by the building of the said chapel, and 

81 This passage will not admit of an exact translation, as it is evidently 
in a corrupt state. 






A.D. 1198. THE ARCHBISHOP OF YOHK APPEALS TO THE KING. 42o 

the institution of canons therein, the same cause for forbidding 
it still existing ; except that we are of opinion that it is still 
more derogatory to the said church, that the building has been 
transferred to a place so distant. 82 Given at Saint Peter's, 
at Borne, on the eighth day before the ides of May, in the first 
year of our pontificate." 

The said pope Innocent also signified, by his letters to all the 
suffragans of the church of Canterbury, that he had given com- 
mands to Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, not to delay, 
within thirty days after the receipt of his letter, at his own 
expense, to destroy the chapel of Lambeth, and revoke as null 
and void whatever had been done as to the institution of canons 
and other persons in reference to the said chapel, as also the 
other matters that were contained in his said letter. He also 
commanded the said suffragans that, if the said archbishop 
of Canterbury should delay to do any of the things that were 
contained in his said letter, then, in such case, for the future, 
they were to pay him no respect or obedience. 

However, the said archbishop, being supported by the king's 
protection, hoping that he could not be defeated by his adver- 
saries, caused all the revenues of the monks, and the offerings at 
the tomb of the blessed Martyr Thomas, to be seized on the 
king's behalf, and, disregarding the mandates of the Supreme 
Pontiff, would not allow the monks of the Holy Trinity to go 
beyond the precincts of that church. At last, however, at his 
own expense, he destroyed the chapel at Lambeth. 

In the same year, Geoffrey, the archbishop of York, and 
Simon, the dean, together with the canons of York, appearing 
in the presence of Eichard, king of England, at Andely, in 
Normandy, each of them alleged the injuries done to the 
one side and the other ; and, as it was in accordance with 
the king's wishes that the said archbishop, dean, and canons of 
York should submit to the arbitration of the lord archbishop 
of Rouen, and the lords bishop of Winchester and Worcester, 
the said archbishop consented to the king's desire on the sub- 
ject : but the dean and canons of York made answer, that they 
would not submit to the judgment of any person, except the 
judgment of canons secular, and they alleged injustice on the 
part of the king, because this mode of reconciliation was pro- 
ductive of long delays, and, in the meantime, the archbishop 

62 Alluding to the transfer of the intended chapel by archhishop Bald- 
win from Akingtou, or Hackington, near Canterbury, to Lambeth. 



426 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1198. 

would not confirm the presentations which the king had made 
to them in the church of York. 

The king, being incensed at this conduct, gave the arch- 
deaconry of Richmond to Roger of Saint Edmund's, his clerk, 
which the archbishop of York had previously given to Master 
Honorius, his clerk ; who, although he had received the fealty 
of the clergy of the said archdeaconry by command of the 
archbishop, and the archbishop had, by his letters, generally 
given a command to the like effect to the whole chapter of 
York, ordering them, in virtue of their obedience, to receive 
the said Honorius and instal him, had still been rejected, 
Simon of Apulia opposing him on the ground that the arch- 
bishop had not made especial mention of him in his letters as 
being dean of the said church. And accordingly, the afore- 
said dean, a disturber of the peace, and unmindful of the pro- 
fession which he had made to the said archbishop, received Roger 
of Saint Edmund's, and installed him, and invested him with 
the archdeaconry of Richmond, after appeal made by Master 
Honorius to the Supreme Pontiff. On this, the clerks of the 
archdeaconry of Richmond, through the violent coercion of 
Simon of Apulia, and the stern commands of the king, paid 
fealty to Roger of Saint Edmund's, in contravention of the 
canonical obedience which they had previously paid to Master 
Honorius. In the chapter of York, consisting of the said 
Simon, the dean, and the other canons of the said church, the 
aforesaid dean, in the violence of his wrath, paying no defer- 
ence to the appeal made to the Supreme Pontiff, excommuni- 
cated Hugh Murdac, his fellow-canon, because he refused to 
sanction their proceedings, or take any part whatever in the 
conspiracy formed against his archbishop. For, as he said : 
"The wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood." 82 On the 
same day, when the said Hugh entered the choir to attend 
vespers, the dean ordered him to go out, as a person excommu- 
nicated ; and, as he refused to depart, the dean ordered the tapers 
to be put out, and left the choir. 

In the same year, Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, the justiciary of Eng- 
land, assembling a large army, proceeded to Wales, to succour 
the people of William de Braose, whom Wenhunwin, 83 the 
brother of Cadwallan, had besieged in Maud's Castle, and on 
arriving there, he fought a pitched battle with the said Wen- 
hunwin and his people, and, although the Welch in arms were 
82 Prov. xxx. 33. ra More generally called Owen. 



A. D. 1198. THE DUKE OF SAXONY YISITS THE ZING OF ENGLAND. 427 

very numerous, still, not being able to make resistance to the 
forces of the English, they were put to flight, and throwing 
away their arms, that, being less burdened, they might run more 
swiftly, there were slain more than three thousand seven hun- 
dred of them, besides those who were captured, and those who 
being fatally wounded escaped from the field ; while on the 
side of the English, only one person was killed, being acciden- 
tally wounded by an arrow incautiously aimed by one of his 
companions. 

In the same year, in the month of August, Ermengard, the 
queen of the Scots, was delivered of her first-born son, and his 
name was called Alexander, he being baptized by Jocelyn, the- 
venerable bishop of Glasgow. 

In the same year, the truce being ended, which the king of 
France and the king of England had agreed to, until such time 
as the corn should have been gathered in on both sides, their 
direful fury immediately blazed forth, and, all conferences being 
put an end to, each entered the kingdom of the other in hostile 
form, and, depopulating the lands, carried off booty, took pri- 
soners, and burned towns. The king of France also, rinding a 
new method of venting his rage against the people, caused the 
eyes to be put out of many of the subjects of the king of Eng- 
land whom he had made prisoners, and thus provoked the king 
of England, unwilling as he was, to similar acts of impiety. 

In the same year, the Duke of Louvaine, the count de Brene, 
Baldwin, earl of Flanders, the count de Gynes, the earl of 
Boulogne, Geoffrey, count de Perche, the earl of Saint Gilles, 
the earl of Blois, Arthur, duke of Brittany, and many others, 
forsaking the king of France, became adherents of Richard, 
king of England, making oath to him, and he to them, that 
they would not make peace with the king of France, unless 
with the common consent of all. On this, the earl of Flanders 
laid siege to the town of Saint Omer, and took it by storm, 
and in like manner Arras, and many other towns of the king 
of France. 

In the same year, Henry, duke of Saxony, nephew of Kichard, 
king of England, came to Andely, in Normandy, to visit his 
uncle, the said king of England, being on his return from the land 
of Sulia ; and was honorably entertained by the king, in such 
manner as befitted a man of such eminence, and his own nephew. 
In the month of September, in the said year, Philip, king of 
France, and llichard, king of England, had an engagement 



428 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1198. 

between Jumieges, a castle of the king of England, and Vernon, 
a castle of the king of France, in which combat the king of 
France and his people being put to flight, he lost sixty 64 of his 
knights, and more than forty 85 men-at-arms, besides many 
horse and foot ; the king of England pursuing the king of 
France with the edge of the sword, until he shut himself up in 
his castle of Vernon. 

In the same year, Philip, bishop of Durham, received, by 
command of king Richard, the manor of Sedbergh, with the 
wapentake and knights' fees, and all other things thereto per- 
taining, as fully and wholly as the charter of the said king 
witnessed that the same grant was made to Hugh, bishop 
of Durham. The king also gave him permission to enclose 
with a ditch and hedge the wood of Cliff and the wood of 
Raic, and quitted claim to him of view of forest as to them 
both, and of all molestation on part of his foresters. 

In the month of September in this year, on the fifth day 
before the calends of October, being the Lord's day, Richard, 
king of England, took by assault a castle of the king of France, 
which is called Curcelles, and another castle of the same king 
called Burris ; and, on the day after the capture of the said 
castles, namely, on the calends of October, being the second 
day of the week and the vigil of Saint Michael, Philip, king 
of France, having assembled a large body of troops and citi- 
zens, marched forth from Mante on his road to Curcelles. On 
hearing of this, the king of England went forth to meet him, 
and fought a pitched battle with him between Curcelles and 
Gisors, on which the king of France, being worsted, fled to 
the castle of Gisors ; and, while he was crossing the bridge 
of the town of Gisors, the bridge broke down on account 
of the multitude of those crossing it, and the king of France 
fell into the river Ethe, and had to drink of it, and, if he had 
not been speedily dragged out, would have been drowned 
therein. In this battle, Richard, king of England, laid three 
knights prostrate with a single lance, and there were taken 
prisoners many illustrious men among the knights of the king 
of France, whose names are as follows : Galis de Port, Mat- 
thew de Montmorenci, Alan de . Rusci, Gerard de Choir, Philip 
de Nanteuil, Peter L'Eschars, Robert de Saint Denis, Theobald 
de Walengard, Cedunal de Trie, Roger de Modlen, Aimer 
Thiers, Reginald d'Ascy, Balde de Levigny, Thomas d'Asgent, 
64 V. r. twenty, 85 V. r. sixty. 



A.D. 1198. LETTER OP THE KING OF ENGLAND. 429 

Feri de Paris, Peter de la Truie, Guido de Levers, Turmentin, 

&of Champagne,] Terric d'Anceis, Amfrid de Baalim, Eborard 
e Montigny, Puncard, Walter Le Rouge, Ernulph de Lenni, 
Odo de Muntiun, William de Sauciai, Jollan de Bray, Peter de 
Poncy, Dembert [d'Auge,] Puncard Duchatel Empurchamp, 
William de Merle, John de Gauge, Theobald de Brune> Robert 
de Beauburg, Geoffrey de Borhai, Peter de Maidnil, Fulk de 
Gilerval, John de Serni, [Alard] de Loenais, Ralph de Yallucel, 
Ferri de Brunaye, Thomas de Castel, William de Rochemont, 
Theobald de Misci: And, besides the knights already men- 
tioned, the king of England took one hundred knights, and 
one hundred and forty horses, covered with iron armour, and 
of men-at-arms, both horse and foot, a great number. 

On this occasion the said king wrote to Philip, bishop of 
Durham, to the following effect : 

The Letter of Richard, Icing of England, to Philip, lishop of 
Durham, relative to the above-mentioned victory. 

" Richard, Ky the grace of God, king of England, duke 
of Normandy and Aquitaine, and earl of Anjou, to his dearly 
beloved and faithful subject, Philip, by the same grace, bishop 
of Durham, greeting. You are to know that on the last 
Lord's day, before the feast of Saint Michael, we entered the 
territory of the king of France, in Anjou, and made an assault 
on Curcelles, of which we took the castle, with the town, as 
also the lord of the castle, and all the rest who were therein. 
On the same day we assaulted the fortified mansion of Bur- 
ris, and took the whole that was in it, together with the 
mansion, and at a late hour returned with our army into Anjou. 
On hearing of this, on the following day the king of France 
came forth from Mante, with three hundred knights, and with 
men-at-arms and citizens, for the purpose of succouring the 
castle of Curcelles, as he did not believe that it was taken. 
On this, as soon as we learned that he was approaching, we 
went forth with a small number of troops, but sent the main 
body of our forces to line the bank of the river Ethe, as we 
supposed that he would come upon our people on the opposite 
bank of the river from the side of Anjou. He, however, 
with his forces made a descent in the direction of Gisors, on 
which, we put him and his people, after taking to flight, into 
such consternation on their way to the gate of Gisors, that the 
bridge broke down beneath them, and the king of France, as 



430 ' ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1198. 

we have heard say, had to drink of the river, and several 
knights, about twenty in number, were drowned. Three also, 
with a single lance, we unhorsed, Matthew de Montmorency, 
Alan de Rusci, and Fulk de Gilerval, and have them as our 
prisoners. There were also valiantly captured as many as one 
hundred knights of his, the names of the principal of whom we 
send to you, and will send those of the rest, when we shall have 
seen them, as Marchades has taken as many as thirty whom 
we have not seen. Men at arms, also, both horse and foot, 
were taken, of which the number is not known ; also, two 
hundred chargers were captured, of which one hundred and 
forty were covered with iron armour. Thus have we defeated 
the king of France at Gisors ; but it is not we who have done 
the same, but rather God, and our right, by our means ; and in 
so doing, we have put our life in peril, and our kingdom, contrary 
to the advice of all our people. These things we signify unto 
you, that you may share in our joy as to the same. "Witness 
ourselves, at Anjou." 

On the thirtieth day of September, Philip, king of France, 
entered Normandy, with a large army, while the king of Eng- 
land had not with him sixty men, as he had scattered his 
army over different places. However, he hung upon the rear 
of the Franks, with a few of his troops, until there had met 
him, in obedience to his command, about two hundred knights 
and Marchades with his Eoutiers. Accordingly, the Franks, 
although they were many more in number, on seeing the king 
of England and his men, after having burned about eighteen 
towns,retreated with hasty steps; and while the king of England 
pursued them in the rear, Marchades, with his lloutiers, met 
them in front, and there were taken of the French, about 
thirty knights and men-at-arms, and one hundred horses, in 
addition to those slain. This took place near Vernon ; for 
they did not return by the road bj r which they had come, that 
is, across the fords of Anjou, but, in their trepidation took to 
flight in the direction of Vernon ; and it is still spoken of, as 
a matter of disgrace to the French people, that, leaving his 
men, their king made his escape on an old dark brown horse, 
which they say he had had lor ten years, and took nothing 
with him out of Normandy, except, perhaps, three or four 
knights and a single man-at-arms. 

After this, the king of England, collecting an army, entered 
France by the ford of Anjou, and took, as above- stated, Burr is 



A.D. 1198. THE EAKL OF LEICESTEE DISCOMFITED. 431 

and Curcelles, and another castle, while his troops, with con- 
tinued ravages and conflagrations, laid waste the whole of the 
French Yexin. When the king of England was on the point 
of levelling the fortress of Curcelles, the king of France, col- 
lecting his forces, came down upon him, and an engagement 
taking place between them, the king of France, giving rein to 
his horse, was put to flight in the midst of his territory, on 
which the king of England pursued him with his troops, and 
took of the knights of the king of France at least eighty-three 
in number, besides men-at-arms, arbalisters, and those who 
were drowned in the river Ethe ; and in consequence of the 
excessive trepidation of the Franks, the bridge over the Ethe, 
before Gisors, broke down beneath them, and the king of 
France fell into the water, so that he was with difficulty dragged 
out 86 by the leg, and was nearly drowned. A great many 
others were also drowned, among whom were Milo de Pudsey, 
count de Bar, and John, the brother of William des Barres, a 
knight ; who with many others were drowned in the river Ethe. 
William, also, the castellane and lord of Curcelles, died imme- 
diately after he was taken prisoner. 

After this, the king of France assembling an army, entered 
Normandy, and burned Evreux and seven other towns. Earl 
John also, brother of king Richard, burned Neuburg, which 
the king of France thinking to have been done by his own 
people, sent some knights to forbid them to proceed in their 
ravages ; and of these eighteen knights were taken, together 
with many men-at-arms. Shortly after, Marchades, with his 
Eoutiers, entered Flanders, and attacked the fair held near Ab- 
beville, and spoiled the merchants of France, and returning 
into Normandy with a great booty, filled the land with the 
spoils of the Franks, and slew many of them, and took with 
him many captives to be put to their ransom. 

After these events, Kobert, earl of Leicester, came with forty- 
knights and a few men-at-arms, before the castle of Pasci, 
which had belonged to him : on which the knights of the castle 
sallied forth with a great number of men-at-arms and the citi- 
zens of the town, for the purpose of capturing him and his 
followers ; and he, being able to offer them no resistance, 
escaped with difficulty, and lost four of his knights. 

80 This is a repetition of the story relative to the disaster of the king of 
France. They were probably copied from two different sources, and, per- 
haps through an oversight of the amanuensis, both were inserted in the 
chronicle. 



432 . AlfffALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1198. 

On the following day, however, the said earl, having called 
to his aid a considerable number of the knights of the house- 
hold of the king of England, came before the castle of Pasci, 
having first disposed the knights and great numbers of men-at- 
arms in different places, to lie in ambush for the people of the 
castle. Accordingly, when the knights of the castle, who had 
driven him from the field the day before, espied him, they 
sallied forth with great vigour, and he fled before them, until 
they fell in with those lying in ambush, on which eighteen 
knights of their number were captured, and a great number of 
the common soldiers. 

In the meantime, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, crossed 
over from England to Normandy, and immediately, at the 
request of the king of France, and with the permission of the 
king of England, proceeded into France, to treat of making- 
peace between those two kings. On this, the king of France 
made offer that he would, for the sake of peace, surrender to 
the king of England all his lands and castles that he had seized, 
with the exception of the castle of Gisors, as to which, he 
would abide by the decision of six Norman barons, whom he 
himself should name, and of six barons of France, whom 
the king of England should name, which of the two had the 
greatest right to retain possession of the castle ; but the king 
of England declined, unless the earl of Flanders, and all the 
others who had abandoned the king of France and become his 
adherents, were included in the treaty. 

In the same year, Hugh Bardolph, Master Eoger Arundel, 
and Geoffrey Hacket, to whom, as judges itinerant, had been 
entrusted Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, York- 
shire, Northumberland, Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Lan- 
caster, held pleas of the king's crown. 

Heads of the Pleas of the King's Crown. 96 
Of pleas of the crown, new and old, which were not dis- 
posed of in the presence of the justices of our lord the king. 
Of mort d' ancestor. Of novel disseisin. Of grand assize, 
as far as ten pounds' value in land, and below. Of advow- 
sons of churches. Elections 87 also under the jurisdiction of 
the grand assize are to be taken before them, in obedience to 
the mandate of our lord the king, or of his chief justice. Of 
churches vacant or not vacant, which were in the presenta- 

86 The 4ext of Wilkins has been adopted. 

87 Probably of ecclesiastical persons. 



A.D. 1198. PLEAS OF THE KING'S CROWN. 433 

tion of our lord the king, as to who has presented them, or who 
has them, and through whom, and what is their value. Of 
escheats of our lord the king, and their values, and who has. 
them, and through whom. Of daughters and sons of nobles, 
and unmarried women who are or ought to be at the disposal 
of our lord the king, and the value of their lands, and which 
of the said males or females has married, and enquiry is to be 
made to whom, and by whom, and since what time. Enquiry 
is also to be made as to what widows have not compounded 
for marrying of themselves, 88 and the fine is to be exacted on 
behalf of our lord the king. Of serjeanties of our lord the 
king, and who has the same, and through whom, and what is 
the value thereof ; and afc to who have not made composition for 
aid to our lord the king, and who have made it, and the fine 
is to be exacted. Of usury by Christians, and the chattels of 
those who are dead. Of those who lie at the mercy of 
the king, and have not been amerced. Of pourprestures 89 
of our lord the king. Of ways of our lord the king that 
have been stopped up. Of treasure troves. Of offenders and 
their harbourers. Of persons accused who have fled and re- 
turned since the last assize. Of the renewal of all weights and 
measures, and ells ; and if the four men who have been de- 
puted to keep the same, have in each town done what is 
enacted by statute relative thereto, and if they have attached 
all transgressors of the said assize ; and if they have not at- 
tached them as they ought, then let them be punished as 
though themselves the transgressors. All wine belonging to 
such persons as shall have sold the same contrary to the as- 
size shall be seized on behalf of our lord the king, and the 
owner of the wine, as well as the sellers, shall be amerced to 
the king. Enquiry is to be made throughout all the counties 
as to the hides and carucates therein ; and whether the justices 
who have been appointed for the purpose have duly behaved them- 
selves, and whether they have received from all persons, and whe- 
ther they have concealed anything. Of the keepers of the sea- 
ports ; if they have received anything which they have not paid, 
and if they have received any bribe for withholding the king's 
rights, and if any person has received anything who has not 
been duly appointed for the said purpose. Enquiry is to be 
made, if all appear, who such person is, and what is his name j 

88 Without the king's permission. 

89 Encroachments by enclosure of the king's lands. 

VOL. LT. F F 



434 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1198. 

for it is by these and other vexations, whether justly or 
unjustly, that all England has been reduced to poverty from 
sea to sea. 

But before these troubles were at an end, another kind of 
trouble arose, to the confusion of the subjects of the realm, by 
means of the justices of the forests, namely, Hugh Neville, 
chief-justice of all the king's forests in England, whose sur- 
name was Envellu, Hugh Wac, and Ernest de Neville. For it 
was commanded the said justices itinerant of the forests, on the 
king's behalf, throughout each county through which they should 
proceed, to convene before them, to the pleas of the forests, the 
archbishops, bishops, earls, barons, and all freeholders, and the 
reeve of each town, and four other men, to hear the king's com- 
mands. 

In the first place, our lord the king gives notice, that if any 
shall commit an offence against him, relative to his venison, 
or his forests, in any way, he does not wish such to place 
their confidence in the fact that he has hitherto amerced 
them solely in their chattels, who have offended against him 
relative to his venison, or his forests. Eor if any persons hence- 
forth shall commit any offence against him relative thereto, and 
shall be convicted of the same, it is his intention that the full 
punishment shall be inflicted on them, as in the days of Henry, 
the grandfather 91 of our lord the king, that is to say, they 
are to lose their eyes and their virility. Also, our lord the 
king forbids that any person shall have bows or arrows, or 
dogs, or harriers, in his forests, unless he has the king as 
Ids surety, or some one else to act as his surety in so doing. 
The king also forbids that any one shall give or sell any- 
thing to the destruction of his woods, or the waste that lies in 
the king's forests ; but he gives full permission for them to 
take anything that is necessary for them from their own 
woods, but without waste and this in view of his forester and 
verderers. He also orders all those who have woods within 
the boundaries of a forest of our lord the king, to place fit and 
proper foresters in their woods ; for which foresters those to 
whom such woods belong are to be sureties, or are to find fitting 
sureties, who may make reparation, if the foresters should offend 
in anything that relates to our lord the king. He also orders that 
his own foresters shall have supervision over the foresters of 
the knights and others, who have woods within the boundaries of 
a iorest belonging to our lord the king, in order that the woods 
91 Properly greatgrandfather. 



A.D. 1198. PLEAS OF THE KING'S GROWN. 435 

may not be destroyed. For if, after this, these woods shall 
happen to be destroyed, they towhom such woods shall be- 
long are distinctly to understand, that by themselves or from 
their lands reparation shall be made, and not by any one else. 
The king also orders that his foresters shall make oath that, 
to the utmost of their ability, they will observe his assize 
which he has made relative to his forests, and that they will 
not be guilty of vexatious conduct towards knights or respec- 
table men, by reason of this supervision which the king has 
given them over their woods. The king also orders that in 
every county in which he keeps venison, twelve knights shall 
be appointed to keep watch over vert and venison in his forests, 
and that four knights shall be appointed for agisting 92 his woods, 
and for receiving his pannage, 93 and for the purpose of guarding 
and protecting the same. He also orders, that no one shall 
agist his own woods within the limits of his forests, before 
their woods shall have been agisted; and notice is given, 
that the agistments of our lord the king begin fifteen days be- 
fore the feast of Saint Michael, and continue for fifteen days 
after the said feast. The king also orders that, if his forester 
has in his charge demesne woods of the king, and those woods 
are destroyed, and he cannot, and knows not how to, show 
a just cause why such woods are destroyed, nothing is to 
be exacted of the said forester beyond his own body. 94 He 
also orders that no clerk shall commit any offence against 
him relative to his venison or his forests, and he gives strict 
orders to his foresters, if they shall find them so offending, 
not to hesitate to seize them, in order to prevent them 
so doing, and to make them prisoners; as he will exact 
sureties of them in consequence of so doing. The king also 
orders that all his assarts 95 shall be viewed every third year, 
after regard, 96 both old and new, and the same as to all pour- 
prestures, and all wastes in his woods ; and that each of the 
same shall be registered by itself. The king also orders that 
the archbishops, bishops, earls, barons, knights, and freeholders, 
and all men in his lands, shall come at the summons of his 

92 " To agist," is to find the cattle of strangers in the king's forest, and 
to receive the money due for the same. 

93 n Pannage," is the money so taken by the agistors. 

94 He is to be punished by imprisonment, and not by fine. 

a5 Forest lands from which the trees have been rooted up, and are thus 
rendered fit for cultivation. % View by the regarders of the forest. 



436 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1198. 

chief forester, to hold pleas as to his forests. It is also to be 
forbidden, at the pleas held at the forests, that any carriage 
shall go out of the high road into the king's forests, or that there 
shall be any swine in the king's forests in the fence times, 97 that 
is to say, between fifteen days before the Nativity of Saint John 
the Baptist, and fifteen days after that feast. It is also to be 
known, that whoever shall commit an offence in the king's 
forest, with relation to his venison, and shall be attainted of 
the same, he shall be at the mercy of the king for loss of his 
eyes and of his virility. 

But he who shall be guilty of an offence in the king's fo- 
rests, as to vert, whether by cutting down wood, or by cut- 
ting down branches, or by digging turf, or by rooting up 
heather, or by cutting brushwood, or by making assart, or 
new pourpresture by hedge or ditch, or by removal of a mill, or 
of a water-course, or of a sheep-cote, or of other houses, or by 
reaping or making hay beyond his hedges or ditches, shall be 
amerced by the king out of his own money, unless he shall 
have the king's verderers or foresters as his warranty for so 
doing. In like manner, they who carry bows or arrows, or 
who lead dogs without a couple through the king's forests, and 
shall be attainted of the same, shall be amerced by the king. 

It is also enacted, that view of forest shall always be 
made every third year ; and in regard of forest, the several 
matters above-mentioned are to be seen to. Also, in regard, 
new assarts are to be viewed, and what old ones have been 
sown since the last regard, and with what corn or pulse they 
have been sown. Fresh assarts shall be seized to the king's 
use ; if old assarts shall have been sown with wheat or with 
winter wheat, then each acre shall pay to the king twelve- 
pence from the said crop ; and if they shall have been sown 
with oats, barley, beans, peas, or any other pulse, then each 
acre shall pay to the king six-pence from the said crop. 

It is also deserving to be known, that in the time of king 
Henry, son of the empress Matilda, it had been allowed for 
ditches to be made within the boundaries of the forests in- 
stead of hedges.; and the said Henry enacted at "Woodstock, 
that whoever should commit an offence against him as to his 
forests, relative to the venison therein, on the first occasion, 
safe sureties should be exacted of him ; if he should offend a 
second time, safe sureties were to be similarly exacted of him ; 
97 Fawning season. 



A.D. 1198. POPE nrarocExi SENDS A LETTER TO THE KiifG. 437 



but if he should likewise offend a third time, for the third 
offence no sureties were to be exacted, but the offender's own 
body. 

In the same year, the men of the religious orders refused 98 
to pay the king five shillings for each carucate in tillage, as 
the other subjects of the kingdom did; on which, an edict 
went forth from the king,^that whoever in his kingdom should 
commit an offence against a clerk or any other member of the 
religious orders, he should not be compelled to make satisfac- 
tion to him ; but if any clerk or other member of the reli- 
gious orders should commit an offence against any layman, he 
should be immediately compelled to make satisfaction to him ; 
in consequence of which, the members of the religious orders 
were compelled to ransom themselves" [from this grievance]. 

The king also issued orders, that all persons, both clerks as 
well as laymen, who had charters or confirmations under 
his old seal, should bring them to be renewed under his new 
seal ; and if they should omit to do so, nothing that was done 
under his old seal should be held to be ratified. 

In the same year, pope Innocent sent letters of entreaty to 
Richard, king of England, in favour of Geoffrey, archbishop 
of York, begging him and, with paternal admonitions, exhorting 
him to receive the said archbishop, after his prayers and ser- 
vices, into his favour and brotherly love, and permit him in 
peace to return to his place, in order that he might not be 
obliged to proceed to ecclesiastical censure against him and his 
kingdom. Inconsequence of this, Richard, king of England, 
sent to the said archbishop, Philip, bishop of Durham, Eustace, 
bishop of Ely, Godfrey, bishop of Winchester, John, bishop of 
Worcester, and Savaric, bishop of Bath, begging, in a spirit of 
humility, on the king's behalf, that he would ratify the pre- 
sentations which the king had made in the church of York, 
on which, the king would restore to him his archbishopric in 
its full entirety. 

To these persons the archbishop made answer, " You are my 
fellow-brethren, and I will do what you advise me, if you will 
give me your assurance in writing under the testimony of your 
seals, that you will stand by that advice in the presence of 
our lord the pope." On this, the said bishops made answer, 

98 The text of Hoveden has " voluerunt," " wished," or " were ready - y " 
the context shows that this is a mistake for " noluerunt." 

99 By paying, like the rest. 



438 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1198. 

" We shall give you no writing, but it must be left to your 
own discretion ; you are of sufficient age, therefore speak for 
yourself;" and so saying, those who had been sent returned to 
the king with the archbishop's answer. 

On this, the archbishop set out for Rome, and the king of 
England sent envoys to Rome to oppose him, who [afterwards] 
wrote to him to the following effect: "Our lord the pope 
writes to you with earnest supplications, that you will restore 
to the archbishop of York his archbishopric in full, together 
with the revenues that have been received from the arch- 
bishopric, upon condition, however, that he shall pay the sums 
of money in which we have alleged him to be indebted to you, 
wholly, and in full. He has also written to our lord the car- 
dinal and some others, that they are to advise and induce you 
to do so ; and if you persist in refusing the same, they are to 
compel you, first, by interdict of the province of York, and 
after that by interdict of the whole kingdom, all power of appeal 
withdrawn. Furthermore, according to the aforesaid instruc- 
tions, your clerks are to be strictly compelled, by the cardinal, 
to give up all the revenues which in the meantime they have 
received, unless they can defend themselves, either on the au- 
thority of the Church of Rome, or on the grounds of delay 
[to present] within six months, according to the statute of the 
council of Lateran, the time of his suspension being excepted 
therefrom. The canons of York are to be advised to come to 
a reconciliation, and if any new point shall arise, both parties 
are again to present themselves before our lord the pope, the 
privileges of the canons [meantime] remaining in their usual 
force." 

In the same year, during the summer, in a certain city in 
Italy, not far from Genoa, a thing took place that deserves to 
be related. In this city, first, one of the citizens, his sins 
so demanding it, became possessed, that is to say, a daemoniac ; 
and in a few days the number of them increased to such a de- 
gree, that each person was in dread for himself, lest a similar 
danger might befall him. Upon this, by the common advice 
of the citizens, some religious men were summoned to the city, 
and especially the abbat of Lucca, of the Cistercian order, who 
was called, and seemed to be the greatest authority among them 
in matters of religion, in order that they might deliberate upon 
what was to be done for the citizens thus terror-stricken. Ac- 
cordingly, a fast for three days was proclaimed. On the third 



A.D. 1198. DECISION AS TO THE 3IANOE OF CLIFF. 439 

day the daemoniacs were summoned into their presence, and the 
said abbat adjured them in the name of Jesus Christ, that they 
would explain the cause why they had dared to annoy that 
city more than others, and to depart from the servants of Christ 
who had been signed with this name. 1 On this, one of them, 
crying out with a loud and terrible voice, exclaimed: ''Are you 
for compelling us to come forth from the vessels that have been 
reasonably assigned to us ? Why, we are that legion of devils 
which your Jesus, after casting them out from the man, allowed 
to hurl the swine from the rock into the sea. But now, being 
released from the chains in which we were bound, we have re- 
ceived power over the blasphemers only of the Virgin Mary ; 
and in this city we have found such persons, and having 
found them, it is our duty to torment them as they deserve. 
Wherefore, if we are driven out, know that you, hypocrite, and 
your order we shall torment the next." At his second com- 
mand, however, they came forth, though with great difficulty, 
leaving the traces of their foul footsteps behind. 

In the same year, Aimeric de Lusignan, king of Baruth, 2 
Accaron, prince of the Isle of Cyprus, and the other Christians 
in the land of Sulia, and the pagans, made a truce, to commence 
from the feast of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, and 
to last for the next six years, unless some powerful king of the 
Christians should arrive in those parts. In the same year also, 
Richard, king of England, and Philip, king of France, made a 
truce in the month of November, to last till the feast of Saint 
Hilary next ensuing. 

In the same year, Philip, bishop of Durham, at the petition 
of Robert de Turnham, granted him, in the king's presence, a 
jury of twelve lawful men of the vicinity of Clif, to enquire 
'which of them had the greater right to the said manor of Clif : 
that is to say, whether the said Robert ought to hold the said 
manor of the bishop of Durham, and to do homage to him for 
the same, or whether the bishop ought to hold it in demesne. 
Accordingly, on the oath of twelve lawful men, it was declared 
that that manor was the hereditary right of the wife of the 
said Robert, daughter 3 of William Fossard, and so the said 
bishop lost the manor of Clif, which his predecesssors had, 
for a long period, peaceably and inviolably held. This took place 
at York, before Hugh Bardolph, Master Roger Arundel, and 
Geoffrey Hacket, at this time justices of the pleas of the crown. 

1 In baptism. 2 Beyrout. 3 " Filii," is evidently a misprint. 



440 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A..D. 1198. 

In the same year, upon the death of Master Eichard of Col- 
dingham, Philip, bishop of Durham, and Bertram, prior of the 
church of Durham, disagreed as to the right of presentation of 
the churches of the aforesaid Richard. For the bishop said 
that the presentation belonged to him, as bishop and abbat of 
the church of Durham ; to which, the prior made answer, that 
the presentation belonged to him, because his predecessors and 
himself, without any one gainsaying it, had presented the same 
as priors and lords of the soil, and that they held all the power 
of abbat in the choir, and in the management of the house, and 
of their revenues, by grant of the king, and through institution 
by the bishops of Durham, and confirmation by the Pontiffs of 
Rome. But this controversy was not allowed to rest, indeed it 
increased to such a degree, that by order of the bishop of Dur- 
ham, Aimeric, the archdeacon of Durham, blockaded the church 
of Saint Oswald, in Elvet, to which the monks had retired, 
and would not allow provisions to be carried to them. One day 
even, after appeal had been made to the pope by the monks, 
the said Aimeric caused fire to be set to the door of the church, 
that thus, by means of the smoke and vapour, the fire might 
expel the monks. However, God changed the feelings of the 
bishop for the better, and, out of respect for Saint Cuthbert, he 
bestowed the said church on the monks, for their sole use, and 
by his charter confirmed the same ; he also granted them the 
free disposal of their churches, though with but a tardy assent 
on his part. 

In the same year, pope Innocent, during the affliction of 
the Christians who were in the land of Jerusalem, wrote to the 
following effect : 

The Letter of pope Innocent, on giving succour to the Holy Land. 
" Innocent, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his 
venerable brethren, the archbishop of York and his suffragans, 
and his dearly beloved sons, the abbats, priors, and other pre- 
lates of churches, and the earls, barons, and all the people of the 
province of York, health and the Apostolic benediction. After 
the sad fall of the kingdom of Jerusalem, after the lamentable 
slaughter of the people of Christendom, after the deplorable in- 
vasion of that land on which the feet of Christ had stood, and 
where God, our king, had deigned to work salvation in the midst 
of the earth, after the ignominious retreat of the vivifying Cross 



A.D. 1198. LETTEE OF POPE INNOCENT. 441 

on which the salvation of the world had been suspended, and 
had thereby blotted out the handwriting of former death, the 
Apostolic See, alarmed at the sad occurrence of mishaps so un- 
fortunate, was affected with, agonizing grief, exclaiming and 
bewailing to such a degree that, from her continual crying, her 
throat became hoarse, and from excessive weeping, her eyes 
became dim. But, in the words of the prophet, 4 ' If I forget 
thee, Jerusalem, let my right hand forget.her cunning. If 
I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of 
my mouth.' Still does the Apostolic See shout aloud, and like 
a trumpet does she raise her voice, endeavouring to arouse the 
nations of Christendom to fight the battles of Christ, and to 
avenge the injuries done to Him crucified, using the words of 
him who says, ' All ye that pass by, behold and see if there be 
any sorrow like unto my sorrow.' 5 For behold, our inheritance 
has gone to strangers, our houses to other people, ' The ways 
of Zion mourn, because none come to the solemn feasts . . her 
adversaries are the chief.' 6 The Sepulchre of the Lord, which 
the prophet foretold should be so glorious, has been profaned by 
the unrighteous, and has been thereby made inglorious. Our 
glory, of which the Apostle speaks when he says, ' God forbid 
that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,' 7 
is held in the hands of the enemy, and our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who, by dying for us, led our captivity captive, as though Himself 
a captive, is driven in exile from His inheritance. In former 
days, when the ark of the Lord of Sabaoth abode in tents, Uriah 
refused to enter his 8 house, and withheld himself from the law- 
ful embraces of his wife. 9 But at the present day, our princes, 
the glory of Israel having been transferred from its place, to our 
disgrace, give themselves up to adulterous embraces, thereby 
abusing their luxuries and their wealth ; and, while they are 
harassing each other, with inexorable hatred, while one is using 
all his endeavours to take vengeance on another for injuries 
done, there is not a person who is moved by the injuries of Him 
crucified, not considering that now our enemies are insulting us, 
saying, * Where is your God, who can neither deliver himself nor 
you from our hands ? Behold ! now have we profaned your sanc- 
tuaries ; behold ! now have we extended our hands to the ob- 

4 Psalm cxxxvii. 5, 6. It is well known that this psalm is not a 
composition of king David. 5 Lament, i. 12. 6 Lament, i. 4, 5. 

7 Gal. vi. 1.4. 6 " Sanctam" is most probably a misprint. 

9 2 Sara. x. 11. 



442 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1198. 

jects of your desires, and have, at the first attack, with the hand 
of violence seized upon those places ; and, whether you will or 
no, we hold possession of the spots in which you pretend that 
your 10 superstition took its rise. Already, have we weakened 
and broken asunder the lances of the Gauls, baffled the efforts 
of the English, crushed the strength n of the Germans, 
and now for the second time subdued the haughty Spani- 
ards; and though you thought to arouse all your might 
against us, hardly in any of your attempts did you succeed. 
Where then is your God ? Let him arise now and help you, 
and let him be the protector of yourselves and of himself. The 
Germans indeed, who presumed that they should gain over us 
unheard-of triumphs, with ardent spirits crossed the seas to 
our land : and after they had taken the single fortified place 
of Baruth, when no one was defending it, unless the assist- 
ance of flight had come to the aid of them and the rest of 
your potentates, they would have wofully experienced upon 
themselves our might, and their descendants would have for 
ever bewailed the slaughter we had made of them. And as for 
your kings and princes, whom we formerly drove out of the 
lands of the East, in order that they may conceal their terror by 
putting on a show of daring, after returning to their skulking 
places, we will not say kingdoms, they prefer to attack e'ach 
other, rather than once more experience our strength and our 
might. What then remains except that, those being cut off 
by the avenging sword, whom, running away, you dismissed 
for your own purposes and to restore peace to your territo- 
ries, we should make an attack upon your territories, for 
the purpose of destroying your name and your memory?' 
How then, brethren and sons, are we to rebut the insults 
of these insulters, in what terms shall we be able to answer 
them ? When are we to see them on their side in pursuit of 
the truth, 12 judging by what has lately reached our hearing 
upon certain information ? For we have received letters from 
parts beyond seas, to the effect that when the Germans had 
reached Acre with their fleet, they seized the castle of Bar- 
uth, there being no one to defend it ; while the Saracens, 
making an assault upon Joppa on the other side gained pos- 
session of it by storm, and having slain many thousand 

10 " Nostrara" appears to be a misprint for " vestram." 

11 " Vires" is probably the right reading and not " viros." 

12 This passage appears to be in a corrupt state. 



A.D. 1198. LETTEB OF POPE TXNOCE^T. 443 

Christians therein levelled it with the ground. As for the 
Germans, on hearing rumours of the death of the Emperor, 
not waiting for the usual time of making the passage, they 
embarked on board their ships for the purpose of returning 
home. On this, the Saracens, who had collected a numerous 
army, raged with such violence against the territories of the 
Christians, that it was not possible for the Christians without 
great danger to go out of their cities, nor yet to remain in 
them without dread ; and too truly their sword has its horrors 
without, its anxious fears within. Take, therefore, my sons, the 
spirit of fortitude, the shield of faith, and the helmet of salva- 
tion, 13 putting your trust not in numbers or in your strength, 
but rather trusting in the power of God, to whom it is not diffi- 
cult to save whether with many or with few, and rush to the suc- 
cour of Him by whom you exist, and live, and have your being. 14 
For in your behalves it was that * He made himself of no reputa- 
tion, and took upon Him the form of a servant, and was made 
in the likeness of men ; and being found in fashion as a man, 
He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the 
death of the cross ;' 15 and yet, while He is poor, you abound, 
while He is put to flight, you are at rest, and do not, while He 
is in want and exile, come to His aid. Who, then, in a case 
of such great emergency, shall refuse to pay obedience to Jesus 
Christ ? When he comes to stand before His 'tribunal to be 
judged, what answer will he be able to make to Him in defence 
of himself ? If God has submitted to death for man, is man 
to hesitate to submit to death for God ? ' For the sufferings 
of the present time are not worthy to be compared with the 
glory which shall be revealed in us.' 16 Shall, then, the servant 
deny to his lord temporal riches, when his lord bestows upon 
the servant riches that are eternal ; ' which eye hath not seen, 
nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man >i7 
to conceive ? Therefore it is that a man should ( lay up 
treasures in heaven, where thieves do not break through nor 
steal, nor moth nor rust corrupt.' 18 Let each and all, then, 
prepare themselves, that in the month of March next ensuing, 
each city by itself, and, in like manner, each of the earls and 
barons may, according to their respective means, send forth a 
number of warriors to the defence of the land of the nativity 
of our Lord, to be supported at ascertained sums, and there to 

13 Alluding to Eph. vi. 16, 17. n Alluding to Acts xvii. 28. 

15 Phil. ii. 7, 9. 16 Rom. viii. 18. ? 1 Cor. n. 9. ls St. Matt, vi. 20. 



444 ANNALS OF ROGER VE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1198. 

remain for two years at least. For, although daily anxieties 
in behalf of all the churches are pressing upon us, still, this 
in especial do we conceive as one of our anxieties, our desire to 
apply every energy to the rescue of the lands of the East ; lest if 
succour should chance to be delayed, the bruch 19 may devour the re- 
sidue of the locust, and the last state become worse than the first. 
But, that we may not seem to lay grievous and insupportable 
burdens on the shoulders of other men, and to be unwilling 
with our finger to move the same, saying so much, and doing 
little or nothing at all, and, inasmuch as he who both does and 
teaches is to be called great in the kingdom of heaven, after 
the example of Him who began to do and to teach, to the end 
that we, who, unworthy as we are to act as His vicars upon 
earth, may set a good example to others, we have determined, 
both in person and in deed, to aid the Holy Land ; and have 
appointed our dearly beloved son, Stephen, cardinal priest and 
titular of Saint Praxedes, and Peter, cardinal deacon and titular 
of Saint Mary in Yia lata, legates of the Apostolic See, men 
fearers of God, famous for their knowledge and their probity, 
powerful both in word and deed, and whom, among our other 
brethren, we do in especial love and esteem, after having, with 
our own hand, placed upon them the sign of the cross, humbly 
and devoutly to precede the army of the Lord, and not to be 
supported by offerings given through charity, but at our own 
cost, and at that of our brethren ; by whom also we have de- 
termined upon sending other availble aid to the said land. 
Wherefore, in the meantime, we have sent the said Peter, 
cardinal deacon and titular of Saint Mary in Yia lata, 20 unto 
the presence of our most dearly beloved sons in Christ, the 
most illustrious kings, Philip, king of the Franks, and Eichard, 
king of the English, for the purpose of effecting a reconciliation 
between them, or at least obtaining a truce for five years, and 
exhorting the people to obedience to Him crucified : and whom, 
as legate to the Apostolic See, we will and command to be honored 
by all, and obedience to be humbly shewn to his mandates and 
enactments. But the aforesaid Stephen, cardinal priest and 
titular of Saint Praxedes, we are about to send to Venice, to 
obtain succour for the Holy Land. Moreover, by the common 
advice of our brethren, we have resolved, and do strictly 

19 This seems to have been an ancient proverb. The " bruchus " was 
a kind of small locust ; it seems to have no name in the English lan- 
guage. 20 He is also called cardinal of Capua. 



A.D. 1198. LETTER OF POPE INNOCENT. 445 

enjoin and command you, our brethren the archbishops and 
bishops, and our dearly beloved sons, the abbats, and other 
prelates of churches, forthwith to levy a certain number of 
soldiers, or, in place of such certain number, a fixed amount of 
money, in the month of March next ensuing, due consideration 
being had of the means of each, for the purpose of attacking 
the barbarous tribes of the pagans, and preserving the inherit- 
ance of the Lord, which with His own blood He 1 has obtained. 
But if any person, (a thing that we cannot believe>) shall dare 
to oppose an ordinance so pious and so necessary, we have de- 
termined that he shall be punished as a transgressor of the 
sacred canons, and do order that he shall be suspended from 
his duties until such time as he shall have made due satisfac- 
tion for the same. Wherefore, trusting in the mercy of God, 
and in the authority of the blessed Apostles, Saint Peter and 
Saint Paul, and in that power of binding and unloosing which, 
unworthy as we are, God has bestowed upon us, we do, in the 
case of those who, in their own persons and at their own 
expense, shall undergo the labours of this expedition, grant 
them plenary pardon for those sins for which they have done 
penance with voice and heart, and do promise them the blessing 
of everlasting salvation as the reward of the just. And, 
to those who shall not have gone thither in their own 
persons, but only, at their own expense, shall have, ac- 
cording to their means and rank, sent fit and proper men, 
to stay there for two years at least, and to those likewise, 
who, although at the expense of others, shall, in their 
own persons, have undergone the labours of the pilgrimage 
which they have undertaken, we do also grant plenary pardon 
for their sins. We do also will that all persons shall be par- 
takers in this remission, who shall give suitable aid to the said 
land at their own cost, according to the amount of the aid 
they shall so give, and especially in proportion to the feelings 
of devotedness they shall manifest. And, in order that all 
persons may prepare more expeditiously and more securely for 
going to the aid of the land of the nativity of our Lord, we do take 
their property from the time that they shall have assumed 
the cross, under the care of Saint Peter and of ourselves ; and 
the same is likewise to be under the protection of the arch- 
bishops, bishops, and other prelates of the church of God ; 
it being our order that until their death or return is to a cer- 
tainty ascertained, the same shall remain safe and untouched. 



446 A1WALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEIT. A.D. 1198. 

And if any person shall presume to contravene this ordinance, 
he is to be forced by ecclesiastical censure to the observance 
thereof. Therefore, let no person entirely withhold him- 
self from this work, inasmuch as the same has not been com- 
menced by ourselves, but by the Apostles themselves, who 
made collection among the nations, that they might succour 
the brethren who were labouring in Jerusalem. And further, 
"we do wish you not to despair of the Divine mercy, how- 
ever much the Lord may be offended at our sins, who, by 
your hand may effect, (if, as you ought to do, you set out upon 
your pilgrimage with all humility of heart and of body,) that 
which he did not grant to your forefathers. For, probably, 
our forefathers would have conspired together, and would have 
said, * our own high hand, and not the Lord hath done all this ;' 
and to themselves, and not to the Lord they would have as- 
cribed the glory of the victory. We do also trust, that He 
will not in His wrath withhold His mercies, who, when He 
is angered, does not forget to show mercy, admonishing and 
exhorting us, saying, ' Turn unto me, and I will turn unto 
you.' We do also believe, that if you walk in the law of the 
Lord, not following in the footsteps of those, who, going after 
vanity, have become vain, who gave themselves up to junket- 
tin'gs and to drunken revellings, and did those things in the 
parts beyond sea, which, in the land of their own nativity, 
they would not dare to do without having to endure great 
infamy and considerable disgrace, but, placing your hopes of 
victory in Him alone, wfeo does not forsake those who put 
their trust in Him, and abstain not only from what is unlawful, 
but also from many things that are lawful, He, who overthrew 
the chariot and the hosts of Pharaoh in the Red Sea, will render 
weak the bow of the strong, and will sweep away from before 
your faces the enemies of the Cross of Christ as though the very 
dirt of the streets ; not, indeed, giving to us or to you the glory, 
but to His own name, who is glorious in His Saints, wondrous 
in His majesty, a worker of marvels, and, after tears and weep- 
ing, the giver of joy and gladness. Moreover, if any of those 
who shall go on the pilgrimage, shall at the time be bound by 
oath to pay interest, we do, brother archbishops and bishops, 
command their creditors 21 in your several dioceses to be com- 
pelled by you, by force of ecclesiastical compulsion, all obstacle 
by appeal removed, entirely to absolve them from their said 
*2 l " Credirnus " is a mistake for " creditores." 



A.D. 1198. PROPHECY OF THE PEIEST PULE. 447 

oaths, and to cease to demand from them any farther in- 
terest. And if any one of their creditors shall compel them to 
payment of interest, then let him be compelled by you, by means 
of similar compulsion, all obstacle by appeal removed, to make 
restitution of the same. Jews also, you princes our sons, we do 
command to be compelled by you, and by means of the secular 
power, to forego all interest from such ; and until such re- 
mission shall have been made, we do, under sentence of ex- 
communication, order every kind of communication with them 
to be withheld by all the faithful of Christ, either in matters 
of trade or in any other matters whatsoever. Also, for the pur- 
pose of more expeditiously and more perfectly carrying out 
these commands in your province, we have thought proper 
to depute you, our sons, the prior of Thurgarton 22 and Master 
Vacarus, to announce the words of the Lord to the others, and, 
inviting our venerable brethren, your archbishop and his suf- 
fragans, and the others, to the fulfilment of this Apostolic man- 
date, so to promote the cause of the Lord that you may both be 
partakers of this remission, and that in this your devoutness may 
more fully shine forth. Also, for* the more laudable promotion 
of the same, you are to associate with yourselves herein one 
of the brethren of the order of the Temple, as also one of the 
brethren of the Hospital of Jerusalem, men of character and 
prudence. Given at Saint Peter's, at Rome, on the ides of 
August, in the first year of our pontificate." 

In the same year, there was in France a certain priest, named 
Fulk, whom the Lord magnified in the sight of kings, and gave 
him power to make the blind to see, to cure the lame, and dumb, 
and others afflicted with divers maladies, and to drive out devils. 
Even harlots, escaping from the bonds of unchasteness, he con- 
verted unto the Lord, and led usurers, by inviting them to that 
heavenly treasure, which neither rust nor moth corrupteth, nor 
thieves steal, to distribute for the use of the poor all that sub- 
stance which their usury and exactions had devoured. 

He also foretold to the kings of France and England, that 
one of them would die an unfortunate death before long, unless 
they speedily desisted from their hostilities. And, because at 
this time the harvest was plentiful, and the workmen few, the 
Lord joined unto him wise men, to preach the words of salva- 
vation, Master Peter and Lord Robert, and Eustace, the lord 
abbat of Flaye, besides some others, who, being sent throughout 
23 A house of canons regular in Nottinghamshire, 



448 A3TN T ALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1198. 

the earth, preached in every part, the Lord assisting them and 
confirming their words by signs attending them. 

One day the before-named Fulk came to Richard, king of 
England, and said to him, " I warn thee, king, on behalf of 
Almighty God, to marry as soon as possible the three most 
shameless daughters whom thou hast, lest something worse 
befall thee. Oh, place thy finger on thy lips, for he will 
prove an accuser who has told the truth. ~No man is born 
without faults ; blessed is he who is burdened with the fewest ; 
and elsewhere are we informed that there is no man living free 
from fault." To this the king is said to have made answer : 
" Hypocrite, to thy face thou hast lied, inasmuch as I have no 
daughter whatever ;" on which Fulk replied and said, "Beyond 
a doubt, I do not He, because, as I said, thou hast three most 
shameless daughters, of whom one is pride, the second avarice, 
and the third sensuality." 

Accordingly, having called around him many earls and 
barons who were present, the king said : " Listen, all of you, 
to the warning of this hypocrite, who says that I have three 
most shameless daughters, njfmely, pride, avarice, and sensual- 
ity, and recommends me to get them married : I therefore give 
my pride to the Knights Templars, my avarice to the monks 
of the Cistercian order, and my sensuality to the prelates of 
the churches." Oh great disgrace, to create a laugh at the ex- 
pense of the wretched ! 

After this, Fulk, leaving the king, departed, preaching the 
word of God from city to city ; and when, so preaching the 
word of God, he had entered the city of Lisieux, the clergy of 
that city, whose unclean lips this man, filled with the Holy 
Ghost and good works, had reproved, laid hands on him, and, 
binding him with chains, threw him into prison. But neither 
chains nor prisons could restrain him, and so, being permitted 
to depart, he came to Caen, preaching the word of God, and 
did many miracles in the sight of the people. The keepers, 
however, of the castle, thinking that it would please the king, 
laid hands on him, and, placing him in fetters, threw him into 
prison ; but bursting forth from the prison and the fetters, he 
came forth unharmed, and went his way rejoicing that he had 
been deemed worthy to suffer reproach for the name of Christ, 
and, going from the castle, he shook the dust from off his feet 
as a testimony against them. 

In the same year, on the fifth day before the ides of 



A.D. 1199. POPE INNOCENT SUSPENDS KING ALPHONSO. 449 

October, being the Lord's day, at the entreaty of the officers 
of Geoffrey, archbishop of York, Philip, bishop of Durham, at 
Hoveden, consecrated Adam, abbat of Sallaie, and Hamo, 
abbat of Beiland, profession of canonical obedience being made 
to the church of York and its vicars, saving always the dignity 
of their order. In the same month, William, surnamed Coke, a 
servant of Richard, king of England, while keeping charge of 
the castle of Leuns, took of the household of the king of 
France, twenty-four men at arms, horsemen, and forty men at 
arms, foot, whom the king of France had sent for the purpose 
of guarding the castle of Newmarche. 

In the same year died Richard, bishop of London, John, 
bishop of Worcester, William de Yer, bishop of Hereford, the 
bishop of Saint David's, and Amfrid of Tours, the first husband 
of the before-mentioned Milicent, wife of Guido, the former 
king of Jerusalem. 

In the same year died at Palermo, in Sicily, Constance, the 
former empress of the Romans, wife of the emperor Henry ; 
whose son pope Innocent received into his charge, together 
with the kingdom of Sicily, the dukedom of Apulia, and the 
principality of Capua. 

In the same year, Philip, bishop of Beauvais, offered to Richard, 
king of England, a thousand marks of silver for his ransom. 
In this year also, Richard, king of England, founded a castle 
on an island at the mouth of the Seine, which he called Butte- 
vant, 23 and the king of France fortified a castle opposite to it, 
which he called Bulecut. In the same year, Richard, king of 
England, gave to master Malgar, his clerk, the bishopric of 
Worcester. 

Upon the decease of pope Celestinus, pope Innocent the Third 
being appointed in his place, he again suspended Alphonso, 
king of Saint Jago, and the whole of his territory from the 
celebration of Divine service, on account of his wife, the 
daughter of the king of Castille, for they were cousins in the 
third degree ; and although the king of Saint Jago offered to 
our lord the pope Innocent and the cardinals twenty thousand 
marks of silver, and to keep and pay two hundred knights 
during the space of one year for the defence of the Chris- 
tians against the Pagans, only on condition that our lord 
the pope should allow them to remain together, until God 
should give them issue, or at least for three years, our lord 
83 It was also called Chateau Gafflard. 

VOL. II. O Q 



450 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEtf. A.D. 1199. 

the pope Innocent utterly refused to sanction their doing the 



In the year of grace 1199, being the tenth and last year of 
the reign of Richard, king of England, the said Richard was at 
Damfront, in Normandy, on the day of the Nativity of our 
Lord, which took place on the sixth day of the week, and 
Philip, king of France, was on the same day at Yernon, 
in Normandy. Otho, king of the Germans, and nephew of 
Richard, king of England, was on the same day at West- 
phalia, in Almaine, which is distant nine days' journey from 
Cologne, and which places Otho, by his prowess and valour, 
had gained against Philip, duke of Suabia, son of Frederic, the 
former emperor of the Romans. 

Immediately after the Nativity of our Lord, the said Otho 
divided his army into two parts, and laid siege to two cities of 
the before-named Philip. The kings of France and England, 
however, met for a conference between Andely and Yernon, 
on the feast of Saint Hilary ; on which occasion the king of 
England came thither in a boat up the river Seine, and not 
wishing to land, spoke from the boat with the king of France, 
who, sitting on horseback on the banks of the river, conversed 
with the king of England face to face ; and there they ap- 
pointed another day for holding the conference, when, in pre- 
sence of a greater number of their followers, through the me- 
diation of the lord cardinal deacon Peter of Capua, titular of 
Saint Mary in Yia Lata, legate of the Apostolic See, and in 
accordance with the advice of other influential persons on 
either side, they agreed upon a truce to be observed between 
them, from the said feast of Saint Hilary, to last for the period 
of five years, with good faith and without evil intent, their 
property and tenements remaining on both sides in the same 
state in which they then were ; and after these arrangements 
had been made and confirmed by oath, each returned to his 
own country ; and they allowed their armies, after returning 
them their thanks, to return to their homes. 

While, however, Marchades, with his Routiers, was returning 
towards his own country, four counts of the kingdom of France, 
through whose lands Marchades had to pass, met him with a 
hostile force, and worsted him, and slew many of his men. 
But the king of France disowned this deed, and swore that it 
had not been done through him. After this, while the king 
of England, in expectation of enjoying peace and in obser- 
vance of the aforesaid treaty, had gone towards Poitou, the 



A.D. 1199. CHAEGE AGAINST EAEL JOHN. 451 

king of Prance erected a new castle between Buttevant and 
Guaillon, and rooted up a forest belonging to the king of 
England, in the neighbourhood of the said place. 

On the king of England hearing of this, he returned into 
Normandy, and sent word to the king of France, by Eustace, 
bishop of Ely, his chancellor, that the truce was broken, un- 
less he should cause the said new castle to be levelled. The 
legate accordingly advised the king of France to demolish the,, 
said castle, in order that a truce so solemnly confirmed might 
not, for such a reason, be broken ; and, at his solicitation, the 
king of France promised that he would shortly level the said 
castle. But Richard, king of England, being far from con- 
tented with this, desired that either a full understanding 
should be come to between them, or else that no peace should 
be made between them. 

Accordingly, a treaty was made between them, to the fol- 
lowing eflPect : that the king of France should restore to the king 
of England, the whole of the territories which he had taken 
from him, whether in war, or whether in any other way, with 
the sole exception of the castle of Gisors ; in return for which, 
the king of France, granted to Richard, king of England, the 
presentation to the archbishopric of Tours. It was also ar- 
ranged, that Louis, the son of the king of France, should 
marry the daughter of the king of Castille, the niece of Richard, 
king of England, and that the king of France should make 
oath, that he would, to the utmost of his ability, aid Otho, the 
nephew of the king of England, in gaining the Roman em- 
pire. In return for this, Richard, king of England, was to 
give to Louis, son of the king of France, the castle of Gisors, 
with his said niece in marriage, and was also to give him 
twenty thousand marks of silver. However, all these things 
had to be delayed till such time as Richard, king of England, 
should return from Poitou. 

Philip, king of France, however, that sower of discord, sent 
word to the king of England, that John, earl of Mortaigne, 
his brother, had entirely placed himself in his hands, and 
that he would show him the document signed by John him- 
self to that effect. A thing much to be wondered at ! the 
king of England believed the king of France, and held his 
brother John in hatred, so much so, that he caused him to be 
disseised of his lands on both sides of the sea. When, 
however, the said John enquired what was the cause of this 

GG 2 



452 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1199. 

indignation and hatred, it was told him, that the king of 
France had sent the above message relative to him to the 
king his brother. In consequence of this, the said earl of 
Mortaigne sent two knights in his behalf to the court of 
the king of France, who offered in every way to make proof 
that he was innocent of the said charge, or to defend him, ac- 
cording as the court of the king of France should think proper. 
%But in this court there was not found a single person, either 
the king, or any one else, who was willing to receive this 
proof of the matter, or challenge of defence. In consequence 
of this, from this period the king of England received his 
brother John into greater favour, and gave less credit to the 
messages of the king of France. 

In the meantime, Richard, king of England, by the advice of 
Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, took away from Savaric, 
bishop of Bath, the abbey of Glastonbury, and gave it to Master 
William la Pie, on which he was made abbat thereof. 

At this period, Guidomar, viscount de Limoges, having 
found a great treasure of gold and silver on his lands, sent to 
Richard, king of England, his liege lord, no small part of the 
same ; but the king refused it, saying that he ought in right of 
his grant 24 to have the whole of the said treasure ; a thing that 
the said viscount would on no account agree to. Accordingly, 
the king of England repaired with a large force to his territory, 
for t^ie purpose of attacking the said viscount, and laid siege to 
his castle, the name of which was Chalus, in which he hoped 
that the said treasure was concealed ; and when the knights 
and men-at-arms, who were in the castle, came forth and 
offered him the castle, on condition of safety to life and limb, 
and of retaining their arms, the king refused to receive it, but 
swore that he would take them by storm and hang them all. 

Accordingly, the knights and men-at-arms returned to the 
castle in sorrow and confusion, and prepared to make a defence. 
On the same day, when the king of England and Marchades 
were reconnoitring the castle on all sides, and examining in 
which spot it would be most advisable to make the assault, a 
certain arbalister, Bertram de Gurdun 25 by name, aimed aii 
arrow from the castle, and struck the king on the arm, inflict- 
ing an incurable wound. The king, on being wounded, mounted 
his horse and rode to his quarters, and issued orders to Mar- 

21 As lord of the demesne. 

25 He is called Peter Basil by some writers. 



A.D. 1199. DEATH OF KING KICHAED. 453 

ehades and the whole of the army to make assaults on the 
castle without intermission, until it should be taken ; which 
was accordingly done. After its capture, the king ordered all 
the people to be hanged, him alone excepted who had wounded 
him, whom, as we may reasonably suppose, he would have 
condemned to a most shocking death if he had recovered. 

After this, the king gave himself into the hands of a physi- 
cian of Marchades, who, after attempting to extract the iron 
head, extracted the wood only, while the iron remained in the 
flesh ; but after this butcher had carelessly mangled the king's 
arm in every part, he at last extracted the arrow. When the 
king was now in despair of surviving, he devised to his brother 
John the kingdom of England and all his other territories, and 
ordered fealty to be done to the aforesaid John by those who 
were present, and commanded that his castles should be delivered 
to him, and three-fourths of his treasures. All his jewels he 
devised to his nephew Otho, the king of Germany, and the 
fourth part of his treasure he ordered to be distributed among 
his servants and the poor. 

He then ordered Bertram de Gurdun, who had wounded 
him, to come into his presence, and said to him, " What harm 
have I done to you, that you have killed me ?" On which he 
made answer, " You slew my father and my two brothers with 
your own hand, and you had intended now to kill me ; there- 
fore, take any revenge on me that you may think fit, for I will 
readily endure the greatest torments you can devise, so long as 
you have met with your end, after having inflicted evils so many 
and so great upon the world." On this, the king ordered him 
to be released, and said, " I forgive you my death." But the 
youth " stood before the feet of the king, and with scowling 
features, and undaunted neck, did his courage demand the 
sword. The king was aware that punishment was wished for, 
and that pardon was dreaded. ' Live on, ' said he, ' although thou 
art unwilling, and by my bounty behold the light of day. To 
the conquered faction now let there be bright hopes, and the 
example of myself/' 26 And then, after being released from his 

26 This is an adaptation from the Pharsalia of Lucan, where he describes 
the surrender of Domitius Ahenobarbus to Csesar at Corfinium, B. ii. 1. 510 
516. The following is the version in the text : 
t( Constitit ante pedes regis, vultuque minaci, 
Nobilitas recta ferrum cervice proposcit ; 
Sensit rex prenamque peti, veniamque timeri ; 
Vive, licet uolis, et uostro munere, dixit, 



454 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1199. 

chains, he was allowed to depart, and the king ordered one 
hundred shillings of English money to he given him. Mar- 
ehades, however, the king not knowing of it, seized him, and 
after the king's death, first flaying him alive, had him hanged. 27 

The king then gave orders that his brains, his blood, and his 
entrails should be buried at Chalus, his heart at Bouen, and 
his body at at Fontevraud, at the feet of his father. He de- 
parted this life on the eighth day before the ides of April, being 
the third day of the week before Palm Sunday, and the twelfth 28 
day after he had been wounded ; on which his people buried 
him in the above-named places, as he had commanded. 

In relation to his death, one writer says : " In this man's 
death, the lion by the ant was slain. evil destiny ! in a 
death so great the whole world fell.''' 29 

Another wrote to this effect : "Valour, 30 avarice, crime, un- 
bounded lust, foul famine, unscrupulous pride, and blind de- 
sire, have reigned for twice five years ; all these an archer did 
with art, hand, weapon, strength, lay prostrate." 31 

Another wrote thus, "If birth and prowess could have es- 
caped the confines of death, I should not have entered on the 
path of fate. But think you the man exists, to whom, from 
the very first, death has announced his end, and repeats aloud, 
1 He is mine ! he is my own ! ' Long is the hand of death ; 
than mighty Hector is death more mighty ; man takes cities, 
death, man." 32 

Another has written these words: "His valour could no 
throng of mighty labours quell, whose way and onward pro- 
gress no obstacles did retard, no roaring, no rage of the sea, no 
abysses of the deep, no mountain heights, no bold and steep 
ascent of the lofty range, no roughness of the path by rocks 
made rugged, no windings of the road, no devious unknown 
track, no fury of the winds, no clouds with showers drunk, no 
thunders, dreadful visitations, no murky air." 38 [None of 

Cerne diem. Victis jam spes bona partibus esto 
Exemplumque mei." 

27 The chronicle of Winchester says that this ruffianly Routier surren- 
dered Gurdun to Joanna, the king's sister, and that she tore out his eyes, 
and put him to cruel tortures, in the midst of which he expired. 

28 V. r. " ninth." M An hexameter and pentameter couplet. 

30 "Virtus " seems to be a more likely reading than "virus." Even 
this severe critic could hardly deny him the quality of valour. 

31 This censure is conveyed in four leonine or rhyming lines. 

32 Three elegiac couplets. 33 Eight hexameter lines. 



A.D. 1199. APPEAL OF CANUTE TO POPE INNOCENT. 455 

these dangers prevented him] from making trial of the prow- 
ess of the Sicilians, of Cyprus, of Saladin, of the pagan nations, 
in arms. " And with no lagging foot does the result follow 
upon the aspirations, together do they onward speed ; at the 
same moment that the will is born, the result is born as well." 

On the decease of king Bichard, Savaric, bishop of Bath, 
immediately urged his claims against Master "William La Pie, 
abbat of Glastonbury, and asserted his right before our lord 
the pope Innocent, in presence of all the cardinals, saying 
that Richard, king of England, had given him the said abbacy 
of Glastonbury, to hold the same for life, and that afterwards, 
listening to bad advice, he had unjustly taken it from him ; 
he also constantly affirmed, being prepared in every way to 
prove the same, that in ancient times there was at Glastonbury 
an episcopal see, which is the one now at Bath ; and he de- 
manded restitution to be made to him thereof, that he might 
be enabled to transfer thither the episcopal see which is now 
at Bath. 

Immediately on the death of king Richard, Philip, king of 
France, made a hostile attack on the city of Evreux, and took 
it, and subjugated the whole of that county. 

In the same year, on Saint Patrick's day, that is, on the six- 
teenth day before the calends of April, being the fourth day of 
the week, Jocelyn, the venerable bishop of Glasgow, departed 
this life, at Melrose, of which place he had been the revered 
abbat ; and was buried there, in the choir of the monks, on the 
northern side of the church. 

On the death of pope Celestinus and the election of pope In- 
nocent in his place, Canute, king of the Danes, sent envoys to 
Rome, to wait upon pope Innocent, and to complain to him of 
Philip, king of France, who had unjustly repudiated his wife 
Botilda, his sister, and taken another wife in her stead. He 
also made complaint to our lord the pope, against William, 
archbishop of Rheims, and the other bishops, counts, and barons 
of France, through whom this divorce had been effected between 
the king of France, and queen Botilda, after appeal made by 
her to our lord the pope. Accordingly, at the instance of Ca- 
nute, king of the Danes, our lord the pope Innocent gave orders 
to Peter of Capua, the cardinal, and legate of the Apostolic See, 
to use every possible endeavour to induce the king of France 
to put away his adulteress, and to take again his wife Botilda, 
and if he should not do so, to pronounce sentence of interdict 
upon the kingdom of France. 



456 ANNALS OF HOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1199. 



KING JOHN. 

ON the decease of Kichard, king of England, John, earl of 
Mortaigne, his brother, who was then staying in Normandy, 
immediately sent to England, Hubert, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, and WilliamMarshal, earl of Striguil, in order to preserve 
the peace in England, together with Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, the 
justiciary of England, and other barons of the kingdom. John 
himself then proceeded to Chinon, where the treasures of his 
brother were; which Robert de Turnham, who had the 
charge thereof, delivered up to him,, together with the castle of 
Chinon, the castle of Saumur, and others of the king's castles 
of which he had the charge. Thomas de Furnes, however, the 
nephew of the before-named Robert de Turnham, delivered to 
Arthur, duke of Brittany, the city and castle of Anjou. For 
the chief men of Anjou, Maine, and Touraine, had met together, 
and given in their adhesion to Arthur, duke of Brittany, as 
their liege lord, saying that it was their opinion and the custom 
of those parts, that the son of the elder brother should succeed 
to what was due to him as his patrimony, namely, the inheri- 

B 



tance which Geoffrey, earl of Brittany. 
would have hacTTFhe had survived Richard, king of "EnglanH, 
his brother ; and, consequently, they delivered up to Arthur, 
Anjou, Touraine, and Maine. On this, Constance, countess of 
Brittany, the mother of Arthur, came to Touraine, and delivered 
to Philip, king of France, her son Arthur ; whom the king of 
France immediately sent to Paris, to be placed in the charge of 
his son Louis, and seized the cities, castles, and fortresses that 
belonged to Arthur, and gave them in charge to keepers ap- 
pointed by himself. 

John, earl of Mortaigne, however, came to Le Mans, and 
captured the castle and the city ; after which, he levelled the 
walls of the city, the castle, and the houses in the city that 
were built of stone, and made the citizens prisoners, because 
they, against the fealty which they had sworn to himself, had 
received Arthur as their lord. John, earl of Mortaigne, was 
at Beaufort, in Anjou, on Easter day, which fell on the four- 
teenth day before the calends of May. The said earl then 
proceeded to Rouen, and, on the Lord's day, being the octave of 
Easter, and the seventh day before the calends of May, and the 
feast of Saint Mark the Evangelist, was girt with the sword 



A.D. 1199. KING OF THE SCOTS SENDS ENVOYS TO NORMANDY. 457 

of the dukedom of Normandy, in the mother church of that 
city, by the hand of "Walter, archbishop of Kouen ; on which 
occasion, the before-named archbishop placed on the head of 
the duke, a circlet of gold, having on the top thereof, around 
the border, roses worked in gold. The duke made oath in the 
presence of the clergy and the people, upon the relics of the 
Saints and the Holy Evangelists, that he would preserve the 
Holy Church and its dignities inviolate, with good faith and 
without evil intent, and would exercise strict justice, and destroy 
unjust laws, and establish good ones. 

In the meantime, queen Eleanor, the mother of the 
said duke, and Marchades, with his B/outiers, entered An- 
jou, and ravaged it, because its people had received Ar- 
thur. Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, and William 
Marshal, who had been sent to preserve the peace in 
England, made the subjects of that kingdom, both in the 
cities, as also the boroughs, and the earls, and barons, and 
freholders, swear fealty, and to observe the peace towards John, 
duke of the Normans, son of king Henry, the son of the em- 
press Matilda, against all men. However, the whole of the 
bishops, as well as such earls and barons as had castles, 
strengthened the same with men, provisions, and arms. Upon 
this, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, William Marshal, and 
Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, justiciary of England, met at Northampton, 
and summoning before them those persons of whom they had 
the greatest doubts, namely, David, brotherof thekingof theScots,~~^i 
Eichard, earl of Clare, Eanulph, earl of Chester, William, earl / 
of Tewkesbury, Walran, earl of Warwick, Roger, constable of 
Chester, William de Mowbray, and many others, earls as well 
as barons, they pledged their word to them, that John, duke of 
Normandy, would give to each of them his due, if they would 
preserve their fealty to him, and keep the peace. Accordingly, 
on these terms, the aforesaid earls and barons swore fealty and 
faithful service to John, duke of Normandy, against all men. 

William, king of the Scots, however, sent his envoys to 
John, duke of Normandy, demanding restitution of his patri- 
mony, namely, Northumberland and Cumberland, with their 
appurtenances, on which he would swear fealty to him, and 
faithfully serve him against all men. But the archbishop of 
Canterbury, William Marshal, and Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, would 
not allow the messengers of the king of Scotland to cross 



458 ANNAiS OF HO'SEE BE HOYEDEN. A.D. 1199, 

over to the duke ; but sent word to him by earl David, his 
brother, that he must wait with patience until such time as the 
duke should come into England. In like manner, John, duke 
of Normandy, sent word to "\jJJiani,_king O f ^e g co t Sj by 
Eustace de Yesci, his son-in-law, thatfon KFreturn " tolSgland, 
he would satisfy him on all his demands, if in the meantime 
he would keep the peace towards himself. 

In the meantime, Master Honorius, who, through the royal 
power and the malice of the dean and chapter of York, had 
been deprived of the archdeaconry of Bichmond, which Geoffrey, 
archbishop of York, had conferred on him, was received in the 
said archdeaconry by the clergy of the said archdeaconry, who 
swore to him fealty and canonical obedience, after expelling 
the officers of Koger of Saint Edmund's, who had been intruded 
by means of the royal power and the authority of the dean 
and chapter of York. On the other hand, the dean and chapter 
of York excommunicated the before-named Honorius and his 
abettors for such presumptuous conduct ; on which the duke of 
Normandy ordered that all the rights of the church of York 
should remain in the same state in which they were on the day 
on which his brother Richard, king of England, had been alive 
and dead. 

Shortly after, the said duke John crossed over from Normandy 
into England, and landed at Scorham, 35 on the eighth day 
before the calends of June, being the third day of the week, 
and, on the next day, that is to say, on the vigil of the Ascen- 
sion of our Lord, came to London, for the purpose of being 
crowned on the following day. 

Accordingly, upon the arrival of the before-named duke, 
there assembled in London Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, 
John, archbishop of Dublin, the archbishop of Ragusa, William, 
bishop of London, Gilbert, bishop of Rochester, John, bishop 
of Norwich, Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, Eustace, bishop of Ely, 
Godfrey, bishop of Winchester, Henry, bishop of Exeter, Sefrid, 
bishop of Chichester, Geoffrey, bishop of Coventry, Savaric, 
bishop of Bath, Herbert, bishop of Salisbury, Philip, bishop of 
Durham, Roger, bishop of Saint Andrew's in Scotland, and 
Henry, bishop of Llandaff, Robert, earl of Leicester, Richard, 
earl of Clare, William, earl of Tewkesbury, Hamelin, earl of 
Warenne, William, earl of Salisbury, William, earl of Striguil, 
Walran, earl of Warwick, earl Roger Bigot, William, earl of 
85 Shoreham. 



A.D. 1199. BISHOP OF DUBHAM SENT TO THE XING OF SCOTS. 459 

Arundel, Eanulph, earl of Chester, and many barons. Hubert, 
archbishop of Canterbury, crowned and consecrated the before- 
named John, duke of Normandy, king of England, in the church 
of Saint Peter the Apostle, at Westminster, on the sixth day 
before the calends of June, being the fifth day of the week, 
and the day of the Ascension of our Lord ; Philip, bishop of 
Durham, protesting against the same, on the ground that the 
coronation ought not to take place in the absence of Geoffrey, 
archbishop of York, primate of all England. 

On the day of his coronation, king John girded "William 
Marshal with the sword of the earldom of Striguil, and Geof- 
frey Fitz-Peter with the sword of the earldom of Essex ; which 
parties, although they had been before styled earls, and had 
had the management of their counties, had not been girded with 
the swords of their earldoms ; and on the same day, being girded 
with their swords, they served at the king's table. 

On the day also of his coronation, the said king conferred 
on Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, his chancellorship. While 
he was exulting in the power so conferred on him, and boast- 
ing greatly of his favour with the king, Hugh Bardolph an- 
swered him : " My lord, by your leave I say it, if you really 
were well to consider the power of your name, and the dignity 
of your position, you would not impose on yourself the yoke 
of slavery ; for we have never seen or heard of a chancellor 
being made out of an archbishop, but we have seen an arch-_ 
bishop made out of a chancellor." 

' In the meantime, William, prior of May, "Walter, prior of 
the Island of Saint Columba, and William de Haye, who had 
been sent on behalf of William, king of Scotland, came to John, 
king of England ; and, through them, the king of Scotland de- 
manded of the king of England Northumberland and Cum- 
berland, with their appurtenances, in right of inheritance from 
his father. He also promised that if the king should restore 
them to him, he would faithfully serve him with all his might ; 
but if not, he would, if he possibly could, obtain the whole of his 
rights. To this, king John made answer : "When your master, 
the king of the Scots, my much-loved cousin, shall come to 
me, I will do for him what is just, both in relation to this and 
his other demands." 

After this, John, king of England, sent Philip, bishop of 
Durham, to meet the king of the Scots, hoping that he would 
come at his command ; and he, in the meantime, came to Not- 



460 AKJTALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A. D.I 199. 

tingham, and remained there on the day of Pentecost, and 
stayed in those parts, awaiting the arrival of the king of Scot- 
land. However, the king of Scotland refused to come, but 
sent again to the king of England, Eoger, bishop of Saint An- 
drew's, and Hngh Malebise, whom the king of England had 
sent for him, and demanded that the king of England should 
restore to him Northumberland and Cumberland ; and if he 
did not, he was to know for certain that, to the best of his 
ability, he would gain possession of the same ; and for receiving 
the king's answer on the subject, he appointed a truce of forty 
days, while he himself, in the meantime, levied a large army. 
On this, the bishop of Saint Andrew's, and Richard 36 Malebise, 
followed the king of England as he was hastening towards 
the sea-shore. 

In the meanwhile, John, king of England, had delivered to 
William de Stuteville Northumberland and Cumberland, with 
the castles and earldoms thereof, to be held in his charge, 
a charge which Hugh Bardolph had~ previously held. He also 
gave in charge to Roger de Lascy, constable of Chester, his 
castle of Pomfret, having first received from him his son and 
heir as an hostage. The king next ordered Stephen de Turn- 
ham, who had now for nearly two years held the archbishopric 
of York in his charge, to deliver up the custody of the said 
archbishopric to Master Ralph de Kime, William Ward, 
and Roger de Bavent, on behalf of the archbishop ; on which, 
the said Stephen wrote to the following effect to all his ser- 
vants : 

" Stephen de Turnham, to all his servants throughout the 
manors of the lord archbishop of York, greeting. Our lord the 
king has, by his letters, commanded me to deliver up the cus- 
tody of the manors of the lord archbishop of York to Master 
Ralph de Kime, William Ward, and, with them, Roger de 
Bavent, on his behalf : and has ordered that the proceeds of 
the manors are to be laid out in the cultivation of the lands, 
and the repair of the boundaries Wherefore I do command 
you, when the persons before-named, or their deputies, shall 
come to you, to deliver up to them, without delay and diffi- 
culty, the charge of the said manors. Farewell." 

This was accordingly done : but t^e_ king, acting upon bad 
advice, after the time of Pentecost, retained in his own hands 
the rents of the manors ; making promise, that on the return 
3 Qy. if not " Hugh." 



.,.D. 1199. THE KING OF FEASCE MAKES SEVEEAL PEISONEBS. 461 

of the archbishop, he would pay them all to him. As for the 
archbishop of Y~ork, after settling his affairs, as previously 
stated, he had proceeded eight days' journey on his road home- 
wards, when, hearing of the death of king Richard, he returned 
to Rome, in order to make such alterations in his affairs as the 
turn of events should require. 

John, king of England, after settling his affairs in England, 
crossed over from England to Normandy, and landed at Dieppe, 
on the Lord's day, shortly before the feast of the Nativity of 
Saint John the Baptist ; and on the day of the Nativity of 
Saint John he was at Rouen, where a multitude of horse, and an 
army of foot, came nocking in to him from every quarter; imme- 
diately after which, a truce was agreed upon between him and 
the king of France, until the day after the Assumption of Saint 
Mary. On the very day of the conference. Geoffrey, archbishop 
of York, having settled his affairs with our lord the pope to his 
heart's content, returned into Normandy, and was honorably 
and affectionately received by his brother John. 

In the meantime, Philip, earl of Flanders, did homage to 
John, king of England, at Rouen, on the sixth day of the 
week before the Assumption of Saint Mary ; and the brother 
of the said earl of Flanders voluntarily resigned into the hands 
of Geoffrey, the archbishop of York, the prebend of Husthwaite, 
which he had held in the church of York at the presentation of 
Richard, king of England. The same was done by many others, 
who felt that those presentations had been made against 
God, and to the detriment of the Holy Church. Immediately 
on this, the said archbishop gave to the before-mentioned bro- 
ther of the earl of Flanders the prebend which had belonged to 
Peter de Dinant, in the church of Saint Peter at York ; for 
the said Peter had, before this, been elected to the bishopric of 
Rennes, in Brittany ; the archbishop also ordered the arch- 
deaconry of West Riding, which he had held in the church of 
York, to be taken possession of in his behalf : but Adam de 
Tornouere, who at this time held possession of the said arch- 
deaconry, declined to trust him, relying on the king's patron- 
age and the authority of the chapter of York. 

In the meantime, Jlenry, count de Namur, brother of Philip, 
earl of Flanders, and Peter de Douay, a most valiant knight, 
and one of theTEousehold of the earl of Flanders, and the bishop 
elect of Cambray, brother of the before-named Peter, were 
made prisoners by some of the household of the king of France, 



462 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOYEDEN. A.D. 1199. 

and delivered up to him. On this, Peter de Capua, car- 
dinal, and legate of the Apostolic See in France, upon his 
arrival, laid an interdict upon France, for the capture of 
the said bishop elect of Cambray, . and upon Normandy, for 
the captivity of Philip, bishop of Beauvais : and, before the 
said sentence was revoked, Philip, king of France, set the 
before-named bishop elect at liberty, and John, king of Eng- 
land, gave his liberty to Philip, bishop of Beauvais, after he 
had paid two thousand marks of silver for the expenses in- 
curred upon him and through him in the time of Eichard, king 
of England, and since the death of king Eichard up to the day 
of his liberation. The said bishop of Beauvais also made oath, 
in presence of the before-named cardinal and other eccle- 
siastics, that for the future he would never, in all his life, bear 
arms against Christians. 

Philip, king of France [at this time], made Arthur, duke of 
Brittany, a knight, and received his homage for Anjou, Poitou, 
Maine, Touraine, Brittany, and Normandy. On the day after 
the Assumption of Saint Mary, and the following day, there was 
a conference held between the king of England and the king 
of France, through their envoys, at a place between Buttevant 
and Guleton, and on the third day after, the kings had an in- 
terview in person. However, the king of England found no 
favour with the king of France ; and, on the king of France 
being asked why he held John, king of England, in such great 
hatred, who had never done him any injury, he made answer, 
that he had, without his permission, taken possession of Nor- 
mandy and other territories ; and that he ought first to have come 
to him, and to have asked them of him as of his right, and to have 
done homage to him for the same. At this interview also, the 
king of France demanded, on his own behalf, the whole of 
the Yexin, that is to say, the whole of the country that lies 
between the forest of Lyons, the Seine, the river Andely, and 
the river Ethe. For he asserted that Geoffrey, earl of Anjou, 
the father of king Henry, son of the empress Matilda, had 
given the same to Louis the Fat, the king of the Franks, in 
return for his assistance in gaining Normandy, against Stephen, 
king of England. He also demanded, on behalf of Arthur, 
Poitou, Anjou, Maine, and Touraine, and made other requests 
to which the king of England would on no account accede, 
nor ought he so to have done ; and so disagreeing, they sepa- 
rated. 



A.D. 1199. THE KING OF FBANCE BESIEGES LAVABDItf. 463 

Upon this, the counts and barons of the kingdom of France 
who had adhered to Eichard, king of England, came to John, 
king of England, and did homage to king John, and made oath 
to him that they would not make terms with the king of 
France, unless with his sanction and consent ; and he swore to 
them that he would make no treaty with the king of France, 
unless they were included therein. 

In the meantime, pope Innocent and the Romans elected as 
their emperor, Otho, king of Germany, and rejected Philip, 
duke of Suabia, and all the others who had been selected. 
Accordingly, the election of the said Otho being confirmed by 
pope Innocent and the Roman Church, pope Innocent proceeded 
to excommunicate Philip, duke of Suabia, and all his adherents, 
advisers, and abettors, if they should not desist from their 
attacks upon the said Otho ; who was publicly proclaimed in 
the Capitol and throughout the whole of the city, in the words, 
"Long live our emperor Otho!" Accordingly, being elected 
emperor, Otho sent word to John, king of England, his uncle, 
to wait a little time, and defer making peace with Philip, king 
of France, as he himself, God willing, would, before long, give 
him the very best aid that his imperial highness could possibly 
give him. 

In the meantime, Philip, king of France, took Conches, the 
castle of Roger de Toni ; this happened in the month of Sep- 
tember. 

In the same month of September, Joanna, wife of Raymond, 
earl of Saint Gilles, the former queen of Sicily, and sister of 
John, king of England, departed this life, at Rouen, in Nor- 
mandy ; and, being carried to the abbey of Fontevraud, was 
there interred among the nuns. 

In the month of October the king of France took the castle 
of Balun, of which Geoffrey de Burelim had charge, and le- 
velled it with the ground. When "William des Roches, the 
leader of Arthur's army, knew of this, he was greatly vexed, 
and strongly censured the king of France, saying that it had not 
been so arranged between him and his lord Arthur ; to which 
the king of France made answer, that for his lord Arthur 
he should not forbear doing just as he pleased with reference 
to his gains from the enemy. 

After this, the king of France laid siege to Lavardin, but 
the king of England surprised him with his army, and the king 
of France, abandoning the siege, betook himself to the city of 



464 ANJTALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1199. 

Le Mans. However, on the king of England pursuing him 
with his army, the king of France left Le Mans, and took his 
departure. In the meantime, "William des Koches, by means of 
extreme cunning, recovered Arthur from the hands of the king 
of France, and made peace between him and John, king of 
England, to whom he delivered the city of Le Mans, which the 
king of France and Arthur had delivered into his charge. 

On the same day, Arthur was informed that the king of 
England intended to take him and throw him into prison. On 
this day also, the viscount de Tuaz, 36 who had charge of the 
castle of Chinon, came to the king of England, at his summons, 
at Le Mans, and, being forced so to do, surrendered to the king 
the castle of Chinon, and the seneschalship of Anjou ; on which 
the king of England 37 immediately delivered the castle of Chi- 
non into the charge of Roger, constable of Chester, until such 
time as the king should have found another custodian for the 
same. 

On the following night, however, Arthur, and his mother, 
and the said viscount de Tuaz, with many others, left the king 
of England and took their departure, and withdrew to the city 
of Anjou. For the mother of Arthur, having left her husband, 
Ranulph, earl of Chester, had married Guido de Tuaz, the 
brother of the before-named viscount de Tuaz. 

On the sixth day before the ides of July, in this year, died 
Hugh, bishop elect of the church of Glasgow, and was buried 
at Geddewerde. 38 In the month of October, in the same year, 
William Malvoisin was elected bishop of the church of Glasgow. 

In the meantime, Peter de Capua, cardinal, and legate of the 
Apostolic^ See, who had been sent by Innocent, the Supreme 
Pontiff, for the purpose of putting an end to the dissensions 
between Richard, king of England; and Philip, king of France, 
and at whose instance the said kings had promised that they 
would observe a truce for the space of five years, now that 
the said truce had failed, in consequence of the death of Richard, 
king of England, used every possible effort that the said truce 
should be observed between the king of France before named, 
and John, king of England, the heir of the before-named 
Richard. The consequence was, that a truce was agreed to. 
between them until the feast of Saint Hilary. In the san*J| 
year, Philip, bastard son of Richard, king of England, to whom 
36 Probably " Thouars." 37 " France," incorrectly in the text. 
38 Jedburgh. 



A. D. 1199. DISPUTE WITH THE ARCHBISHOP OF YOBK. 465 

the said king, his father, had given the castle and the manor 
of Cuinac, 39 slew the before-named viscount of Limoges, in re- 
venge for his father. 

In the same year, there were in England, and the various 
parts thereof, such vast floods of water that bridges, mills, 
and houses, were carried away. The bridge of Berwick having 
been carried away, by command of William, king of the Scots, 
earl Patrick, the governor of Berwick, and the then chief justi- 
ciary of the whole kingdom of Scotland, attempted to rebuild 
the bridge ; on which he was forbidden, on behalf of Philip, 
bishop of Durham, to sink a foundation for a bridge on his land ; 
but the bridge could not be made unless it had its foundation on 
the land of the bishop of Durham, -as it had before. At length, 
however, the bishop of Durham, by the advice of William de 
Stuteville, allowed the bridge to be made, and to have its 
foundation on his own land, saving always the covenants that 
had been made between the king of Scotland and Hugh, bishop 
of Durham, his predecessor. 

In the same year, Geoffrey, the archbishop of York, Simon, 
the dean, Haimo, the treasurer, Reginald, the precentor, Adam 
de Tornouere, and William Testard, the archdeacons, and the 
other canons of the church of York, having met in the presence 
of Peter de Capua, cardinal deacon and titular of Saint Mary 
de Via Lata, and legate of the Apostolic See, Geoffrey, arch- 
bishop of York, and the above-named clergy of the church of 
York, submitted the decision of their disputes to Hugh, the 
lord bishop of Lincoln, Master Eoger, dean of the said church, 
and Master Columba; on which occasion, the archbishop pro- 
mised, on the word of truth, that if he should refuse to abide 
by the decision of the before-named arbitrators, he would pay 
to the dean and canons of York two hundred marks by way of 
penalty ; the dean also, and the before-named clergy of the 
church of York, made oath distinctly that they would not re- 
fuse to abide by the decision of the before-named arbitrators, 
but would dutifully receive and dutifully observe whatever 
should be determined by them. 

After this, when the officers of the archbishop of York, on va- 
rious grounds, attempted, by the pope's letters, to summon them 
to trial before other judges, they made claim against the arch- 
bishop of the said two hundred marks of silver, by way of 
penalty. Also, while the said archbishop was staying with the 
39 Now Cognac. 

VOL. U. H H 












466 ANNALS OF ROGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1199, 

king in Normandy, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, and 
Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, the king's justiciary, at the entreaties, and 
in behalf of, the chapter of York, sent word to the king and 
advised him not to allow the archbishop of York to return to 
England without him, for, they declared, if he should come into 
England, he would be bringing a sword, and not peace. 

Some Statutes enacted ly Iting John. 

In the same year, John, king of England, enacted that no 
wine of Poitou should be sold at a higher rate than twenty 
shillings the tun, and that no wine of Anjou should be sold 
V at a higher rate than twenty-four shillings the tun, and that 
$ no French wine should be sold at a higher rate than twenty- 
five shillings the tun ; unless the said wine was so good 
that any one would be willing to give for it as much as 
two marks at the highest. He also enacted, that no wine of 
Poitou should be sold at a higher rate than fourpence the gallon ; 
and that no white wine should be sold at a higher rate than 
, sixpence the gallon. He also enacted, that all the tuns which 
should in future come into England from Rech, 40 after the 
present vintage, should be changed. This statute he ordered 
to be observed from the octave of Saint Andrew in De- 
cember and thenceforward ; and, for the observance thereof, 
ordered that in every city and borough in which wine is sold 
twelve inspectors should be appointed, and should make oath 
that they would cause the said assize to be kept and observed. 
And, if they should find any vintner selling wine at the tap 
contrary to the said assize, the sheriff was to arrest his body, 
and have him kept in safe custody in the prison of our lord 
the king, until he should have some other command relative to 
him, and all his goods were to be seized on behalf of our lord 
the king, on view of the said twelve men. If any one was also 
found who should buy or sell a tun or tuns contrary to the said 
assize, both parties were to be seized, and placed in safe custody 
in prison, until some other command should be received rela- 
tive to them; and it was enacted, that no wine should be bought 
for regrating, out of the wines that should have been landed in 
England. 

However, this first ordinance of the king had hardly been 
enacted, when it was immediately done away with ; as the 
merchants could not bear up against this assize. Accordingly, 
40 Rochelle. 



A.D. 1199. DISPUTE OF THE CHURCHES OF TOTJES AND DOL. 467 

leave was given them to sell a gallon of white wine for eight- 
pence, and a gallon of red wine for sixpence ; and so the land 
was filled with drink and drinkers. 

In the same year, when William, king of the Scots, was 
purposing to invade England with an army, he went to the 
shrine of Saint Margaret, the former queen of the Scots, at 
Dunfermline, and passed the night there; on which, being 
warned by a Divine admonition not to invade England with an 
army, he allowed his army to return to their homes. 

In the same year was decided that most ancient dispute 
between the churches of Tours and Dol, as to the metropolitan 
rights which the church of Dol claimed against the church of 
Tours, in the following manner : Our lord the pope Celestinus, 
of blessed memory, had determined that, with the Lord's as- 
sistance, in his time an end should be put to this most ancient 
and most lamentable dispute, which had been carried on be- 
tween the churches of Tours and Dol. Accordingly, for this 
purpose he had appointed to each party a peremptory day, on 
which, being sufficiently provided with all their reasons which 
they might consider that they should be in want of at the 
trial, all appeals, delays, and excuses laid aside, they were to 
appear in the Apostolic presence. But, inasmuch as it was 
not granted from above that the above-mentioned question 
should be settled by him (for he was removed from the world 
before the appointed time had arrived), our lord the pope In- 
nocent, formerly Lothaire, cardinal deacon of Saints Sergius 
and Bachus, on succeeding the said lord Celestinus, adopting 
the commencement that had been made by his predecessor 
relative to the above-mentioned question by the citation of the 
parties, and wishing by a discussion on the matter, with the 
help of the Lord, entirely to put an end thereto, for the same 
reason, gave orders that the parties should repair to the E-oman 
Church, in order that the said matter might be brought to an 
end by him, if, perchance, Divine Providence should spare 
him. 

Because the archbishop of Tours at this time was labouring 
under very great infirmity in all his body, he did not appear 
in person in presence of the Supreme Pontiff' ; however, he took 
care to send discreet and prudent men in his place, namely, the 
chancellor of his church and three of his fellow-canons, together 
with some other persons. Accordingly, the bishop of Dol elect, and 
the before-named commissioners of the said archbishop, having 



468 ANNALS OF EOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1199. 

come into the presence of the Supreme Pontiff and the cardinals, 
his brethren, and many things having been alleged on the one 
side and the other, in defence of their rights, the said lord In- 
nocent began, like a most kind father, as also did his brethren, 
to attempt to effect a reconciliation between them ; and in order 
that they might have time to deliberate, he put off the further 
hearing of either party at intervals. 

Although the commissioners from Tours were at last induced 
to make an offer to concede an archiepiscopal see to the church 
of Dol, with two suffragans only, and on condition that it should 
be subject to the lord archbishop of Tours as its prince, and that 
the archbishop of Dol should receive from his hand, or that of 
the church of Tours, the pall that was sent to the said church 
of Tours from the pope, as also consecration; still, because 
two of the adjacent bishoprics were refused by the envoys of 
the archbishop of Tours to the said bishop elect of Dol, he 
would on no account accept of their said offer ; a refusal in- 
deed, which redounded to his own inconvenience, as will be 
heard in the sequel. 

Accordingly, the pope, seeing that the said dispute could not 
be settled on amicable terms, listened to the citations and alle- 
gations made on either side in full consistory, more freely and 
fully than before. After hearing and understanding them 
more fully, he was ready at length, with his brethren, to 
pronounce a definite sentence. But, once more seeking the 
ways of peace, he invited them to make an arrangement. 

When, however, he could at length avail nothing whatever 
by these means, the lord Innocent, sitting in judgment, his 
brethren acting as his assessors, publicly pronounced sentence, 
in the second year of his papacy, against the church of Dol, 
and in favour of the church of Tours, to the effect that the 
church of Dol, as being the suffragan of the church of Tours, its 
metropolitan, should, all exemption or exception laid aside, 
for the future be subject thereto; that the bishop of Dol should 
in all things pay obedience and respect to the archbishop of 
Tours ; that when he was elected, he should receive confirma- 
tion, and, when the proper time required it, consecration from 
him ; and, in addition to this, he granted a general privilege to 
the church of Tours, illustrated with manifold arguments and 
reasons for the same, and sent to the archbishop of Kouen, and 
some other persons, his Apostolic writings relative to the said 
subject, all of which will appear more fully from what follows. 



A.D. 1199. THE CHUBCH OF DOL DEPRIVED OF THE PALL. 469 

But when the bishop elect of Dol heard that sentence was 
pronounced against him, being vexed, and not without reason, 
and very dispirited, he came into the presence of our lord the 
pope, and, wishing to depose himself, resigned to our lord the 
pope the church of Dol. But our lord the pope, on seeing this, 
answered without hesitation, " Thou art the bridegroom, and 
the bride requireth thee. Thou canst not do that which is 
against our will, without our own consent ; and, in virtue of thy 
obedience, we enjoin thee, after summons made by the arch- 
bishop of Tours, to repair to him within the space of forty days, 
all excuse whatever laid aside, for the purpose of receiving 
from him the gift of consecration." 

In the same year, master Giraldus, 41 the bishop elect of Saint 
David's, raised a controversy as to the metropolitan right over 
the church of Saint David's, publicly asserting the right of the 
said church and its ancient metropolitan dignity, in presence 
of our lord the pope Innocent the Third, and the cardinals, 
namely, Octavianus, cardinal of Ostia, the cardinal of Por- 
tuenza, John, cardinal bishop of Albano, Jordan de Fossa Nova, 
Sephred, John de Saint Paul, John de Salerno, Gratianus, 
Ugolino, and Hugeson. 42 

It ought to be known that after Saint Dubricius, the arch- 
bishop of the city of Chester, choosing the life of a recluse, had 
resigned the honor of his dignity to Saint David, the latter 
forthwith transferred the archiepiscopal dignity to Menevia, 43 and 
was made archbishop of that province ; and, in succession to 
him, twenty-four persons received the pall and the full metro- 
politan dignity, the last of whom was Saint Samson, who, on ac- 
count of the jaundice, which pestilence was committing fatal 
ravages amongst the people of Wales at that time, crossed over by 
ship to Armorican Brittany, and was appointed over the church 
of Dol, which then chanced to be vacant, and there made use of 
the pall of Saint David, which he had brought over with him. 

On this pretext it was, that the church of Dol, by continually 
laying claim to the pall, had shown itself rebellious to the church 
of Tours, down to the time of the before-named pope Innocent 
the Third, in whose second year this cause was decided, and 
this adventitious dignity was withdrawn from the church of 
Dol. 

41 Giraldus Cambrensis, the famous scholar and historian. 

42 Or Ugutio, called by some authors Hugh de Peter Leonis. 

43 The Latin name formed from the British one of Saint David's. 



470 AJfNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEtf. A.D. 1199. 

As for the church of Saint David's, from the same cause, 
either through slothfulness or poverty, its bishops had always 
hitherto gone without the pall. Still, however, all the bishops 
of the church of Saint David's, that is to say, nineteen bishops, 
from the departure of Saint Samson until the time of Henry, 
the first king of England, enjoyed the whole of the archiepis- 
copal dignity, except the pall, and had seven suffragans, 
namely, Llandaff, Saint Paternus in Kerdikan, 44 (which see, 
because the people thereof slew their pastor, had been long since 
abolished, and united with the diocese of Saint David's), Bangor 
and Saint Asaph ; while in Wales, beyond the Severn, which 
had been lately taken possession of by the English, there were 
the bishoprics of Chester, Hereford, and Worcester. 

However, the before-named king Henry, having rendered 
"Wales subject to his rule, and, consequently, wishing to ren- 
der the said church of Saint David's, and the other churches 
in Wales, suffragans of the church of Saint David's, subject to 
the church of his own kingdom, namely, to the church of Can- 
terbury, had Bernard, the clerk of his chamber, appointed in 
place of bishop Wilfrid, in the church of Saint David's, and 
then, by violent measures, had him consecrated at Canterbury ; 
he being the first bishop of the church of Saint David's who 
was consecrated by the archbishop of Canterbury. After him, 
David and Peter were in like manner compelled by the kings 
of England to receive consecration from the archbishops of 
Canterbury, oaths having been previously extorted from them, 
in contravention of the canons, not at any time to raise any 
dispute as to their metropolitan right against the church of 
Canterbury. 

Bernard, however, on the decease of king Henry the First, 
did move the question, as to the metropolitan rights of his 
church, against Theobald, archbishop of Canterbury ; on which 
occasion, pope Eugenius wrote to Theobald, archbishop of Can- 
terbury, to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Eugenius, on the metropolitan dignity of tlte 
church of Saint David's. 

" Eugenius, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his venerable brother, Theobald, archbishop of Canterbury, 
health and the Apostolic benediction. Our venerable bro- 
ther, Bernard, bishop of Saint David's, coming into our pre- 
44 Cardigan. 



A. D. 1199. THE POPE CITES THE AECHBISHOP OF CANTEEBTJEY. 471 

sence, has asserted that the church of Saint David's was for- 
merly metropolitan, and has personally demanded restitution 
to be made by us of the said dignity. When, however, watch- 
ing over the interests of his said application, he had made a long 
stay at our court, you, brother archbishop, in his presence, 
rising to oppose him, did, in our presence, make complaint 
against him, that he had withdrawn the obedience due to you 
as the chief metropolitan, and had shown himself disobedient 
and rebellious towards you, inasmuch as he had been consecrated 
by your predecessor, as being chief metropolitan, and had, both 
personally and in writing, made profession to the church of 
Canterbury, and had afterwards, like the other suffragans, shown 
obedience to you in many matters, and waited upon you. On 
this, he could not deny the fact of consecration, but utterly 
denied that he had made the profession, and had shown 
obedience ; hearing which, you publicly produced two wit- 
nesses, who gave testimony that in their seeing and hearing, 
after his consecration, both in words and writing, he had 
made profession to the see of Canterbury. Accordingly, after 
hearing the reasons of both parties, and diligently weighing 
the same, and having carefully examined your witnesses, witli 
the general sanction of our brethren, we received their depo- 
sitions upon oath, and, justice so dictating, commanded that the 
said bishop should show to you, as chief metropolitan, all obe- 
dience and respect/ "Wherefore, inasmuch as it is our wish 
to preserve for each church, and for ecclesiastical personages, 
their own dignities and what is their respective due, we have 
named a day for you and for him, the Feast of Saint Luke in 
the year nexf ensuing, upon which, in the presence of all the 
parties, we may learn the truth as to the dignity of the church 
of Saint David's and its liberties; and we will then decree rela- 
tive thereto, by the Lord's help, what shall be found to be 
conformable with justice. Given at Meaux, on the third day 
before the calends of July." 

Now this letter, the before-named Master Giraldus found in 
the register of pope Eugenius : and accordingly, on these grounds, 
and at the instance of the said Giraldus, who publicly asserted 
the rights of his church in the court of Borne, pope Innocent, 
by his letters, cited Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, as to 
the state of the church of Saint David's and the metropolitan 
dignity ; which letters the said Giraldus also caused to be en- 
tered in the register of that pope, as a perpetual testimony of 



472 ASTffALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1200. 

what had been done. The said pope also gave orders to the 
before-named archbishop, so to give consecration to the said 
Giraldus, the bishop elect of Saint David's, as not to exact 
from him the unlawful oath which his predecessors had been 
in the habit of extorting from the bishop of Saint David's, 
namely, as to not asserting their metropolitan rights against 
the church of Canterbury, but solely canonical obedience ac- 
ording to the usual form. The said pope also commanded 
the bishops of Lincoln, Durham, and Ely, if the archbishop of 
Canterbury should delay to consecrate Giraldus, so often named, 
that they, supported therein by the Apostolic authority, should 
not delay to consecrate him themselves. 

In the year of grace 1200, which was the second year of 
the reign of king JoKn, thaiTking was at Burun, in Normandy, 
iW Pithe_day_Qf_the ^ajivity_^.l_our Lord, which fell on Satur- 
day ; and this was the first Feast of the Nativity of our Lord 
after the first coronation of king John. After the Nativity of 
our Lord, the said John, king of England, and Philip, king of 
France,' met to hold a conference between Andely and Gaillon ; 
at which interview, it was agreed between them, that Louis, 
son of the king of France, should take to wife the daughter of 
Alphonso, king of Castille, and niece of John, king of Eng- 
land ; on which, king John would give and quitclaim to the 
said son of the king of France, together with his said niece, the 
city of Evreux, together with the whole county thereof, and 
all the fortresses and castles which the king of France had in 
Normandy, on the day on which Richard, king of England, 
was living and dead ; besides which, he was to give him thirty 
thousand marks of silver. He also made oath, that he would 
^givje_no_aid_to his nephew 0th o, either in money or in men, for 
the purpose^ of gaining tEe Roman empire. 

All these matters, however, were put off until the octave of 
the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist. After the conference, 
John, king of England, sent his mother, Eleanor, to Alphonso, 
king of Castille, to obtain his daughter in marriage for Louis, 
son of Philip, king of France. 

Jin the meantime, John, king of England, crossed over 
from Normandy into England, and levied from each carucatc 
throughout all England the sum of three shillings as an aid. 
"St'Xcnt, king John came to York, expecting that William, 
king of the Scots, would come to him, as he had commanded 



A.D. 1200. LETTER OF POPE INNOCENT. 473 

him ; the king of the Scots, however, did not come ; on which, 
the king of England returned to Normandy. 

In the same year, pope Innocent, on hearing of the tribu- 
lations of the Christians in the land of Jerusalem, which the 
Lord had brought upon them, our sins demanding the same, 
wrote to all the prelates of Holy Mother Church, to the fol- 
lowing effect : 

TJie Letter of pope Innocent on giving succour to the land of 
Jerusulem. 

" Innocent, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to all 
the prelates of the Holy Mother Church to whom these letters 
shall come, health and the Apostolic benediction. The sad 
miseries of the lands of the East, and their urgent necessities, 
we now are, our sins demanding the same, compelled to lament 
rather than recount ; inasmuch as it is a matter of necessity 
that succour should be given thereto, in their present state, (if 
state, indeed, the train of calamities can be called, which with 
grief we recite), and that resistance should be offered to the 
attempts of the pagans. It may, indeed, be supposed, that but 
few of the Christians who had devoted themselves to the defence 
of the inheritance of the Lord, and to obedience to Him cruci- 
fied, will make drunk the arrows of the enemy with the shed- 
ding of their blood, and expose their throats to the swords 
of the pagans, inasmuch, as by this, nearly all the pilgrims 
have returned from those parts, as so many remnants of the 
desolation of that land, to be totally lost without any hope 
of human aid, and to fall into the possession of the foe. 
Hitherto, indeed, our Lord Jesus Christ, to the end that He 
might the more strongly prove our faith, and might find who are 
His own, has, in His mercy, prevented this, by turning their 
hands against themselves, and allowing them, in their various 
dissensions, to vent their rage upon each other, in order that, 
in the meantime, the Christians being aroused to the aid oi the 
said land, a more easy means might be granted them of reco- 
vering what was lost, and of triumphing over the foe. For we 
have received letters from our venerable brethren, the Patriarchs 
of Jerusalem and Antioch, and from the archbishops and bishops 
of both provinces, as also, in like manner, from our most dearly 
beloved sons in Christ, Aimeric, king of Jerusalem, and Leo, 
king of Armenia, and our own dearly beloved sons, the Masters 
of the Hospital and of the knights of the Temple, and many 



474 ANNALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

others, fully explaining the miseries and necessities of that 
land, and asking for the aid that was so long looked for.; for 
that there, strong hopes were entertained, the Lord so disposing, 
that at the present time a few would be of more avail, in con- 
sequence of the dissensions among the Saracens, than hitherto 
a numerous army had been. It was also added, that, as arrange- 
ments were being made among the Saracens for the establishment 
of peace, if a full reconciliation should be effected among them 
before assistance should be given to the province of Jerusalem, in- 
asmuch as it is almost entirely destitute of men and resources, 
unless God alone should interpose, there would be no one able 
to withstand their violent attacks. Wherefore we, with our 
brethren, summoning also the bishops and other religious men 
who were then staying at the Apostolic See, after considering 
the mode of succouring that land, in order that we might not 
seem to be laying heavy burdens on the shoulders of those who 
bore them, and not to be willing to touch the same even with 
our finger, talking only, and, as the saying is, doing little or 
nothing, in order that an example might be set by ourselves to 
you, and then by you to the laity, in doing good, after the ex- 
ample of Him who began to do and to teach [at the same 
time], made it our care to_^e^_ajide_Jhe^^th_^a ! rLof _all_our 
revenu,e_s, and of all our receipts, for the assistance of the Eastern 
lands, withdrawing not the slightest portion therefrom for our 
necessities, to which indeed, inasmuch as they are more pressing 
than usual, and on that account demand a more heavy expen- 
diture, our present means do not suffice ; to the end that, although 
we were giving nothing of our own, we might, at least, repay 
to Him a small portion of what is His, who, in His mercy, 
has bestowed all things upon us. And not only in resources, 
but also in personal attendance, did we make it our anxious 
endeavour to provide the requisite aid for the Holy Land ; for 
we determined to dispatch thither our dearly beloved sons, 
Stephen, cardinal priest and titular of Saint Praxedes, and 
Peter, cardinal deacon and titular of Saint Mary in Vid Lata, 
as legates of the Apostolic See, on whom we had already placed 
the sign of the Cross, in order that they might act in our behalf 
in preceding the army of the Lord, and that, to them, as to a 
single head, all might resort. But, inasmuch as we look upon 
this as slight, aye, slight indeed, and as by no means sufficing 
to the necessities so numerous of that land, we do, by these 
Apostolic writings, command the whole of you, and I, in be- 



A.D. 1200. LETTER OF POPE nOTOCEJfT. 475 

half of Almighty God, do, by the guidance of the Holy 
Spirit, under pain of God's judgment, strictly command, that 
each of you shall appropriate the fortieth part of all ecclesias- 
ticaTje venues and profits, (interest, however, being first de- 
ducted therefrom, of which payment cannot be avoided), for 
the aid of the Holy Land. To all clerks, subordinates as well 
as prelates, who shall spontaneously and faithfully pay such 
fortieth part, trusting in the mercy of Almighty God, and in 
the authority of the blessed Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint 
Paul, we do remit one fourth part of the penance that has been 
enjoined them, supposing always, that no fraud is made use of, 
and that pious devotion is supported thereby. For know, 
that he is acting culpably and obdurately, and shows himself 
obdurately culpable, who refuses to give so small an aid, in 
such an emergent necessity, to his Creator and Redeemer, 
from whom he has received his body and his soul, and all the 
blessings that he enjoys ; and we, who, unworthy as we are, 
act as His vicar upon earth, can on no account conceal the obdu- 
racy of such an offence. And you must not by any means sup- 
pose that, by these means, it is our wish to establish a law at 
the expense of yourselves, in order that, in future, the fortieth 
part may be required of you, as due and customary ; for, on 
the contrary, we w r ish nothing whatever to result herefrom 
to your prejudice, as we grieve that a case of such great 
necessity has occurred to us and to you, and it is our wish 
that, in future, the like may not occur. We do further 
will, and by this our precept command you, that you, brother 
archbishops and bishops, shall make it your care, without 
delay, to meet in your metropolitan church, or, if it cannot 
be done there, "by reason of disagreements or any other evident 
impediment, in two or three other places of your province, 
and there consider among yourselves, according to the tenor of 
the Apostolic mandate, the succour of that land ; and, after 
each of you shall have returned into his diocese, he is to con- 
vene a synod without delay, and there, relying upon our 
authority, enjoin the abbats and priors, both exempt 43 as 
well as others, as also the archdeacons, deans, and all others 
whatsoever of the clergy throughout his diocese, appointed by 
a fair assessment to tax their revenues and profits, and within 
three months after the command so given to them, not to delay 
to send to some fitting place in his diocese the fortieth part of 
43 Exempt from the episcopal government. 



476 ANNALS OF KOGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

the value thereof; employing, nevertheless, for the sake of 
greater precaution, the services of some faithful and discreet 
laymen therein : which, also, brother archbishops and bishops, 
we do strictly command you to do. From these general terms, 
however, we have excepted the Cistercian monks, the Praemon- 
stratensian canons, and the recluses of Grammont and Can- 
terbury, to whom we give, relative to this matter, especial com- 
mands. "We are also unwilling that those who have taken 
diligent care to value their revenues and profits shall incur the 
penalty of transgressing the strict injunctions above given; 
but those who shall not of their certain knowledge, but rather 
through ignorance, have subtracted from their fortieth part, 
shall still, when they shall have afterwards found it out, fully 
make up for the deficiency they have so made in their pay- 
ment. If, also, which God forbid, any person shall withdraw, 
of his own certain knowledge, any portion of the fortieth part 
so to be paid, the same person, when he shall have made due 
satisfaction, shall be entirely free from any penalty for such 
transgression. And let not any one be surprised, or even won- 
der, that we order this with such strictness, inasmuch as it is 
an extreme necessity that demands it. For, although obedience 
to the Divine will ought to be a pleasure, we still read in the 
Gospel .that, of those invited to the marriage feast, the Lord 
gave orders that they should be compelled to go in to the same. 
"We do further command that you, brother archbishops and 
bishops, after exacting and collecting the said fortieth part 
throughout your dioceses, shall faithfully cause the same, ac- 
cording to the manner above stated, to be deposited in a place 
of safety, and shall, so soon as can possibly be done, signify 
unto us, by your letters, and through special messengers, 
the amount of the whole thereof. For this purpose, we do 
order that a hollow chest shall be placed in each of your 
churches, fastened with three keys; the first to be in the hands 
of the bishop, the second with the priest of the church, and 
the third with some pious layman, by them to be kept ; and 
each of the faithful is to be moved to deposit therein alms for 
the remission of their sins, according as the Lord shall have 
inspired their minds in relation thereto ; and in all churches 
mass shall be publicly said once a week for the remission of sins, 
and especially of those who shall make offerings. We do 
also grant unto you, brother archbishops and bishops, that, 
in relation to those who shall be willing with their property 



A.D. 1200. LETTEB, OF POPE INNOCENT. 477 

to aid the Holy Land, after, using therein the counsels of dis- 
creet men, you shall have duly considered the rank of such 
persons and their means, and shall have taken into considera- 
tion the intensity of their devotion, you shall have power to 
change works of penance that have been enjoined for works 
of almsgiving. We do further will, that, joining with you two 
brethren, where the same can be found, one of the Hospital of 
Jerusalem and the other one of the Knights of the Temple, as 
also other religious laymen, you shall provide for discreet 
knights, or other soldiers, who have assumed the sign of the 
Cross of our Lord, if they shall be unable to make the voyage 
at their own expense, a suitable supply out of the said sum, 
having taken from them a sufficient security that they will 
remain in defence of the Eastern lands one year or more, ac- 
cording to the amount of the assistance they shall have re- 
ceived ; and that if, which God forbid, they shall die on the 
way, they will not apply the amount so received to other uses, 
but will, on the contrary, restore it, to be applied in payment 
of the troops ; and such persons, when they shall have returned, 
shall not be discharged from the sureties which they have given, 
before they shall have presented to you letters from the king, or 
Patriarch, or Hospital of Jerusalem, or order of the Temple, or 
else from our legate, giving full testimony to the fact of their 
attendance there. But, inasmuch as supreme necessity demands, 
and common utility requires, that the people of Christendom 
should, not only in resources, but in person, render aid to the Holy 
Land without delay against the attacks of the pagans, we do by 
these Apostolic writings inform your brotherhood, forthwith, 
prudently and diligently to make it your care to exhort and in- 
duce the faithful, both of yourselves and by means of other fit- 
ting persons, to the end that those who are capable of fighting the 
battles of the Lord, may, in the name of the Lord of Sabaoth, 
assume the sign of the Cross. Let the rest also, according to the 
extent of their means, bestow their pious alms. We also our- 
selves, trusting in the mercy of God, and in the authority of 
the blessed Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul, by virtue of 
that power which, unworthy as we are, God has bestowed upon 
us, of binding and loosing, do indulgently grant to all who shall 
in their own person undergo the labours of this expedition, and 
incur the expense thereof, plenary pardon for those sins, for 
which they shall have shown repentance both with voice and 



478 ANNALS OF ROGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

heart, and promise them the blessings of eternal salvation as 
the reward of the just. To those also who shall not personally 
go thither, hut who shall at their own expense have'sent thither 
lit and proper men to stay there for one year at least, as also 
to those who, at the expense of others, hut in their own per- 
sons, shall have undergone the labours of the pilgrimage so 
undertaken, we do grant plenary pardon for their sins. Of this 
remission also, we do will that all shall be partakers according 
to the amount of their aid and the intensity of their devotion, 
who shall give suitable aid out of their resources in support of 
the said land. Their own persons also, and their property, 
from the time of their assuming the Cross, we do take under 
the protection of Saint Peter and of ourselves, and they are to 
be under the care of the archbishops and all prelates of the 
church of God ; it being by us enacted, that until the fact of 
their death or their return is known to a certainty, the same 
shall remain safe and untouched. And if any person shall 
presume to act contrary hereto, he is to be compelled by eccle- 
siastical censure, all power of appeal removed. If also any 
persons among those proceeding thither shall be bound by 
oath to the payment of interest, then do you, brother arch- 
bishops and bishops, by the same means of coercion, compel 
their creditors throughout your dioceses, all obstacle by appeal 
removed, entirely to absolve them from their oaths, and to make 
them desist from any further exaction of interest. But if any 
creditor shall compel them to payment of interest, you are, by 
like measures of coercion, to force him to make restitution 
thereof, all power of appeal removed. We do also order that 
Jews shall be compelled by the secular power to remit all claim 
against such for interest, and, until they shall have remitted 
the same, we do order that, through sentence of excommunica- 
tion, all communication whatever with them shall be withheld. 
These matters also, brother archbishops and bishops, we do wish 
and command each of you to carry out in his respective diocese; 
and you are so diligently and so faithfully to follow the same, 
that in the strict enquiry made at the last judgment, when you 
shall be standing before the judgment seat of Christ, you shall 
be enabled to give a becoming account thereof. Given at the 
Lateran, on the sixth day before the calends of January, in the 
second year of our pontificate.' 7 

In the same month of January, immediately after the Na- 
tivity of our Lord, the heart of Philip, king of France, being 



A.D. 1200. TRUCE OF THE K1XGS OF CASTILLE AND ARRAGOtf. 479 

hardened, he could be prevailed upon neither by kind nor by 
harsh measures, to get rid of his adulteress, and take once more 
his lawful wife : on which, Peter de Capua, the before-named car- 
dinal and legate of the Apostolic See. jDnmounced sentence of 
interdict on the kingdom of Prance, and took his departure, 
commanding the clergy, in virtue of their obedience, to allow 
no Divine service to be performed, except baptism and confes- 
sion ; but pope Innocent, on confirming this sentence, excepted 
therefrom all who had assumed or should assume the Cross of 
the pilgrimage to Jerusalem, enacting that they might hear 
mass, and have Christian burial, while all others were to go 
without the mass and Christian burial. 

When, however, the king of France remained immoveable 
in his evil purposes, our lord the pope proposed to revoke the 
sentence of interdict, and to excommunicate the king of France, 
saying, " It is better that one should be punished, than that 
the whole nation should perish." 46 On hearing this, the king 
of France repeatedly sent envoys to the Supreme Pontiff, re- 
questing that the sentence of interdict might be revoked ; and, 
although he suffered a repulse a first and second time, still, at 
last, it was definitely arranged by our lord the pope, envoys 
from the king of France acting in his behalf in presence of our 
lord the pope and the cardinals, that the king of France should 
put away his adulteress, and take again his wife Botilda, and 
treat her honorably as a queen and as his wife ; and if during 
the next year the king of France should wish a divorce to be 
effected between them, the same should be signified to the 
king of Denmark and the other friends of the queen, when 
and where the king of France should desire the said divorce 
to be effected, if the same ought of right to be effected, in order 
that the queen's friends might be able to attend; and the 
same was to be signified to our lord the pope and the court of 
Rome, in order that discreet men might be present on their be- 
half, to the end that a divorce of such solemn nature might be 
legally accomplished. 

In the same year, Sancho, king of Navarre, hearing of the 
losses and mischiefs that were inflicted upon his territories by 
Alphonso, king of Castille, and the king of Arragon, who had 
gained possession of nearly the whole thereof, returned from 
Africa, and, again entering his territories, made a truce with the 
said kings, his adversaries, to last for the space of three years. 
45 An adaptation of St. John, xi. 50. 



480 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

In the same year, that is to say, from the year of the Incar- 
nation of our Lord one thousand two hundred, John, king of 
England, was at Worcester, in England, on Easter day, which 
fell on the fifth day before the ides of April, and shortly after 
he crossed from England into Normandy. 

In the meantime, queen Eleanor, the mother of John, king 
of England, whom he had sent to Alphonso, king of Castille, 
for the purpose of giving the daughter of the said king of Cas- 
tille in marriage to Louis, the son of Philip, king of France, 
returned, having obtained the daughter of the king of Castille. 
When she had arrived at the city of Bordeaux, and was staying 
there, on account of the solemnity of Easter, Man-hade's, the 
chief of the Brabanters, came to her, and on the second day in 
Easter week the said Marchades was slain in the said city of 
Bordeaux, by a man-at-arms in the service of Brandin. After 
this, queen Eleanor, being fatigued with old age and the labour 
of the length of the journey, betook herself to the abbey of 
Fontevraud, and there remained ; while the daughter of the 
king of Castille, with Elias, archbishop of Bordeaux, and the 
others who attended her, proceeded to Normandy, and there de- 
livered her into the charge of king John, her uncle. 

On the octave of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, 
Philip, king of France, and the king of England, met to hold 
a conference between Buttevant, a castle belonging to the king 
of England, and Gaillon, a castle of the king of France, on the 
eleventh day before the calends of June, being the second day of 
the week. At this conference, the king of France restored to 
John, king of England, the city of Evreux, and the whole 
county thereof, and all the castles, cities, and lands of which he 
had gained possession in Normandy during the war, as also 
in the other territories of the king of England ; and John, king 
of England, immediately did homage for the same to Philip, 
king of France, and forthwith bestowed the whole thereof on 
Louis, the son of the said king of France, as a marriage portion, 
with his niece, the daughter of Alphonso, king of Castille ; and 
on the following day, that is to say, on the tenth day before 
the calends of July, being the third day of the week, the be- 
fore-named daughter of the king of Castille was married to 
Louis, the son of Philip, king of France, at Purmor, in Nor- 
mandy, by the before-named archbishop of Bordeaux, many 
bishops and other religious being present, as also many counts 
and barons of the kingdom of France. But at this time 






A.D. 1200. THE KING GIVES PERMISSION TO HOLD FAIES. 481 

the kingdom of France was under an interdict on account of 
queen Botilda, whom the king of France had put away. Im- 
mediately after his marriage, the said Louis took with him 
into France his wife, the daughter of the king of Castille. 

While these things were going on, upon the same day, Philip, 
king of France, and John, king of England, held a conference 
at_Vernon, at this time a town of the king of France ; and 
Tiere ArtEur, duke of Brittany, did homage to his uncle John, 
king of England, for Brittany and his other territories, with 
the sanction and advice of the king of France ; but Arthur, 
being given up by the king of England, remained in the charge 
of the king of France. 

In the same year, John, king of England, gave to Zachary, 
the prior of Saint Alban's, the abbacy of Burgh, and to the prior 
of Burgh he gave the abbacy of Ramsey. In this year also, 
Robert, count de Drues, brother of Philip, bishop of Beauvais, 
departed this life. In the same year, on Easter day, which fell 
on the fifth day before the ides of April, nearly the whole of 
the city of Rouen was destroyed by fire, together with the church 
of the archiepiscopal see, and many other churches besides. 

In the same year, Otho, king of the Germans, who had been 
elected emperor of the Romans, sent Henry, duke of Saxony, 
and William of Winchester, his brothers, to his uncle John, 
king of England, to demand of him the earldom of York 
and the earldom of Poitou, which Richard, king of England, 
had given him, as also two-fourths of the whole of the treasures 
of Richard, king of England, and all the jewels which the 
said king had left him by devise. But John, king of England, 
would not accede to any of these requests, in consequence of 
the oath which he had sworn to the king of France, to the 
effect that he would give no assistance whatever to Otho against 
the duke of Suabia. 

In the same year, shortly before the festival of Saint Peter 
ad Vincula, a pitched battle was fought between the before- 
named Otho and Philip, duke of Suabia, at Brunswick; in 
which battle, Otho came off victorious, and took prisoners more 
than two hundred knights of the household of the duke of 
Suabia. 

In the same year, John, king of England gave to Philip, bishop 
of Durham, leave to hold a fair each year at Hoveden, and at 
Alverton. 47 To William de Stuteville also, the said king gave per- 
47 North Allerton. 

VOL. II. II 



482 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

mission each year to hold a fair at Butterham andatCoggingham, 
and to build castles at those places. The said king also gave a 
license to Eichard de Malebise to fortify a castle at Oweldric ; 
but after he had nearly built it, the citizens of York, thinking 
that this had been done to their detriment and disgrace, pre- 
vailed upon William de Stuteville, at this time sheriff of York, 
on the king's behalf, to forbid llichard de Malebise to fortify 
the said castle, and accordingly in that state it remained. 

In the same year, William de Stuteville gave to John, king 
of England, three thousand marks of silver, to obtain judgment 
for the barony of "William de Mowbray, which the said William 
de Stuteville claimed in the king's court, against the said Wil- 
liam de Mowbray. For it should be known, that Eobert 
Grundebeof, the great grandfather of the said William de Stute- 
ville, held the said barony on the conquest of England; but the 
said Robert Grundebeof, leaving Henry, king of England, son 
of king William the Bastard, who had subdued England in 
war, gave in his adhesion to Eobert Curthose, duke of Nor- 
mandy, when he claimed the kingdom of England in right of 
his father against the aforesaid Henry, king of England, his 
younger brother ; and in the battle which took place between the 
said two brothers, that is, between Henry, king of England, and 
Eobert Curthose, his brother, duke of Normandy, at Tenchebrai, 
Henry, king of England, was victorious, and took Eobert Curt- 
hose, his brother, and kept him in prison until the end of his 
life, as he also did Eobert Grundebeof ; and king Henry gave 
his barony to Mgel de Aubigny, the great grandfather of the 
said William de Mowbray. It ought also to be known, that 
Eobert de Stuteville, the father of the before-named William 
de Stuteville, in the time of king Henry the Second, laid claim 
to the said barony against Eoger de Mowbray, the father of 
the before-named William de Mowbray; on which an arrange- 
ment was made between them, by which Eoger de Mowbray 
gave to Eobert de Stuteville Kirby-in-Moreshead, with its ap- 
purtenances, together with nine 48 knight's fees, for his homage, 
in full discharge of his claim. But, because this arrangement 
had not been confirmed in the king's court, and sanctioned by 
his authority, the said William de Stuteville again laid claim 
to the said barony, in the court of John, king of England. 

However, after the contention had been long carried on, at 
length, byJke.cQnsent of the kingdom, and at the king's de- 
43 V. r."Ten," 



A.D. 1200. DISSENSION AT PABIS. 483 

sire, peace and a final reconciliation were made between the 
said William de Stuteville and "William de Mowbray, to the 
following effect : William de Stuteville renounced his claim 
which he made against "William de Mowbray respecting his 
barony, and William de Mowbray gave to William de Stute- 
ville, for his homage and for the renunciation of his claim, 
nine knight's fees in addition, and twelve pounds of yearly 
revenue. And thus, all their disputes being settled on both 
sides, they became reconciled in the presence of John, king of 
England, in the second year of his reign, at Lue in Lindesey, a 
vill of the bishops of Lincoln, on the first Sunday in Septuagesima. 

In the same year, Philip, king of Prance, gave to the Jews 
permission to reside at Paris and in his other cities, he having 
expelled them therefrom in the first year of his reign. 

In the same year, John, king of England, immediately after 
the agreement made between him and the king of France, set 
out for Aquitaine with a large army, but no one was found to 
make head against him. 

In this year also, a divorce was effected between John, king 
of England, and Hawisa, his wife, daughter of William, earl 
of Gloucester, by Elias, bishop of Bordeaux, William, bishop 
of Poitou, and Henry, bishop of Saintes, because they were 
related in the third degree of affinity. After this divorce had 
taken place between John, king of England, and his wife, 
the king of England, by the advice of his lord, Philip, king 
of France, married Isabel, the daughter of Ailmar, count of 
Angouleme, whom the said count, by the sanction and advice 
of Richard, king of England, had previously given to Hugh 
Le Brun, count de la Marche ; and the said count had ac- 
knowledged her as his wife, by promise made as pledge for the 
future, 49 and she had taken him for her husband by promise made 
for the future ; for because she had not yet attained marriage- 
ble years, the said Hugh declined to be united to her in pre- 
sence of the church. However, the father of the damsel, on 
seeing that John, king of England, had a fancy for her, took her 
out of the custody of Hugh Le Brun, and gave her in mar- 
riage to John, king of England ; and she was immediately mar- 
ried to John, king of England, at Angouleme, by Elias, arch- 
bishop of Bordeaux. 

In the same year, a serious dissension arose between the 
students and citizens of Paris, the origin of which was as fol- 
49 " Verba de praesenti." 



484 ANXALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

lows. There was in Paris a German student, of noble family, 
being one of those selected for the office of bishop of Liege. 
While a servant of his was buying some wine at a tavern, he 
was beaten, and his wine-vessel broken. On hearing of this, 
a meeting took place of the clerks of German birth, and, en- 
tering the tavern, they wounded the master of the house, and, 
after severely beating him, took their departure, leaving him 
nearly dead. On this, there was an outcry among the people, 
and the whole city was in commotion; so much so, that 
Thomas, the mayor of Paris, in arms, together with the populace 
of the city, who were likewise armed, made an assault upon the 
quarters of the German students ; in which conflict the said 
noble scholar, who [as before-mentioned] was one of those 
selected for the office of bishop of Liege, was slain, together 
with some of his companions. 

On this, the masters of the schools at Paris went to Philip, 
king of France, and made complaint to him against Thomas, 
the mayor, and his accomplices, who had slain the said scho- 
lars ; and, at their request, Thomas, the mayor, was arrested. 
Some of his accomplices were also seized and thrown into 
prison, while others of them took to flight, leaving their 
homes and possessions ; on which, the king of Prance, being 
incensed, caused their houses to be levelled with the ground, 
and their vineyards and fruit-bearing trees to be rooted up. 

As to the mayor, the following determination was come to : he 
was to be kept in the king's prison, not to be released therefrom, 
until such time as he should have cleared himself by the judgment 
of water or of iron ; and, if he were cast, he was to be hanged, 
and if acquitted thereby, he was, at the king's mercy, to abjure 
the realm. However, the scholars, taking pity on him, entreated 
the king of France that the mayor and his accomplices, after 
being whipped in the schools after the manner of scholars, 
might be discharged, and restored to their possessions. This, 
however, the king of France refused, saying, that it would be 
most derogatory to his honor if any other person than himself 
were to inflict punishment on his offenders. 

The king of France also, being apprehensive that the master 
of the scholars, and the scholars themselves, might withdraw 
from the city, made satisfaction to them by enacting, that in 
future no clerk should be brought before a secular tribunal, 
for any offence whatsoever that he might have committed ; but 
that if a clerk should be guilty of any offence, he should be 



A.D. 1200. OTHO CROWNED KING OF THE GEEMANS. 485 

handed over to the bishop, and be dealt with according to the 
judgment of the clergy. The king of Prance also enacted, 
that whoever should be mayor of Paris, should make oath 
that he would keep faith with the clerks, saving always his 
fealty to the king. The said king also gave to the scholars an 
assurance of his protection, and, by his charter, confirmed the 
same. 

As for the mayor, after he had been confined several days 
in the king's prison, he determined to escape by flight, but 
while he was descending from the wall, the rope broke, and, 
falling from a height to the ground, he was killed. 

In the same year, Margarite, the leader of the pirates, whom 
Henry, emperor of the Romans, had caused to be deprived of 
his sight, came to Paris, to Philip, king of France, and offered 
him, if he would follow his advice, to make him emperor of 
the Romans, or emperor of Constantinople, whichever he 
should prefer. To this, the king of France gave a ready assent, 
and prepared all necessaries for his expedition, horses, arms, 
men, 50 and equipments. Margarite, then preceding the king 
of France, in order that he might arrange as he had pro- 
mised, sent word throughout all parts of his dominions for all 
his galleys to meet him at Brindisi ; but on his arrival at Rome, 
he was slain by a servant of his, whom he had maltreated ; 
and so, this accident intervening, the king of France was baulked 
of his hopes. 

In the same year, died the archbishop of Mentz, who, in 
the city of Mentz, had acknowledged Philip, duke of Suabia, 
as his lord, and had crowned him king there. On his decease, 
the clergy and people of the city made choice of a certain 
noble clerk of their number for archbishop, and presented him 
to Philip, duke of Suabia ; but he rejected him, and wished, 
contrary to their desire, to appoint one of his own relations 
bishop of that place. Being greatly indignant at this, the 
clergy and people of Mentz, rejecting the duke of Suabia, gave 
their adhesion to Otho, king of the Germans, and acknowledged 
him as their lord ; and he, upon their presentation, received the 
person whom they had chosen as archbishop ; while Otho himself 
was, on the day of the Nativity of our Lord, crowned king at 
Mentz, by the said archbishop of Mentz. On hearing of this, 
Philip, duke of Suabia, ordered the treasures to be conveyed 
to him which he had in those parts ; which coming to the 
80 ' Viribus" is probably an error for " viris." 



486 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

knowledge of Otho, he kept a watch night and day upon the 
street along which the duke's men were to pass with his trea- 
sures ; and so, taking no precaution against the same, while 
on their road, they fell into the hands of Otho, and they and 
the treasures were captured ; and thus Otho was enriched with 
the treasures of the duke of Suabia, his enemy. 

In the same year, one of the companions of the above-named 
Eulk, Eustace by name, the lord abbat of Elaye, came into Eng- 
land from the country of Normandy, to preach the word of 
the Lord, and did wondrous things during his life. Among 
these, he did one work that is wondrous in our eyes. Eor 
the said Eustace came to a town not far from Canterbury, of 
which the name is Wye, and there he bestowed his blessing 
on a certain spring, on which the Lord poured forth so exceed- 
ingly His grace, that whoever drank of the spring so blessed, 
the blind received their sight, the lame their power of walk- 
ing, the dumb their speech, and the deaf their hearing, and 
every infirm person who drank thereof, rejoiced that he was 
restored to health. 

On this, a certain woman came to the abbat, being pos- 
sessed by devils, and stout to a degree beyond what is credible, 
as though swollen by dropsy, and sought to be restored by him 
to health ; to whom the abbat made answer, " Daughter, have 
faith, and go to the pools of the spring at Wye, which the Lord 
hath blessed ; drink thereof, and thence thou shalt receive 
health." She departed, and, drinking thereof, was seized 
with a vomiting, on which there came forth from her two large 
black toads, which were immediately transformed into dogs of 
immense size and very black, and shortly after took the forms 
of asses. As to the woman, she stood astounded, and soon after 
ran after them, raving, and trying to catch them ; but a certain 
man, who had been appointed to take charge of the said spring, 
sprinkled some of the water from the spring between the 
woman and the monsters ; who, immediately departing, flew 
up into the air, leaving behind them foul traces of their foot- 
steps. The woman was made whole from that hour, magni- 
fying God, who had given such power unto men. 

Also, the said abbat, coming to Eumenel, 50 where there was a 

deficiency of water, at the request of the people, struck a stone in 

the church in that town with his staff, on which water flowed 

forth, the draughts of which are a cure for various maladies. He 

60 Romney. 



A.D. 1200. JOHN, BISHOP OF NORWICH, DIES. 487 

also, by his preaching, turned the hearts of many to the release 
of claims for interest, and to the assumption of the Cross in the 
expedition to Jerusalem. At London also, and many other 
places throughout England, he effected by his preaching, that 
from that time forward people did not dare to hold market 
of things exposed for sale on the Lord's day. 

He also enacted in London and several other places, that in 
each church that had the means, there should be always a lamp 
kept burning, or some never-failing light, before the body of our 
Lord. He also caused, by means of his preaching, that many 
of the citizens and other discreet men kept daily upon their 
table an alms-dish, in which to place some part of their food 
for those poor who have no means of their own. Accordingly, 
for these and other works of mercy, the enemy of mankind raised 
against this man of God the ministers of iniquity, who said to 
him, "It is not lawful for thee to reap another's harvest;" to 
which he replied, "The harvest truly is great, but the labourers 
are few." 51 However, the said abbat, on being censured by the 
ministers of Satan, was unwilling any longer to molest the 
prelates of England by his preaching, but returned to Normandy, 
unto his place whence he had come. 

In the same year, Raymond, earl of Saint Gilles, did homage 
to John, king of England, for the lands and castles which Richard, 
king of England, had given him as a marriage portion with his 
sister Joanna, upon the understanding that when Raymond, 
his son by his wife Joanna, should come to the years of discre- 
tion, he should have all the estates before-mentioned, and 
should do homage for the same to John, king of England, his 
uncle; but if he should depart this life without issue, the same 
were to revert to the earl of Saint Gilles : and he himself, and 
his heirs after him, were to hold all the same as of hereditary 
right of the earl of Poitou, by the service of coming with five 
hundred knights to serve the earl of Poitou as often as the earl 
of Poitou should go into Gascony with his army, for 'one month 
at his own expense, but if he should stay there longer than 
that period, the earl of Poitou was to provide all necessaries. 

After this, John, king of England, came to Anjou, and re- 
ceived from it one hundred and fifty hostages as pledges that 
it would preserve its fealty to him, whom he placed under ward. 

In the same year, died John of Oxford, bishop of Norwich, 
and was succeeded in his bishopric by John de Gray, at the 
51 St. Luke x. 2. * 



488 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1200. 

presentation of king John ; on which, Hubert, archbishop of 
Canterbury, consecrated him bishop. In the same year, John, 
king of England, gave to Gilles, son of William de Braose, the 
bishopric of Hereford, and he was consecrated bishop by Hu- 
bert, archbishop of Canterbury. In this year also, John, king 
of England, received from Walter, archbishop of Rouen, six 
hundred pounds of money Anjouin, and by his charter confirmed 
to him the possession of all those places which Richard, king of 
England, had given him in exchange for Andely, that is to say, 
the town of Dieppe with its appurtenances, Louviers with its 
appurtenances, and the forest of Aliermont, together with the 
mill of Robeck. 

In the same year, Geoffrey, archbishop of York, and his ad- 
versaries, namely, Simon, the dean, and the other clergy of 
the church of Saint Peter at York, met at Westminster, in 
presence of Herbert, bishop of Salisbury, and Alan, abbat of 
Tewkesbury, judges delegate of our lord the pope ; and, after 
the allegations on both sides had been fully stated, the said 
judges endeavoured by every method to bring them to a recon- 
ciliation, and at length, by the aid of God, succeeded in in- 
ducing the said archbishop to receive with the kiss of peace, 
first, William Testard, archdeacon of Nottingham, then Reginald 
Arundel, the praecentor, and, last of all, Simon, the dean, of 
the church of York, on condition that they should give satis- 
faction to each other respectively as to their disputes in the 
chapter at York. 

In the same year, peace and final reconciliation was made 
between Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, and the monks of 
the church of the Holy Trinity at Canterbury, by Hugh, bishop 
of Lincoln, Eustace, bishop of Ely, and Samson, abbat of 
of Saint Edmund's, who were appointed judges in that matter 
by our lord the pope Innocent. But, as the lord bishop of 
Lincoln was unable to take part in the settlement of the said 
dispute, he appointed, as his substitute, Roger de Robleston, 
dean of the church of Lincoln. 

Accordingly, an arrangement was made between them to the 
following effect : that the said archbishop of Canterbury might, 
if he should think proper, rebuild the chapel of Lambeth in the 
same place, though not upon the same foundations, on which it 
had been previously built, and that he should not establish there 
canons secular, but should be at liberty, if he should think fit, to 
establish there canons regular of the Prsemonstratensian order, 



A.D. 1200. SYNOD HELD IN LONDON. 489 

to be in number thirteen at the least, and twenty at the most ; 
and, for their support, the archbishop was to give, if he should 
think proper, out of the churches in his presentation, one hundred 
pounds of money yearly at the most ; but in the said church 
he was neither to make the chrism, nor consecrate bishops. 

Also, as to the four churches which Richard, archbishop of 
Canterbury, of blessed memory, had given to the use of the 
said monks, it was thus arranged : Simon, archdeacon of Wells, 
was to pay to the aforesaid monks of the Holy Trinity, at Can- 
terbury, ten pieces of gold, yearly, during his life, as being the 
payment made by the church of Monkton, in Thanet ; and, after 
the decease of the said Simon, a moiety of the tithes of corn 
and pulse belonging to the said church, was to be applied to 
the augmentation of the alms of the monks aforesaid ; while the 
remaining moiety belonging to the said church, and the offerings 
at the altar, were to be at the disposal of the archbishop. The 
same also was to be done as to the church of Eastry, in con- 
sideration of Master Ralph, the possessor thereof, during his 
life, making to the said monks a yearly payment of six pieces 
of gold. Robert Belesmains, the former archbishop of Lyons, was 
to be at liberty to retain possession of the church of Aylesford 
during his life, and, after his decease, the aforesaid monks of 
Canterbury were to receive in augmentation of their alms, the 
third part of the tithes of corn and pulse belonging to the 
said church, and all the rest belonging to that church was to 
be at the disposal of the archbishop. The same was to be done 
as to the church of Meopham, except that Yirgilius, the holder 
thereof, was to pay from the same to the aforesaid monks of 
Canterbury one piece of gold, by way of annual payment, 
during his life. 

As to the yearly gifts which the monks demanded from their 
own manors, they were to remain with the archbishop during 
his life, and, after the death of the said archbishop, his successor 
was to enjoy the possession thereof, saving always the share of 
the monks. As to the division of the marsh lands belonging 
to the archbishop and the monks, it was provided that, on the 
oaths of twelve or more lawful men, it should be ascertained how 
much ought to belong to the archbishop, and how much to the 
monks ; which very same thing the archbishop had repeatedly 
offered them. The archbishop also allowed them to hold a court 
for their own tenants, without making any payment for the 
said license. All the matters above stated were agreed upon 



490 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

between them, and duly confirmed, reserving always the au- 
thorization thereof by our lord the pope. 

In the same year, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, held a 
general synod at London ; this took place at Westminster, in 
spite of the prohibition of Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, earl, of .Essex, 
at this time chief justiciary of England. At this synod, the 
said archbishop published the decrees under-written, and en- 
acted that the same should be inviolably observed by those sub- 
ject to him : 

The Decrees of Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury. 
"Inasmuch as, in the celebration of Divine service, errors 
are made, not without peril to the body as well as to the soul, we 
do, with the healthful advice of this synod, enact, that by every 
priest who officiates, the words of the canon shall be fully and 
distinctly uttered, and that the time shall not be cut short 
by too great haste, nor yet prolonged by excessive slowness. 
For it is proper not to delay too long at the same, because of 
thoughts that spring up, which, like dead flies, destroy the 
sweetness of the ointment. In like manner, all the hours, 51 
and all the offices, are to be openly and distinctly repeated, so 
as not to be cut short from excessive haste, nor are the words to 
be clipped. If this ordinance shall not be observed, those priests 
who do not observe it, after the third admonition, are to be 
suspended until such time as they shall have given full satis- 
faction. This, saving in all things the honor and privileges of 
the Holy Church of Rome." 

The same Priest is not to be allowed to celebrate [the mass] 
twice in the same day. 

"A priest is not to be allowed to celebrate [the mass] twice 
in the same day, except in case of urgent necessity ; and then 
in cases where the same person shall officiate twice in one day, 
after the first celebration and the receiving of the blood, nothing 
more is to be poured into the chalice. Also, after the first 
celebration, the drops are to be most carefully dried up from out 
of the chalice, and the fingers are to be sucked or licked with 
the tongue, and then washed, the rinsings thereof being reserved 
in a clean vessel, especially appropriated for that purpose, which 
same rinsings are to be received after the second celebration. 
This is to be done, unless there be present at the first celebra- 
tion a deacon, or some other fitting minister, who, in such 
M See vol. i. p. 331. 






A.D. 1200. DECREES OF THE SYNOD OF LONDON. 491 

case, may take the said rinsings. To this we add, that the 
Eucharist is to be kept in a clean and fair pyx, and that the 
same is to be carried to the sick, in a clean and fair pyx, a linen 
cloth being placed over the same, and a lantern and cross pre- 
ceding it, unless the sick person shall happen to be at a very 
great distance. Also, the host itself is to be renewed each 
Lord's day, and certainty is to be observed relative to the 
Eucharist, so that what is unconsecrated may not be taken as 
though it were consecrated. To this we have thought proper 
to add, that the communion of the Eucharist is not to be given 
in secret to any person asking for the same ; but it is to be 
given, publicly and immediately, to him who asks for it, unless 
his oifences are of a public nature. This, saving in all things 
the honor and privileges of the Holy Church of Rome." 

Of Baptism or Confirmation, if there are doubts thereon. 

" As to baptism or confirmation, if there are doubts thereon, 
following the enactments of the holy canons, we do enact that 
the same shall be given, ' because that cannot be said to be 
repeated which is not known to have been already done.' 
Therefore, children exposed, about whose baptism there are 
doubts, are to be baptized, whether found with salt, or whether 
without salt. 55 We do also add, that no person shall be held at 
confirmation, by his father or mother, step-father or step- 
mother. Also, it is not to be allowable for deacons to baptize, 
or to give absolution, except in two cases of necessity ; because 
either the priest cannot, through absence, or will not, through 
foolishness, and the death of the child or sick person is immi- 
nent. And, if in a case of necessity, a child is baptized by a 
layman, which may be done by the father or mother, irrespective 
of their being married, let the service that follows the immer- 
sion, though not that which precedes it, be performed by a 
priest. This, saving in all things the honor and privileges of 
the Holy Church of Borne." 

Of Penance. 

"Inasmuch, as in penance, which is a 'second plank in 
shipwreck,' the more necessary reparation is after a lapse, 
the greater the circumspection that must be employed ; we, 
following the enactments of the holy canons, do command, that 
in enjoining penance, priests shall diligently attend to the cir- 

55 See p. 363. 



492 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

cumstances, that is to say, the position of the person, the ex- 
tent of the offence, the time, place, cause, and period occu- 
pied in the sin, as also, the devoutness of the feelings of the 
penitent; and such a penance is to be enjoined on the wife, 
that she may not be rendered suspected by her husband of any 
secret and enormous sin, and the same is to be observed as to 
the husband. Also, no priest, after a lapse, is to presume to 
come to the altar, to celebrate [the mass], before he has made 
confession. This also we do add, in order to restrain the 
avarice of the priesthood, that masses are not to be enjoined, 
by way of penance, to any persons who are not priests. 56 This, 
saving in all things the honor and privileges of the Holy Church 
of Rome." 

In what manner the archbishop, bishop, and their officers are to 
be entertained by their subjects. 

"Inasmuch as among the enactments that have been made by 
the fathers of modern times, those of the council of Lateran 57 
are most distinguished and most worthy in every way to be 
observed ; we, humbly and devoutly following the instructions 
thereof, do enact, that an archbishop, when visiting his province, 
shall on no account exceed the number of forty or fifty, and a 
bishop twenty or thirty horses; while an archdeacon shall not 
have more than five or seven, and deans who are appointed 
under bishops are to be content with two. They are not to go 
about with hounds or hawks, but are to proceed so as to appear 
to seek not their own things, but those of Christ. 58 We do 
also forbid them to presume to oppress those in subjection to 
them with tallages and exactions. However, we do permit 
them, considering the many necessities that sometimes arise, 
in case a manifest and reasonable cause shall exist, to be at 
liberty with all brotherly love to ask of them some slight as- 
sistance. For whereas the Apostle says, * The children ought 
not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children,' 59 
it seems to be at variance with fatherly affection, if those who 
are the governors should be burdensome to those in subjection 
to them, whom, like shepherds, they ought in all their necessi- 
ties to cherish. Archdeacons or deans are to presume to demand 
no exactions or tallage from priests or clerks. Further, what 
has been above said as to the number of horses, is to be ob- 

56 For if the persons had to pay for them, the priesthood might, if 
avariciously inclined, have an interest in multiplying such penances. 
V See vol. i. p. 497. w Alluding to Phil. ii. 21. 69 2 Cor. xii. 14. 



A.D. 1200. DECREES OF THE STNOD OF LONDON. 493 

served in those places of which the revenues and the property 
of the church are ample ; but in poor places it is our will that 
such limits should be observed, that the lesser ones shall not 
have to complain that a hardship is inflicted by the arrival of 
the greater ; so that those persons who have hitherto employed 
a smaller number of horses, may not suppose that they are to 
be indulged with leave to use more. It belongs also to the 
duty of visitation, in the first place to attend with all diligence 
to those matters which relate to the saving of souls, and to see 
that each church has a silver chalice, and sufficient and proper 
sacerdotal vestments, the necessary books and utensils, and 
other things that relate to worship and due respect for the 
sacrament. Further, to put an end to the vice both of avarice 
as well as negligence, relying on the authority of the council 
of Toledo, we do command that no visitor shall presume to 
demand entertainment, or a sum in lieu of entertainment, from 
a church in which he has not in the customary manner per- 
formed the duties of visitation. This, saving in all things the 
honor and privileges of the Holy Church of Rome." 

That no person shall le ordained without a certain title. 

"We do also, in conformity with the decrees of the council of 
Lateran, enjoin that it shall be strictly observed, that if a 
bishop shall ordain any person without a certain title deacon or 
priest, he shall support such person until such time as he shall 
provide him in some church a suitable salary for clerical duties; 
unless the person who is so ordained shall be able to maintain 
himself by his own means or on property inherited from his 
father. "We do enact the same as to the ordination of subdeacons, 
and do add, that if, without the especial command of his bishop, 
an archdeacon shall present any one of the parties before named 
for ordination, and such person shall, upon his presentation, be 
ordained, he shall be subject to the penalty above-mentioned. 60 
This, saving in all things the honor and privileges of the Holy 
Church of Rome." 

That it is not allowable to pronounce sentence of excommunication 
unless canonical admonition shall have preceded it. 

11 Again, following the decrees of the council of Lateran, we 
do order that prelates shall not pronounce sentence of sus- 
pense or excommunication on those subject to them, unless the 
60 Of having to support the person ordained. 



494 ANNALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 12CO. 

same be a fault which, by its very nature, entails the penalty 
of excommunication. Also, those subject to prelates are not, 
contrary to ecclesiastical discipline, before the commencement 
of the trial, to seek to take refuge in the words of appeal. Eut 
if any person shall think that it is a matter of necessity for 
him to appeal, then a competent time is to be named for him 
to prosecute his appeal : and if he shall neglect to prosecute it 
within such time, then the bishop shall be at liberty to exercise 
his authority. If also, in any matter any person shall make an 
appeal [against another], and on the person appealed against 
making his appearance, the person who has made the appeal 
shall not appear, he is to make a competent return to the other 
for his expenses, in order that, being at least checked by this 
fear, a person may not be too ready to appeal to the prejudice 
of another ; and in religious houses we do especially desire 
that this shall be observed, to the end that neither monks nor 
any other person of the religious orders, when they shall re- 
quire correction for any excess, shall, contrary to the regular 
discipline of their prelate and chapter, presume to appeal, but 
humbly and dutifully receive whatever may have been for the 

lore effectually securing their salvation enjoined them. Also, 
for the purpose of checking the viciousness of many, we have 
thought proper to adjoin hereto, that, every year, sentence of 
excommunication shall be pronounced upon sorcerers, perjurers 
upon the Gospels, 61 incendiaries, thieves, and daring robbers, 
each in his class. Also, we do enact that those who shall 

lowingly have committed perjury at the expense of any 
person shall not be absolved therefrom ; nor shall penance be 
enjoined them by any person but the bishop of the diocese, or 
upon his authority, except at the point of death ; and they 
are to be enjoined at the moment that they shall recover to go 
to the bishop to receive penance from him or upon his autho- 
rity. This, saving in all things the honor and privileges of 
the Holy Church of Rome." 

That nothing is to le demanded for the administration of the 
sacraments. 

" As it has been, in the Council of Lateran, healthfully pro- 
vided by the holy fathers, so do we forbid that anything 
whatever shall be exacted from ecclesiastical personages when 

61 This is probably the meaning of " sacramenta" here, though it may 
possibly mean the relics of saints. 



A.D. 1200. DECREES OF THE SYNOD OF LONDON. 495 

being installed in their sees, or from priests, or any other 
clerks, when being instituted, or for burying the dead, or 
for blessing the newly - married, or for the chrism, or for 
any other of the sacraments. And if any person shall pre- 
sume to contravene this enactment, let him to know that he 
will have his portion with Gehazi, whose deeds he has imitated 
by this exaction of a disgraceful gift. To this we do add, that 
nothing shall be demanded from priests for license to celebrate 
Divine service, or from masters for teaching ; and, if any such 
sums shall have been paid, the same are to be returned. On the 
authority also of the same council, we do forbid that new 
imposts shall be exacted from churches by bishops, or abbats, 
or other prelates, or that the old ones shall be increased, nor 
are they to presume to appropriate any part of the revenues 
thereof to their own use ; but, with good will, let those of higher 
rank preserve for their inferiors that liberty which they desire 
to be preserved for themselves. And if any person shall act con- 
trary hereto, let that which he shall have so done be deemed of 
no effect. Also, no ecclesiastical offices, or benefices, or churches, 
be given or promised to any person before they are vacant ; to 
the end that no person may seem to long for the death of his 
neighbour, to whose place or benefice he believes he shall suc- 
ceed. For whereas, in the very places of the heathens we find 
this forbidden by law, it is most disgraceful, and most deserving 
of the censures of the Divine judgment, if, in the Church of 
God, expectation of succession should hold a place, which even 
the heathens themselves have taken care to condemn. This, 
saving in all things the honor and privileges of the Holy Church 
of Borne." 

That Tithes are not to le diminished under pretence of icages of 
servants or of the reapers. 

" Inasmuch as Abraham, by his actions, and Jacob, in his 
promises, signified that tithes ought to be given to God and to 
the priests of God, and the authority of the Old and the New 
Testament, as also the enactments of the holy fathers, have 
declared that tithes ought to be paid of all things which are 
yearly renewed, we do decree that the same shall be inviolably 
observed, and that no diminution shall be made of the tenth 
part under pretence of wages of servants or of the reapers, 
but the same is to be paid in full. Priests are also to have the 
power, before the commencement of autumn, of excomnmni- 



496 ANNALS OF BOCER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

eating all curtailers of their tithes, and of absolving the same, 
in due ecclesiastical form. To this sanction we do also add, 
that, from lands newly brought into cultivation, tithes are not 
to be paid to any other than the parish churches within the 
limits of whose parishes the lands are cultivated from which the 
said tithes arise. Also, withholders of tithes, in accordance 
with the enactment of the council of Rouen, if, on being warned 
a first, second, and third time, they do not correct their ex- 
cesses, shall be brought by the ban of excommunication to make 
condign satisfaction. This, saving in all things the honor and 
privileges of the Holy Church of Rome." 

That Clerics in holy orders shall not keep concubines. 

"We do enact that, in churches of which the yearly revenues 
do not exceed in amount the sum of three marks, no person 
shall be instituted, unless he shall be willing to perform duty 
there in his own person. We do also, reverently following 
the enactments of the Council of Lateran, enact that clerks in 
holy orders, who, bearing the character of incontinence, shall 
be keeping young women in their houses, shall either put away 
the same and live chastely, or else be removed from their eccle- 
siastical duties and benefices. To this we do also add, that 
clerks shall not be present at taverns or at public drinkings. 
For hence arise contentions and strifes, so that laymen, by some- 
times striking clerks, render themselves amenable to canonical 
censures ; and, when these are brought before the pope, it is 
not just that the clerks, who have in some measure caused the 
offence, should remain unpunished. All clerks are also to wear 
the clerical dress and the tonsure prescribed by the canons. 
But archdeacons, as also the others who hold dignities, and 
priests, are to wear hoods with long sleeves attached thereto. 
This, saving in all things the honor and privileges of the Holy 
Church of Rome." 

What persons may enter the Marriage state. 

" A man is not to marry any female relative by blood of 
his former wife; and, in like manner, the wife is not to 
marry any male relative of her former husband. He who has 
been received at baptism, is not to marry the daughter of him 
who baptized him, or of him who received him [at the font], 
whether born before or since that time. Also, no marriage is to 
be contracted without notice thereof being thrice given in the 



A.D. 1200. DECREES OF THE SYNOD OF LONDON. 497 

church, nor yet if the persons shall not be known. Also, no 
persons are to be united in marriage, except publicly in face of 
the church and in presence of the priest ; and, if this shall 
not be observed^ those parties are to be admitted into no church 
whatsoever, except by the especial authority of the bishop. 
Also, it is to be allowable for neither of two married persons 
to undertake a distant pilgrimage, unless upon publication of 
the consent of both. This, saving in all things the honor and 
privileges of the Holy Church of Rome." 

That Purgation is to be enjoined on those who are accused by 
public report. 

" Those who are accused by public report, or on probable 
evidence, of any crime of which they cannot be convicted, are 
to be warned a first, second, and third time to confess and make 
satisfaction. But if, making no amends, they shall persist in 
their denial, then let purgation 63 be enjoined them, and let it 
not be put off from day to day as a pretext for receiving money ; 
but let the same be received on the first day on which it is en- 
joined, if the person is ready ; and let not the number 64 pre- 
scribed by the canons be exceeded. This, saving in all things 
the honor and privileges of the Holy Church of Rome." 

That Lepers are to have a burial (/round and chapel of their own. 

" Being induced by a regard for piety, and relying on the 
enactment of the council of Lateran, we do enact, that wherever 
there shall be a sufficient number of lepers assembled together 
to be able to build a church, with a burying ground attached, 
and to enjoy the services of their own priest, they shall be 
allowed, without any opposition, to have the same. They are 
to take care, however, that they are not detrimental to churches 
previously established; for that which is conceded to them 
on grounds of piety, we do not wish to redound to the injury 
of other persons. We do also enact, that of vegetable pro- 
duce and the young of animals belonging to such persons, they 
shall not be obliged to pay tithes. This, saving in all things 
the honor and privileges of the Holy Church of Rome." 

63 Canonical purgation, by the evidence on oath of one, two, three or 
more witnesses of good character in favour of the accused. 

64 Of witnesses. 

VOL. II. Z K 



498 ANNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 



That no person shall, without the authority of the bishop, receive 
ecclesiastical benefices at the hands of 



" Paying all due attention to the enactments of the council 
of Lateran, we do decree that neither the brethren of the Tem- 
ple nor of the Hospital, nor any other person of the religious 
order, shall receive either tithes or any other ecclesiastical be- 
nefices at the hands of laymen, without authority of their 
bishops, and excepting therefrom those which up to the present 
time they have received, contrary to the tenor thereof. We 
do enact that such persons as shall be excommunicated, and 
shall, in accordance with the sentence of the bishops, be by 
name laid under interdict, shall be avoided by them as well as 
all others. In their churches, which do not belong to them by 
full legal right, they are to present priests for institution to 
the bishops, that they may be answerable to them for their 
care of the people, and give to themselves a full account 
as to the temporal things thereof. Also, those who have 
been instituted, they are not, without the sanction of the 
bishops, to presume to remove. If Templars or Hospitallers 
should come to a church under interdict, they are only once in 
a year to be ' admitted to the performance of divine service 
therein, nor even then are they to bury the bodies of those un- 
der interdict therein. As to the fraternities, we do also enact 
that if they shall not [upon warning] entirely join the brethren 
before-mentioned, but shall think proper to reside upon their 
own properties, 66 still for all this they are on no account to be 
exempt from the sentence of the bishops, who are to exercise 
their authority over them just the same as they do in the case 
of others in their dioceses, when they require to be corrected for 
their excesses. What has been stated as to the brethren be- 
fore named, we do also command to be observed with regard to 
those of other religious orders, who, in their presumption, wrest 
from the bishops their legal rights, and dare to enter upon a 
course contrary to their own canonical profession, and the 
tenor of our own privileges. And if they shall infringe upon 
this ordinance, both the churches in which they have presumed 
so to do, shall be laid under interdict, and all that they shall 
have done, shall, by the authority of the said council, be deemed 
null and void. Monks also are not to be admitted into mo- 

ca Contrary to the monastic rules. 



A.D. 1200. DECKEES OF THE STTSTOD OF LO^DOST. 499 

nasteries for money, nor are they to be allowed to hold private 
property of their own ; nor are they to be placed alone in vills 
and towns, or in any parish churches ; but they are to remain 
in the general convent, or with some others of the brethren, and 
not alone among secular people to await the attack of their spi- 
ritual foes ; for it is Solomon who says, ' "Woe to him that is 
alone when he falleth, for he hath not another to help him up/ 6C 
And if any person, on demand made, shall pay anything for his 
admission he shall not be admitted to canonical orders ; and 
he who receives the same, is to be punished by loss of his 
office. If any [monk] also shall have any private property, 
unless he shall have received permission from the abbat for the 
administration of certain duties enjoined, the said person is to 
be removed from the communion of the altar ; and for him who 
at the point of death shall be found to be in possession of private 
property, no offering is to be made, and he is not to receive burial 
among the brotherhood. The same also, we do enact, with re- 
ference to the various religious orders ; and the abbat who shall 
not with due diligence pay attention to the same, is to know 
that he will thereby incur the loss of his office. Priorships also, 
or abbacies, 67 are to be given to no person for the receipt of 
money ; and if this shall be transgressed, let both the giver and 
the receiver, be removed from the administration of their eccle- 
siastical duties. Also, when priors shall have been appointed 
in conventual churches, they shall not, except for manifest and 
reasonable cause, be changed ; unless, for instance, they have 
been guilty of dilapidation, or lived incontinently, or have been 
guilty of any offence of a like nature for which they shall ap- 
pear to deserve to be removed, or if they shall have to be trans- 
ferred through the necessity of their filling some higher office. 
It seems also proper to be added, that monks 'or black canons, 
or black nuns, are not to use coloured hoods, but black ones 
only ; and they are to use cloaks of only black or white, with the 
skins of lambs, cats, or foxes. Monks also, and other persons 
of the religious orders, are not to use hats, or to go away from 
their convents on pretence of making pilgrimages. We do 
also enact, that in every church of monks, or of any religious 
persons canonically appropriated to their use, a vicar shall, un- 
der the superintendence of the bishop, be appointed, who shall 

6fi Eccl. iv. 10. 

67 In the text " obedientiae." This was a name sometimes given to 
the abbacy, and sometimes to any ecclesiastical office whatever. 

KK 2 



500 ANNALS OF BOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

receive a fair and sufficient maintenance from the property of 
the church. [These, saving in all things the honor and privi- 
leges of the Holy Church of Rome.] 

In the same year, Octavianus, cardinal bishop of Ostia, and 
legate of the Apostolic See, came into France, being sent as 
legate a latere by our lord the pope Innocent, in order to en- 
quire into the divorce that had taken place between Philip, 
king of France, and queen Botilda, his wife, and in the first 
place, before entering upon the question, to compel the before- 
named king of France to put away his German adulteress, and 
to take again his wife Botilda, and treat her in a due and 
becoming manner. 

This accordingly took place upon the vigil of the Nativity 
of the blessed Mary, the Mother of God and ever a Virgin, the 
said cardinal and the archbishops, bishops, and clergy of France, 
having met at the church of Saint Leodegar, at Nivelle. Thither, 
also, came Philip, king of France, and Botilda, his queen, and 
his German adulteress ; and the king of France, at the admo- 
nition of the said cardinal, and by the advice of his people, jmt 
away his adulteress, and took back his queen Botilda; immedl- 
~ately after which he made complaint against her to the cardinal, 
saying, that legally he ought not to have her for a wife, as 
they were too closely connected by consanguinity, and that this 
he was prepared in every way to prove ; and he therefore de- 
manded that a divorce should be effected between them. 

Upon this, the before-named cardinal appointed for them 
a space of six months, six weeks, six days, and six hours from 
the vigil of the Nativity of the blessed Mary, within which to 
deliberate upon the matter, and, at the choice of queen Botilda, 
appointed Soissons as the place for trial. On the same day, 
that is to say, on the vigil of the Nativity of Saint Mary, after 
the king of France had put away his adulteress, and had taken 
again his wife Botilda, the sentence of interdict upon the 
churches in the kingdom of France was immediately repealed, 
arid, the bells ringing, there was great joy among the clergy 
and the people, as the interdict had now lasted for more 
than thirty weeks, and the bodies of the dead had been buried 
outside of the town, along the lanes and streets. Shortly after 
this, the woman before mentioned, whom the king of France 
had put away, gave birth to a son, who was called Philip, after 
the name of his father. The said king of France had also had, 
by the same woman, a daughter, who was five years old on the 



A.D. 1200. THE ARCHBISHOP OF YORK IS HARASSED. 501 

very day on which, he put her away; which daughter the 
king of France promised that he would give in marriage to 
Alexander, the son of William, king of Scotland. 

In the same year, on the ninth day before the calends of 
October, being the last Saturday [of the autumnal fast 68 ] of the 
four seasons before the feast of Saint Michael, William, sur- 
named Malvoisin, the bishop elect of Glasgow, was ordained 
priest at Lyons, by the archbishop of that city ; and on the fol- 
lowing day, namely, the Lord's day, being the eighth day before 
the calends of October, he was consecrated bishop of Glasgow 
by the same archbishop, by order of pope Innocent the Third. 

In the month of October, in the same year, after settling his 
affairs in Normandy and his other territories beyond sea, John, 
king of England, crossed over from Normandy to England, 
bringing with him his wife Isabel ; and on the eighth day before 
the ides of the said month, being the Lord's day, he and his 
wife Isabel were crowned at London, at Westminster, by Hu- 
bert, archbishop of Canterbury. In the meantime, by command 
of the said king, Geoffrey, archbishop of York, his brother, 
was deprived of all the manors and property of his archbishopric. 
On this occasion, James de Poterne, who was the then sheriff 
of York, violently entering upon the manors of the said 
archbishop, made waste of his property ; on which the arch- 
bishop excommunicated the said sheriff, and all the authors and 
abettors of the said violence, with candles lighted and with 
bells ringing. He also excommunicated all who had excited 
or wished to excite his brother John to wrath or indignation 
against him without any fault on his own part. He also excom- 
municated the burgesses of Eeverley, and suspended that town 
from the celebration of Divine service, and from the ringing of 
bells, because the said burgesses had broken into his park, and 
had disturbed and lessened his other possessions, which Roger, 
archbishop of York, his predecessor, and he himself, for some 
time, had held without molestation. 

In process of time, however, John, king of England, following 
the advice of prudent men, restored to the before-named arch- 
bishop his archbishopric, and named a day for him to come to 
court, for the purpose of showing why he had not crossed over 
with him, in order to make a treaty with the king of France, 
when he had been summoned so to do ; as also, why he had not 

63 There were originally four periods of fasting in the Latin church, 
apportioned to the four seasons. 



502 ANNALS OF HOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

permitted his servants to receive the money levied upon the 
carucates in his hands, as had been done in other parts of the 
kingdom, and why he had beaten one of the servants of the 
sheriff of York ; and in order that he might repay to the king 
three thousand marks of silver, which he had owed to Richard, 
king of England, his brother. 

f Immediately after his coronation, John, king of England, 

| sent Philip, bishop of Durham, Roger Bigot, earl of Nor- 

| folk, Henry de Bohun, earl of Hereford, nephew of "William, 

\ king of Scotland, David, earl of Huntingdon, brother of the 

1 said king of Scotland, Roger de Lacy, constable of Chester, 

| "William de Vesci and Robert de Ros, sons-in-law of the said 

| king of Scotland, and Robert Fitz-Roger, sheriff of Northum- 

(jberland, to William, king of the Scots, with letters patent from 

the king, giving a safe conduct for the purpose of bringing the 

said king of the Scots to the king of England, and naming the 

morrow of the feast of Saint Edmund as that of his appearance 

at Lincoln. 

In the meantime, Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, returning to 
England from the parts beyond sea, fell ill at London, being 
attacked by a quartan ague ; on which John, king of England, 
came to visit him, and confirmed his will, and promised him, in 
the name of the Lord, that for the future, in his time, he would 
ratify all reasonable testaments of prelates of churches. Shortly 
after, in the month of November, sixteen days before the ca- 
lends of December, being the fifth day of the week, Hugh, 
bishop of Lincoln, departed this life at London. 

In the same month of November, on the eleventh day before 
the calends of December, being the third day of the week, 
John, king of England, and William, king of Scotland, had an 
interview at Lincoln ; and, on the day after, that is to say, on 
the tenth day before the calends of December, being the fourth 
day of the week, John, king of England, fearlessly, and con- 
trary to the advice of many of his followers, entered the cathe- 
dral church of Lincoln, 69 and offered on the altar of Saint John 
the Baptist, in the new buildings there, a chalice of gold. After 
this, on the same day, he and William, king of the Scots, met for 
a conference, outside of the city of Lincoln, upon a lofty hill ; 
and there, in sight of all the people, William, king of the Scots, 

69 This is an allusion to the superstitious notion, that misfortune would 
befall those kings who entered the city of Lincoln. See Vol. i. p. 249, and 
the Note. 



A.D. 1200. CONFEEENCE OF ICINGS OF ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND. 503 

did homage to John, king of England, as of his own right, and 
swore fealty to him, upon the cross of Hubert, archbishop of 
Canterbury, for life and limb, and his worldly honor against all 
men, and for preserving the peace toward him and his realm, 
saving always his own rights, the following being witnesses 
thereto : Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, John, archbishop 
of Dublin, Bernard, archbishop of Ragusa, Philip, bishop of 
Durham, William, bishop of London, Gilbert, bishop of Ro- 
chester, Eustace, bishop of Ely, Savaric, bishop of Bath, Herbert, 
bishop of Salisbury, Godfrey, bishop of Winchester, Gilles, bi- 
shop of Hereford, John, bishop of Norwich, Roger, bishop of 
Saint Andrew's, in Scotland, Henry, bishop of Llandaff, and 
Roger, bishop of Bangor; Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, justiciary of 
England, earl of Essex, Roger Bigot, earl of Norfolk, Hamelin, 
earl of Warenne, Baldwin de Bethune, earl of Aumarle, Wil- 
liam, earl of Salisbury, Henry de Bohun, earl of Hereford, the 
earl of Clare, the earl of Ferrers, David, brother of William, 
king of the Scots, earl of Huntingdon, Roland, son of Uctred, 
son of Fergus, prince of the men of Galloway, Patrick, earl of 
Lothian, Griffin, son of Rees, king of South Wales, and many 
besides, from the kingdom of Scotland ; and in presence of the 
following barons of England and Normandy; Roger, constable of 
Chester, Eustace de Vesci, Robert de Ros, William de Stute- 
ville, Ralph Chamberlain of Tankerville, Warine Fitzgerald, 
Stephen de Turnham, and Robert, his brother, Gilbert Basset, 
and Thomas and Alan, his brothers, Roger de Huntingfield, 
Saier de Quincy, William de Hastings, Jolan de Neville, Simon 
de Chancy, Gerard de Camville, and many others of the barons 
of England and Normandy. 

Accordingly, after doing homage, William, king of Scotland, 
demanded of John, king of England, his lord, the whole of 
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmoreland, as his right 
and inheritance ; and after this had been discussed between 
them at considerable length, and they could not come to an 
agreement, the king of England demanded of the king of Scot- 
land a truce, for the purpose of deliberating until Pentecost 
next ensuing. This being granted, on the day after, that is to 
say, on the ninth day of the calends of December, being the 
fifth day of the week, early in the morning, William, king of 
the Scots, set out on his return to his own kingdom, under the 
safe conduct of the persons before named, who had escorted 
him to the king of England. 



504 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

On the same day, that is to say, on the ninth day before the 
calends of December, the body of Hugh, bishop of Lincoln, was 
carried to Lincoln, for the purpose of being buried there ; on 
which, John, king of England, and the above-named three arch- 
bishops, and thirteen bishops, together with the said earls and 
barons, went forth to meet it, and received the body ; and the 
king himself, with the earls and barons, carried the body on their 
shoulders to the porch of the cathedral church, rejoicing in thus 
showing obedience to God and to his blessed minister. At the 
door of the church the above-named archbishops and bishops re- 
ceived the body, and then it was carried on the shoulders of the 
priests into the choir, where it remained for the night. While 
the service of the dead was being performed around it, a certain 
woman, who for seven years had been blind of one eye, re- 
covered her [perfect] sight. There too a certain cut-purse cut 
away the purse belonging to a woman, immediately upon which 
both his hands became contracted, and he stood motionless, 
crying aloud, and saying, 70 " I repent, alas ! if belief is ever 
accorded to any of the wretched, I repent, and am tortured by 
my deeds. I, who confess that torments still more severe are by 
me deserved, though hardly can I endure them more severe. And 
yet, although this punishment is merited by my deeds ; still, 
great hopes have I in the mercy'of God. Hope it is that makes 
even the delver, 71 chained with the fetter, to live on, and to fancy 
that from even the iron his legs will be released. Hope it is 
that, when on every side no land he sees, makes the ship- 
wrecked sailor still strike out in the midst of the waves. 
Full oft has the skilful care of the physicians abandoned him, 
whom, as the pulse died away, hope did not forsake. Those 
in prison fast enclosed are said to look for the day of safety, and 
many a one as he hangs on the cross, still breathes forth his 
vows. Lo, hope ! how many, when around the neck they have 

?0 This extempore confession of the Cut-purse, consists of nine Penta- 
meter couplets, beginning 

'* Poenitet, O, si quid miserorum creditur ulli, 

Poenitet, et facto torqueor ipse meo." 

Roger of Wendover is content to leave him to speak in plain prose only, 
and to the following effect. " Pity me, pity me, ye friends of God ; for 
I renounce Satan and his works, to whom I have till now been a slave ; 
and pray to the Lord for me, that He may not confound me in my peni- 
tence, but may rather deal compassionately with me." 

*N " ut vivat fossor quoque compede vinctus." 

This poetical thief must have been a reader of Ovid ; there is an allusion in 
these words to the Tristia, B. iv. El. i. 1. 1. 



A.D. 1200. TWELVE ABBATS COME TO KING JOHN. 505 

tied the noose, has she forbidden to die by the purposed death ! 
Sometimes at the altar does the violator of the temple take 
refuge, nor does he dread to invoke the offended Deity's aid." 

Then, returning to himself, he exclaimed, "Be silent, thou 
my tongue, nothing more art thou allowed to say." After which, 
turning to the clergy, he said, " Pity me, do you, at least, pity 
me, ye friends of God, and pray for me unto the Lord, that He 
in His ineffable mercy may have mercy unto me. For Satan 
and his works I renounce." And immediately, upon prayer 
being made for him unto the Lord, the chains of Satan were 
loosed, by which his hands had been bound together, and he 
was made a whole man from that hour, praising and glorifying 
God. "At .praises being given such as thine, do they in 
heaven rejoice, that so, what their power is able to effect, by 
testimony they may prove. Full oft do they alleviate punish- 
ments, and restore the light withdrawn, when they see that a 
sin has been sincerely repented of." 72 

On the eighth day before the calends of December, being the 
sixth day of the week, the body of the said Hugh, bishop of 
Lincoln, was, after the solemnity of the mass, carried into the 
new church which he himself had founded in honor of the 
blessed Mary, the Mother of God and ever a Virgin ; and he 
was buried by the before-named archbishops and bishops, near 
the altar of Saint John the Baptist. Oh ! how great was the 
grief of all, how great their lamentations ! and those of the 
clergy in'especial. For he was truthful in word, just in judgment, 
force seing in counsel, conspicuous in virtue, and remarkable 
for every endowment of manners ; and his life shed a glorious 
"i^ht^upon all churches. " The closing day of man must ever 
be a\voi fo d, and before his death and the last rites ought no 
man to be pronounced happy." 73 For to live is not a glorious 
thing, but to live well is the thing to be gloried in. 

Also, while John, king of England, was staying at Lincoln, 
there came to him twelve abbats of the Cistercian order, and, 
falling at his feet, begged for mercy, saying that his foresters 

T 2 Two Elegiac couplets. 73 A quotation, 

" Ultima semper 

Expectatione dies homini est ; dicique beatus 
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet." 

The classical reader will here remember the conversation of Solon with 
Croesus, and his story of the deaths of Cleobis and Biton, related in the 
first Book of Herodotus. 



506 ANNALS OF HOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

had destroyed their cattle, by which they and the poor of 
Christ were sustained, and had driven them away from the 
royal pastures and forests ; on which the king made answer, 
" Arise." Accordingly, all these men arose, and the king 
himself, by the inspiration of the Divine favour, fell on his 
face before their feet, asking pardon, and said to them, " My 
protection I do give and do grant to you, that you may feed your 
cattle in my pastures and forests, in the manner in which the 
said privilege is known to have been granted to you by my 
predecessors the kings of England ; in addition to which, look 
out for some suitable place in my kingdom for you to found 
an abbey of your order, and I will build it for the good of my 
soul and those of my parents, and for the establishment of my 
kingdom, and there, God willing, will I be buried." 

In the month of December, in the same year, Roland, prince 
of Galloway, died at Northampton, in England, on the four- 
teenth day before the calends of January, being the third day 
of the week, and was buried there, in the abbey of Saint Andrew. 

In the same year, Dunecan, son of Gilbert, the son of Eergus, 
carried off Evelina, the daughter of Alan Eitz- Walter, lord of 
Renfrew, before the return of William, king of Scotland, from 
England into his territories. The king, being greatly enraged 
at this, exacted from Alan Eitz-Walter twenty-four hostages, 
as pledges that he would keep the peace towards him and 
his territories, and that he would exact redress for that 
offence. 

In the month of September, in the said year, Hugh, bishop 
of Lincoln, within fifteen days after his death, appeared, in 
his sleep, to Master Roger de Roleston, dean of the church of 
Lincoln, and said to him, "Our Lord Jesus Christ has, in His 
favour, granted unto me, that one of you my brethren shall before 
long come to me to reign with the Lord. Be -ye, therefore, pre- 
pared and watch, for ye know not the day nor the hour when 
the Lord shall come;" and so saying, he departed. When 
the morning came, the before-named dean related this vision 
in the chapter- house to the brethren, and they were all with 
one mind desiring with great desire to be relieved from the 
great burden of the flesh, and to be with Christ. But this 
vision was, at this time, fulfilled in one brother only of their 
number, Robert Deschapelles. Eor he immediately fell ill, 
and, breathing his last within three days, took his departure 
unto the Lord. [After his death] his body was found to be 



A.D. 1200. ANSWER OF THE ENVOYS OF THE KING OF THE DANES. 507 

sewed up in sackcloth, from the head to the knees, which he 
had been long in the habit of wearing beneath a white gar- 
ment. 

In the same month of December, a little before the Nativity 
of our Lord, there appeared by night, in the province of York, 
five moons in the heavens, at about the first watch of the 
night. The first appeared in the north, the second in the 
south, the third in the west, the fourth in the east, and the 
fifth in the middle of the first four, having with it many 
stars ; and this latter one, with its stars, made the circuit of 
the four moons previously mentioned five or six times. This 
phenomenon appeared, in the sight and to the great surprise of 
many, for about a period of one hour; after which, it va- 
nished from the eyes of those who beheld it. 

In the same year, at Mid-Lent, in the month of March, Philip, 
king of France, and queen Botilda, his wife, met, with their re- 
spective partisans, at Soissons, in the presence of Octavianus, the 
bishop of Ostia, the judge-delegate of our lord the pope Inno- 
cent. On behalf of the said queen also, there were there 
present bishops, and other worthy and discreet men, who had 
been sent by Canute, king of the Danes, her brother, and who, 
before the commencement of the trial, demanded of the king 
of France security to be at liberty to answer and to make 
allegations, and to depart from his territories. These being 
accordingly granted, the king of France stoutly demanded 
that a divorce should take place between himself and Botilda 
his wife, saying, that they were so closely connected in the 
ties of consanguinity, that he was bound by law to have no 
intercourse with her. 

To this, the envoys of the king of the Danes made answer 
in the following terms: "We both know, have heard, and 
have seen, that, -when the venerable men, your envoys, whom 
your excellency sent to our lord Canute, the king of the Danes, 
for the purpose of contracting a marriage between you and 
Botilda, his sister, were in his presence, and had stated that 
you had desired, with exceeding great desire, to take to wife 
his sister Botilda, a distinguished maiden, and of royal birth, 
and urgently requested that she might be sent to you, our 
lord Canute, the king of the Danes, the mighty triumpher over 
his foes, whom no one with impunity opposes, upon hearing 
the opinions of the nobles of his kingdom, thought proper 
to listen to your requests. Upon this, your said envoys made 






508 AlTOALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEK". A.D. 12UO. 

oath upon your soul, and upon their own souls as well, that, 
immediately the said Botilda should enter within the limits of 
your kingdom, you would have her married to you, and crowned 
queen, and would treat her honorably as your wife, so long as 
you two should live. And, as to this, you sent unto our mas- 
ter, the king of the Danes, your instrument, which we have 
here in our hands, and we have the instruments of your nobles 
as well, who made oath to the same effect. And inasmuch as 
you have treated the before-named Botilda, your wife, other- 
wise than as was sworn to by your nobles, we do accuse them 
of perjury and of breach of faith in presence of our lord the pope ; 
we do also appeal to our lord the pope from the judge here, Oc- 
tavianus, the lord bishop of Ostia, who is suspected by us, inas- 
much as he is your kinsman by blood, as he admits, and shows 
too great favour to your cause." In like manner, also, queen 
Botilda herself appealed, in her own behalf, to our lord the 
pope. On this, Octavianus, bishop of Ostia, and legate of the 
Apostolic See, hearing that appeal was made to the Supreme 
Pontiff, said to the envoys of the king of the Danes, " Wait 
till such time as my colleague, who has been asssociated with 
me by our lord the pope, and who will be here before long, shall 
come, and then receive the decision that he shall give." They, 
however, took their departure, saying, " We have appealed." 

After three days, the other legate arrived, in whose sanctity 
and justice our lord the pope had full confidence, and, sitting 
in judgment, he found no cause why there should be a divorce 
between Philip, king of France, and queen Botilda, his wife; 
but when it was his intention to pronounce final sentence 
thereon against the king of France, the king, being forewarned 
thereof, took his departure before the sentence was pronounced, 
taking with him his wife, Botilda, whom he placed in still 
closer confinement. 

P$*In the same year, this treaty of peace and final reconcilia- 
tion was made between Philip, king of France, and John, king 
of England : 

The final Treaty made between Philip, king of France, and John, 
king of England. 

" Philip, by the grace of God, king of the Franks, to all to 
whom this present writing shall come, greeting. Know ye, 
that .this is the form of the treaty of peace made between us and 
our dearly beloved and faithful John, by the grace of God, king 



A.D. 1200. TREATY OF THE KINGS OF FEANCE AND ENGLAND. 509 

of England : that is to say, he will observe the treaty of peace 
towards ourselves and our heirs, which king Richard, his brother, 
made with ourselves between Chastel Heraud and Charoton ; 
with the exception of those things, which in this present instru- 
ment are excepted or changed by reason of the exceptions which 
the said king Eichard made in the said treaty of peace so con- 
cluded with us. And to this further effect ; that the said John 
has given to us and to our heirs, as being the right heir of his 
brother Richard, the city of Evreux and the Evreusin, with all 
the fees and demesnes thereof; in such manner as the under- 
written boundaries set forth. The said boundaries are placed 
between Neubourg and Evreux. The whole of the land that 
shall lie within the said boundaries on the side of France shall 
belong to me ; while that which shall be on the side of Neu- 
bourg shall belong to the king of England. Also, as much 
land as we have extending towards Neubourg, so much shall 
we have extending towards Conches, and towards Akemu a 
similar extent, in the direction where the abbey of Noa is 
situate, according to the course which the river Icogne there 
takes. Gurtebo 71 also, as far as it extends, he has given unto 
us ; Tiliers, with its appurtenances, and Danville remain in the 
hands of the king of England ; also, as much as the lord of 
Bruroles shall have (namely, that which he shall be entitled to 
have) in the lordship of Tiliers, just so much is the lord of 
Tiliers to have (that is, to be entitled to have) in the lord- 
ship of Bruroles. He has also granted unto us as much of the 
bishopric of Evreux as lies within the said boundaries ; for 
which the bishop of Evreux shall be answerable to us and to 
our heirs : while the said bishop shall be answerable to the king 
of England, and to his heirs, for as much thereof as shall lie 
without the said boundaries. Be it also known, that neither 
we nor the king of England shall be at liberty to erect fortifi- 
cations within the boundaries established between Neubourg and 
Evreux, nor yet at Gurtebo, neither we on our side nor the king 
of England on his side, except where fortifications have been 
already erected within the before-mentioned boundaries. Also, 
the fortresses of Fortes and of Landes shall be immediately de- 
stroyed, and no fortresses shall be allowed to be rebuilt at the 
said places. And further, the king of England has caused the 
right heir to Evreux to quit-claim to us of all places which the 

74 There is no doubt that many of the names of these small places in 
Normandy are corrupt. 



510 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1200. 

count of Evreux used to hold within the said boundaries. With 
regard to Hulcasme, in Normandy, the following shall be the 
terms agreed on : the fees and demesne shall remain in the 
hands of the said king of England and his heirs, just as the 
archbishop of Rouen held the same on the day on which he 
made the exchange for Andely ; beyond which the whole of 
the Hulcasme belongs to us. Also, we are not to be at liberty to 
erect fortifications beyond Jumieges, on our side of Normandy, 
nor beyond the borders of the forest of Vernon, but within 
the same. The king of England has also given as a marriage 
portion to our son Louis, together with his niece, the daughter 
of the King of Castille, the fief of Heraud, the fief of Carsarre, 
and the fief of Butures, just as Andrew de Calumac held the 
same of the king of England ; and of all the same we shall 
stand seised until such time as the said marriage shall have 
been consummated. And whatever may happen as regards the 
said marriage, after the same shall have taken place, we are to 
hold the said fiefs all the days of our life ; and after our death, 
the said fiefs are to revert to the said king of England and his 
heirs, if the before-named Louis, our son, shall not have an 
heir by the niece of the king of England. But if the king 
of England shall chance to die without an heir by the wife 
now married to him, then, together with the fiefs aforesaid, 
the king of England shall give to our son Louis, together with 
his said niece, by way of marriage portion, the fief of Hugh 
de Gournay, on this side of the sea of England, and the fief of 
earl Patrick, just as they hold the same of the king of Eng- 
land, on this side of the English sea. Also, the king of Eng- 
land has given to us thirty thousand marks of silver, full 
weight and lawful money, according to the law by which they 
were made, that is to say, of the value of thirteen shillings and 
four-pence each mark, as an equivalent for our reliefs and our fief 
of Brittany, which we have transferred to the king of Eng- 
land. King John has also received Arthur as his liegeman, so 
that Arthur will hold Brittany of the said king of England. 
Also, the said king of England, as being right heir of his bro- 
ther, king Eichard, shall hold of us all fiefs in such manner as 
his father and king Eichard, his brother, held the same, and in 
such manner, as they are entitled to the fiefs, with the excep- 
tion of those above mentioned, which remain with us, as before 
stated. With regard to the count of Angouleme and the viscount 
of Limoges, the said king John shall receive them as his liege- 



A.D. 1200. TREATY OF THE ZINGS OF FRANCE AND ENGLAND. 511 

men, on condition that he will allow them to remain in pos- 
session of all their rights. Also, as to the earl of Flanders and 
the earl of Boulogne, it shall be thus arranged ; the earl of 
Flanders shall hold that which he holds in our territory, and 
we shall continue to hold of the earl of Boulogne what we 
now hold, that is to say, the demesnes, fiefs, and other things 
which are in the hands of the count of Pontigny, which 
fiefs and demesnes shall remain to us and to the count of 
Pontigny ; and all which the earl of Flanders holds of us, he 
shall do homage to us for the same. Also, if the earl of Flan- 
ders, or any one of our liegemen, who are or ought to be rather 
Hegemen of ourselves than of the king of England, shall attempt 
TxTdo us any eviTor injury, the king of England shall not be at 
liberty to aid them against us, and to support them, nor we, in 
like manner, his liegemen, who are or ought to be rather liege- 
men of him than of ourselves, saving always the contents before 
mentioned of this present treaty of peace. Among these cove- 
nants, the king of England has also made a covenant that he will 
give no aid to Otho, either with money or with troops, or with 
knights, or in any other way, unless with our consent. As to 
Arthur, it is thus arranged, that the king of England shall not 
deprive him of the fief or of the demesne of Brittany on this 
side the sea of England, except upon the lawful judgment 
of his court. The king of England has given us sureties by 
his liegemen whose names are underwritten Baldwin, earl of 
Aumarle, William, earl of Pembroke, Hugh de Gournay, "Wil- 
liam de Humezt, constable of Normandy, Eobert de Harcourt, 
John de Pratelles, William de Kay, and Guarine de Capuin who 
have made oath to the following effect, that they will come 
over to us with all their fiefs on this side the sea, if the king of 
England shall not observe this treaty of peace and covenant 
as arranged. We also have given sureties by our liegemen, 
whose names are underwritten : Eobert, count de Dreux, Geof- 
frey, count de Perche, William Garland, Bartholomew de Eoye, 
Gervaise de Chastel, Walter Chamberlain, the father, and Urso, 
his son, Philip de Leuns, and Walter Chamberlain the younger : 
who have in like manner made oath that they will go over to 
that king with all their [fiefs] if we shall not observe this 
treaty of peace, as the same has been arranged. And further, 
we and our pledges before named have sworn strictly and faith- 
fully to observe the same in good faith, and without any evil 
intent whatsoever. And that this same may be of lasting va- 



512 AJJfNALS OF BOGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1200. 

lidity, we do, by the authority of our seal, confirm^ this'present 
instrument. Done at G , 75 in the year from the Incarna- 
tion of our Lord 1200, in the month of May." 

A similar instrument to the above was received by the king 
of France, with the change only of the names. 

Customs of the Exchequer as to enquiries into debts due to our 
lord the king. 

It has been enacted in England, and the same is, by com- 
mand of king John, confirmed, that no sheriff shall receive 
ajaj_one_at_ the presentation of a baron for a seneschal/ 6 who 
cannot be answerable for his amercement consequent on a breach 
of faith, if he should chance to be guilty of the same. And in case, 
afthe presentation of a baron, a seneschal shall make oath that he 
will account to the sheriff for the debts due from his master to 
the exchequer, it is to be understood that he is to account for 
the debts due according to the computation of the sheriff; and if 
he shall not do so, he shall be put in the prison for that purpose 
named, according to the laws of the exchequer, and the debt 
due to the king shall be levied from the chattels of his master, 
in conformity with the laws of the exchequer. If also he shall 
not keep the faith to which he has pledged himself, so as not 
to appear at the time and place of payment to the sheriff, 
or if he shall make his appearance, and shall depart without 
leave given, his body shall be seized and placed in the king's 
prison for that purpose named, and he shall not be set at 
liberty but by the especial command of our lord the king. Also, 
persons shaU be sent upon the lands of the master, whose 
seneschal has committed the default, and payment shall be 
made from out of his chattels of the money which, according 
to the law of the exchequer, is due : and if the said money is 
due for a fine 77 on land, and chattels are not to be found, then 
the land on account of which the fine became due shall be seized 
for the use of our lord the king, and be retained until such 
time as the money shall be paid in conformity with the law 
of the exchequer. As a punishment for his breach of faith the 
seneschal who shall have been guilty of such breach, shall never 

75 Probably Gaillon, or Guleton. 

76 This name here means nothing more than steward. 

77 Probably the word " finis," here means the fine paid to the king, as 
superior lord, on entering on lands newly acquired by descent or purchase. 
It is, perhaps, the same as Spelmau calls " the king's silver." 



A.D. 1200. STORY OF THE PHILOSOPIIEK SECTTXDUS. 513 

be believed on his oath as to this or any other sums due what- 
ever, nor shall he be received ; 78 nor shall his master be believed, 
or to be listened to as to the said debt, unless by favour, and at 
the desire of the king, in conformity with the law and custom 
of the exchequer. 

In the same year, John i _king_ojL_Englan4, sold for five 
thousand marks, to William de Braose, the whole of the lands 
of Philip de "Worcester, and the whole of the lands of Theo- 
BaTOitz-'Waltef, in Ireland. On this, Philip, with difficulty 
escaping from the hands of the king, returned into Ireland, 
passing through the territories of the king of the Scots, and 
recovered part of his lands by waging war [against the king]. 
Also Theobald Fitz- Walter, by the mediation of Hubert, arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, his brother, paid to William de Braose 
five hundred marks, in order to regain possession of his lands, 
and did homage to him for the same. 

Of the Philosopher Secundus and his determined silence. 

In 79 the time of Adrian flourished the philosopher Secundus, 
who philosophized, keeping silence all the time, and leading 
the life of a Pythagorean. 80 For, when a little child, having 
been sent there 81 to be taught, he had heard among 
the Scots, that every woman is a harlot and unchaste. At 
length, becoming perfected in philosophy, he returned to his 
country, following the usual customs of a person on a pil- 
grimage, carrying a staff and a wallet, with the hair of his 
head and his beard growing long. [On his return] he was 
entertained in his own house, no one of the servants recog- 
nizing him, nor yet his own mother ; and, wishing to prove, as 
to women, if what he had heard was true, he called one of 
the maid-servants, and promised her ten pieces of gold if she 
would induce his mother [to comply with his desires] : on which, 
yielding assent to the maid's proposal, she had him introduced 
to her in the evening. And whereas she supposed that she was 
about to have carnal connexion with him, he embraced her just 

78 In the character of steward or seneschal to any lord. 

79 How this account of the philosopher Secundus and his maxims came 
to he inserted here, or for what purpose, it is impossible to say. It has 
nothing to do with the narrative. 

80 Probably abstaining from flesh. 

81 This was a singular school for the education of a child, in the time 
of Adrian or his predecessors. 

VOL. II. I ^ 



514 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOYEDEN. 

as though she had been his own mother, and lay upon her 
breast until the morning. 

When the morning came, and he wished to arise and 
depart, she caught hold of him, and said, " It was to try me, 
that you did this ;" on which he made answer, " By no means, 
madam, my mother ; but it would not have been a proper 
thing for me to defile the vessel from which I came forth." On 
this she enquired who he was ; when he made answer, " I am 
your son Secundus." Accordingly, on considering within her- 
self, not being able to bear her alarm, she died from fright. 

Secundus, now feeling sensible that it was through his words 
that his mother's death had happened, exacted it as a punish- 
ment upon himself for, the future not to speak again; he, 
accordingly, preserved silence until the day of his death It 
so happened, that about the same time the emperor Adrian, 
coming to Athens, heard of him, and, sending for him, in the 
first place saluted him ; the other, however, remained silent. On 
this, Adrian said, "Speak, philosopher, that we may hear 
something of thee." He, however, still persevered in his deter- 
mined silence ; on which Tyrpon called to a headsman, and 
said, " As this person does not choose to speak to the emperor, 
we do not choose that he shall live. Take him away, and put 
him to the torture." At the last moment, Adrian secretly 
took the headsman aside, and said to him, " Speak to him on 
the road, and persuade him to speak ; and if at your persuasion 
he makes answer, then behead him; but if he makes no 
answer, then bring him back to me/' 

Accordingly, Secundus was led by the headsman to the place 
of torture ; and the headsman said to him, " Secundus, why 
dost thou die in silence ? Speak, and thou shalt live." How- 
ever, caring but little for life, in silence he awaited death; 
and the headsman, leading him to the appointed place, said to 
him, " Stretch forth thy neck, and receive the sword thereon : " 
on which, he extended his neck, and preferred silence to life. 

On this, the headsman took him, and led him to Adrian, tel- 
ling him how that Secundus had persisted in his silence even unto 
death. Adrian, admiring the firmness of the philosopher, said 
to him, " Since this law of silence which thou hast deter- 
mined upon can in no way be broken, take that tablet and 
write, and at least speak with thy hand." Secundus, then 
taking up the tablet, wrote to the following effect : "As for 
me, Adrian, I fear thee not, because thou seemest to be the 



STORY OF THE PHILOSOPHEK SECUKDTJS. 515 

prince of this world ; thou mayest indeed hear me, but thou 
hast no power whatever to compel me to use my voice." 

Adrian, accordingly, read what he had written,, and said, 
" Thou art fully excused. But still I would propose to thee 
some questions for thee to answer me thereon ; of which the 
first is, 'What is the world?" 3 In answer to this, the other 
wrote, "The world is a circle without end, a sightly commo- 
dity, a form made of many forms, an eternal course, a revo- 
lution without error." 

"What is the ocean?" "The embracer of the world, the 
encircling limit, the dwelling-place of the rivers, the fountain 
of the showers." 

" What is God ? " "An immortal mind, an unimaginable 
loftiness, a form of many forms, a research that defies investi- 
gation, an eye that sleeps not, all-embracing, light, good." 

"What is the sun ? " " The eye of the heavens, a circle of 
heat, light without setting, the ornament of the day, the dis- 
tributor of the hours." 

"What is the moon?" "The ornament of the heavens, 
the rival of the sun, the enemy of evil-doers, the solace of 
wayfarers, the guide of mariners, the signal for solemnities, 
the bestower of dew, the presager of tempests." 

"What is the earth?" "The foundation of the heavens, 
the centre of the universe, the guardian and the mother of 
fruits, the cover of hell, the mother of those who are born, 
the devourer of all, the store-house of life." 

" What is man ?" " A mind incarnate, an apparition for a 
season, a looker-on of life, a slave of death, a traveller on his 
road, a guest on the spot, a struggling spirit, an abode for a 
short season." 

"What is beauty?" " A fading flower, a carnal felicity, 
an object of desire to mankind." 

" What is woman ? " " The confusion of man, an insatiable 
beast, a continual anxiety, a never-ceasing strife, the ship- 
wreck of an unchaste man, a human slave." 

" What is a friend ?" "A desirable name, a man seldom 
seen, a refuge in distress, an endless blessing." 

" What are riches ? " "A weight of gold, a servant of cares, 
an unpleasing delight, an insatiate envy, an ever- craving desire, 
an exalted face, a hateful object of desire." 

" What is poverty ?" "An odious blessing, the mother of 

LL2 



516 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1201. 

health, freedom from cares, the refresher of the wise, business 
without loss, possession without claim thereon, happiness with- 
out anxiety." 

" What is old age ? " " A wished-for evil, the death of the 
still living, a safe weakness, a living death." 

"What is sleep?" " The image of death, a rest from la- 
bour, the wish of the sick, the desire of the wretched." 

"What is life?" "The delight of the happy, the sorrow 
of the wretched, a waiting for death." 

" What is death ?" "An eternal sleep, the fear of the rich, 
the desire of the poor, an inevitable event, the robber of man, 
the flight of life, the dissolution of all things " 

"What is a word?" " The betrayer of the mind." 
" What is the body ? " " The resting-place of the spirit." 
" What is the beard ? " "A distinction of sex." 
" What is the brain ? " " The guardian of the memory." 
" What is the forehead ? " " The image of the mind." 
" What are the eyes ? " " The guides of the body, the ves- 
sels of light, the discoverers of the mind." 

" What is the heart ? " " The receptacle of life." 
" What is the liver ? " " The retainer of heat." 
" What is the gall ? " " The producer of anger." 
" What is the spleen ? " " The storehouse for laughter and 
mirth." 

"What is the stomach ? " " The cook of the food." 
" What are the bones ? " " The strength of the body." 
" What are the feet ? " "A moving foundation." 
" What is wind ? " "A disturbance of the air, a movement 
of the waters, a dryness of the earth." 

" What are rivers ? " "A never-failing course, the refresh- 
ers of the sun, the waterers of the earth." 

" What is friendship ? " "A wonderful certainty of a thing 
unknown." 

"What is it that will allow no man, though weary, to de- 
sist?" "Gain." 

In the year of grace 1201, being the third year of the reign 
of king John, the said king was at Guilford, in England, on 
the day of the Nativity of our Lord, which fell on the second 
day of the week. On the same day, William, king of the 
Scots, was at Lanark, in his territories. On the same day, Otho, 
king of the Germans, nephew of John, king of the English, was 
crowned at Mentz. After the Nativity of our Lord, on the 



A.D. 1201. THE BISHOP OF DURHAM DEPAETS FOE SPAIN. 517 

fifth day before the ides of January, there was a great earth- 
quake in England, at York, and in the neighbourhood. After 
the Nativity of our Lord, John, king of England, came to Lin- 
coln, but he could not come to an agreement with the canons 
of the church of Lincoln as to the election of a bishop. For 
the king wished to make an election according to his own 
pleasure, and the canons also wished to be at liberty to elect ; 
which, however, the king would not concede to them. 

In the same year, in the month of January, on the day of 
the Conversion of Saint Paul, being the fifth day of the week, 
John, king of England, crossed over the river Humber, and 
came to Cottingham, and was entertained by "William de 
Stuteville ; and on the next day he came to Beverley, where, 
being induced by a sum of money so to do, he made a stay with 
John Le Gros, who had been excommunicated by Geoffrey, arch- 
bishop of York ; and when the canons of Beverley wished to 
receive him with a procession and the ringing of bells, he re- 
fused to be so received, and would not allow them to be rung. 
On his departure from Beverley, Henry des Chapelles, a ser- 
vant of Geoffrey, archbishop of York, was seized and thrown 
into prison, because he would not allow the king to take any 
of the archbishop's wines. The said king also gave orders that 
all the servants of the archbishop of York, wherever they 
might be found, should be arrested ; which was accordingly 
done. 

In the month of February, at the Purification of Saint Mary, 
JoKn, king of England, and queen Isabel, his wife, were at 
Scarborough, from which place the king proceeded as far as 
the borders of his kingdom, and went through the land, and 
put the subjects of his kingdom to their ransom, that is to say, 
compelled them to pay fines ; charging them with having laid 
waste his forests. When he had come to Extoldesham, he 
heard that at Choresbridge there was a treasure concealed, on 
which he made people dig there ; but nothing was found beyond 
some stones, sealed with brass, iron, and lead. 

In the same year, at the vigil of the Purification of Saint 
Mary, William, bishop of Glasgow, landed at Dover, in Eng- 
land, on his return from his consecration. In the same year, 
immediately after the Purification of Saint Mary, Philip, bishop 
of Durham, crossed over between Dover and Witsand, for the 
purpose of going on a pilgrimage to Saint Jago. 

In the same year, between the Nativity of our Lord and the 



518 ANNALS OP EOGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1201. 

beginning of the fast, Roderic and Machdunlef were slain in 
Ulster, in a barn belonging to the White Monks, by the ser- 
vants of John de Courcy, the said John not knowing thereof, as 
it is said ; and, after he heard of it, he was very sorry, and, for 
this crime, sent the murderers into banishment. 

At Mid-Lent, John, king of England, and queen Isabel, his 
wife, were at York, and Geoffrey, archbishop of York, made 
his peace with the king on payment of a pecuniary fine, upon 
the understanding that, by the decision of four bishops and 
four barons, elected on behalf of the king and on behalf of 
the archbishop, amends should be made for the faults com- 
mitted by either side. Here also, William de Stuteville and 
James de Poterne, whom the archbishop had excommunicated, 
received absolution from him. 

In the meantime, Reginald Arundel, praecentor of the church 
of York, departed this life ; on hearing of which, Geoffrey, 
archbishop of York, wished to give the praecentorship to one 
of his own people, but the dean and chapter would not allow 
thereof, but, against the will of the archbishop, gave to Hugh 
Murdac the archdeaconry of Cleveland, which the said bishop 
had the day before given to Master Ralph de Kime, his own 
ofiicer ; and, when the archbishop wanted to instal him in place 
of the praecentor, the dean said to him, " You have no right to 
instal any one, and you shall not instal him ; for, by the autho- 
rity of the council of Lateran, we have given away this arch- 
deaconry." As the archbishop could not succeed according to 
his wishes, he proceeded to excommunicate Hugh Murdac. 

In the meantime, Honorius, archdeacon of Richmond, pro- 
ceeded to Rome, on account of the injuries which Geoffrey, 
archbishop of York, had done him ; he having, contrary to the 
ancient dignities of the archdeaconry of Richmond and the 
customs thereof, laid claim to the right of institution to 
churches and the synodals. Por the archbishop alleged that 
the said Honorius had resigned all these things to him, and, 
by his charter, confirmed the same. This Honorius in every 
way contradicted, and made complaint to pope Innocent of the 
injuries which the archbishop of York had done him, and. ob- 
tained from him a letter to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Innocent to Geoffrey, archbishop of York. 

" Innocent, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
the archbishop of York, health and the Apostolic benediction. 



A.D. 1201. LETTER OF POPE INNOCENT. 519 

If you recognized the authority of the Apostolic See, and 
the reverence due to the same, you would not presume in any 
way to derogate from the fulness of its power, and the privileges 
of its dignity, inasmuch as, you, who have been set apart by 
her to share her anxieties, have more frequently found her acting 
as your assistant in the emergencies into which, in your rash- 
ness, you had brought yourself. For you cannot excuse your- 
self, as you ought to have been able to do, on the ground that 
you were ignorant of that privilege, by which the means of ap- 
pealing to the Apostolic See lie open to all who have been un- 
justly aggrieved, inasmuch as you yourself have sometimes ap- 
pealed to our presence, and from grievances committed by you, 
appeal has been made to us, not once only, but many times, so 
that it is not possible for you to be ignorant of the said privi- 
lege. But, to let alone other considerations, if on this ground 
only, you ought to have abstained from all molestation of those 
subject to you, when they invoked our name, because, in many 
and arduous emergencies, you have both asked and obtained that 
favour should be shown to you by the Apostolic See. But, as 
the result of circumstances sufficiently shows, you neither regard 
our authority, nor recognize the favour that has been shown to 
you, nor do you pay any deference to appeals which are inter- 
posed, by those aggrieved, to the Apostolic See. For instance, 
when our beloved son, Master Honorius, the archdeacon of Eich- 
mond, being in full possession of the liberties of the archdea- 
conry of Eichmond, had, together with his clerks, appealed from 
you to the Apostolic See, by reason of manifest grievances and 
various injuries, you nevertheless pronounced upon him, and 
some of his clerks, sentence of suspension, and upon some 
churches in the same archdeaconry you pronounced sentence of 
interdict. And, not content with this indiscretion, after he had 
set out on his journey for the purpose of coming to the Apos- 
tolic See, suspending some of his clerks, and laying an interdict 
upon their churches, and excommunicating others, (in deed 
only, for of right you could not,) you extorted from the rest a 
certain sum of money, disturbing and molesting, in many re- 
spects, his state of quiet, as also that of his clerks. Wherefore, 
because we neither will, nor ought to, leave the excesses of 
such great presumption uncorrected, we do, by these Apos- 
tolic writings, enjoin and command your brotherhood, of your- 
self, to correct such matters as have been previously mentioned, 
in order that you may not compel us to be incensed against 
you to a greater degree, having hitherto borne with your 



520 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1201. 

temerity on so many occcasions. Otherwise, know that we 
have, by our writings, sent word and enjoined our venerable 
brother, the bishop of Ely, and our dearly-beloved son, the 
abbat of Waltham, that they are to denounce the aforesaid 
sentences of excommunication, suspension, and interdict, in 
such manner pronounced by you, as being null and void, and, on 
pain of ecclesiastical censure, all power of appeal removed, to 
compel you to make restitution of all that which you have ex- 
torted either from the clerks or from the churches of the said 
archdeaconry, after appeal to ourselves lawfully interposed, as 
also compensation for their losses sustained ; and whatever 
they shall find left unchanged by you or your people, to the pre- 
judice of him or of his people, they are, relying upon our 
authorization, to replace in its former state ; and are, by means 
of the stringent measures before stated, to prevent you from un- 
justly molesting the archdeacon or his clerks, or presuming to 
disturb their quiet or their liberties ; and you shall know for 
certain that it is a hard thing for you to kick against the pricks, 
unless you abstain from conduct of this nature, and reverently 
pay obedience to our mandates. If otherwise, we shall proceed 
still further, perchance, to lay our hands upon you more hea- 
vily than you apprehend, that so your excesses may not be 
laid to our charge. Given at the Lateran, on the third day be- 
fore the nones of February, in the [fourth j 82 year of our pontifi- 
cate." 

In the same year, that is to say, in the year from the Incar- 
nation of our Lord 1201, being the third year of the reign of 
John, king of England, the said king, and queen Isabel, his wife, 
were crowned at Canterbury, by Hubert, archbishop of Can- 
terbury, in the cathedral church there, on Easter day, which 
fell on the ninth day before the calends of April, being the 
feast of the Annunciation of our Lord, in presence of John, 
archbishop of Dublin, William, bishop of London, Gilbert, 
bishop of Rochester, Eustace, bishop of Ely, and John, bishop 
of Norwich. 

Shortly after Easter, the king issued commands that the 
earls and barons of England should, at Pentecost, be at Ports- 
mouth^ ready, with their horses and arms, to cross over with 
him. Eor_ the men of Poitou had prevailed against the guar- 
dians of his territories, and had laid siege to his castles, and Gu- 
arine de Clapion, the seneschalof Normandy, had, by command 
ofhis lord, John, kingof England, laid siege to the castle of Drien- 
court, which Richard, king of England, had given to Ralph 
82 This word is omitted in the original. 



t 



A.D. 1201. A PROPHECY EXPLAINED BY THE LEAENED. 521 

de Issoudon, count de Auche, brother of Hugh Le Brun. But, 
on hearing of the approach oFthe king of England, Thilip, 
king of France, raised all the aforesaid sieges, before the king 
of England had arrived in Normandy. 

In the meantime, the earls of England met to hold an inter-" 
view 83 between them at Leicester, and, by common consent, 
sent word to the king that they would not cross over with him. 
unless he_ should restore to them their rights. On this, the 
king, following bad advice, demanded possession of their cas- 
tles, and, beginning with William d'Aubigny, demanded of 
him the castle of Beauvoir ; on which the said William satisfied 
him by delivering his son as a hostage, and so retained posses- 
sion of his castle. 

In the same year, William de Stuteville was appointed by 
the king sheriff of York. In the same year, Philip, bishop of 
Durham, on his road to Saint Jago, was, on Easter-day, at 
Saint John d' Angely, where the head is kept of Saint John the 
Baptist, which Herod caused to be cut off in prison, and gave 
in a charger to the dancing-girl, the daughter of Herodias, 
his wife. On the same day, William, king of the Scots, was at 
Karel, in Scotland. 

In the same year, pope Innocent the Third reigning in the 
city of Rome, Saphadin, the brother of Saladin, in the Holy 
City of Jerusalem, Alexander, 84 the fratricide, in the city of Con- 
stantinople, Leo in Armenia, Aimeric de Lusignan in the cities 
of Tyre and Sidon, and in Acre, and the Isle of Cyprus, Ray- 
mond being prince of the city of Antioch, Otho, brother of 
Henry, duke of Saxony, being, in Germany, elected emperor of 
the Romans, Philip reigning in France, John in England, Swere 
Birkebain in Norway, Canute in Denmark, William in Scot- 
land, Gurthred in the Isle of Man, and John de Courcy in 
Ulster, our learned men declared that the old dragon was let 
loose, which is the same as the Devil and Satan, saying, "Woe, 
woe to those who dwell upon the earth, inasmuch as the old 
dragon is let loose, which is the Devil and Satan !" according 
to what was said by Saint John the Apostle and Evangelist, 
who at the [last] Supper reclined upon the breast of the Lord, 
and who drank the streams of the Gospel from the sacred spring 
itself of the breast of the Lord : "I, John, saw an angel come 
down from heaven, having the keys of the bottomless pit, and 

83 The first step towards gaining the Magua Charta. 
w A mistake for Alexis. 






522 ASXALS OF BOGER DE HOTEDEN. A.D. 1201. 

a great chain in his hand ; and he laid hold on the dragon, that 
old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him a 
thousand years, and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut 
him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the 
nations no more, till the thousand years should be fulfilled ; 
and after that, he must be loosed a little season." 85 Accordingly, 
our learned men asserted that these thousand years were now 
fulfilled, and that the Devil was loosed. Woe unto the earth 
and to the inhabitants thereof, for if the Devil, when bound, has 
brought so many evils upon the world, how many and how 
great will he bring when loosed ? Let us, therefore, suppli- 
antly pray to God, that in our daily actions He will preserve 
us from evil that He will check and curb our tongues that 
the dreadful din of strife may not resound that He will pro- 
tect and cherish our perception that He will not allow us to 
follow after vanity that the inmost recesses of our hearts may 
be pure that folly may be removed afar that moderation in 
food and drink may destroy the pride of the flesh that, when 
Christ, the Judge, shall come, at the end of the world, He will 
make us sharers in joy everlasting. 

In the month of May, in the same year, on the vigil of the 
Ascension of our Lord, Walter de Ghent departed this life, the 
first abbat of the canons regular of the holy Cross at Waltham. 
In the same year, in the week of Pentecost, when the barons 
of England were assembled at Portsmouth, for the purpose of 
crossing over with the king, the king received from each of 
them the sum of money which they had intended to expend in 
his service, and allowed them to return home ; after which, 
he sent before him into Normandy, William Marshal, earl of 
Striguil, with a hundred knights, and Roger de Lacy, constable 
of Chester, with another hundred knights, in order to make 
head against the attacks of his enemies upon the territories of 
Normandy. The king also gave to Hubert de Burgh, his cham- 
berlain, a hundred knights, and made him keeper of the marches 
of England and Wales. 

After this, the said king remitted his wrath against Geoffrey, 
archbishop of York, and restored him his manors and his servants, 
whom he set at liberty, and by his charter confirmed to him 
the liberties of the church of York, and of its archbishopric, 
in such manner as Roger, archbishop of York, had held the 
same. In return for the said confirmation, the said arch- 
* Rev. xx. 1-3, 



A.D. 1201. LETTEE OF POPE INNOCENT. 523 

bishop engaged to pay to the king, in the course of one year, 
one thousand marks sterling, and for the performance thereof, 
the said archbishop pledged his barony to the king. 

Shortly after, the king of England sent Geoffrey, bishop of 
Chester, Eichard Malebise, and Henry Pudsey to "William, 
king of the Scots, and requested that the time for giving an 
answer to the demand he had made of the county of Northum- 
berland, which the king of England had fixed at Pentecost, 
might be put off till the feast of Saint Michael. The king of 
England, and queen Isabel, his wife, then embarked and crossed 
over, in the second week of Pentecost ; but the king landed 
in the Isle of Wight, while the queen, his wife, embarking in 
another ship, and having a fair wind, landed in Normandy. 

After he had stayed some days longer in England, king John 
again went on board ship at Portsmouth, and crossed over to Nor- 
mandy; immediately upon which, a^cpnference was held between 
him and the king of Trance, near the isle of Andely, and they 
came to a full agreement, no one but themselves being aware of 
what passed at the interview between them. Three days after 
this, at the invitation of the king of France, king John went 
to Paris, and was lodged in the palace of the king of France, 
and honorably entertained ; the king of France having removed 
to take up his dwelling in another quarter. On his departure 
thence, the king of England proceeded to Chinon ; while here, 
Berengaria, the former queen of England, and wife of king 
Richard, came to him ; on which, John, king of England, made 
satisfaction to her for her dowry, in conformity with the testi- 
mony of Philip, bishop of Durham, and others who had been 
present at her marriage. 

In the meantime, pope Innocent, having the bowels of com- 
passion for the afflicted, wrote to the prelates of the churches 
to the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Innocent on giving aid to the land of 
Jerusalem. 

" Innocent, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his 
venerable brethren, the archbishop and bishops throughout the 
kingdom of England appointed, health and the Apostolical bene- 
diction. Our just and merciful God, who reproves and chas- 
tens those whom He loves, forgets neither to show mercy, nor 
does He withhold His compassion in His wrath. Although He 
spares not the rod, that He may not seem to hate His sons, 



524 ANNALS OF ROGEH DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1201. 

still, so does He moderate the severity of His just judgments 
against those who offend, that He scourges not so as to destroy, 
but, as it were, by His scourges to raise those who are fallen ; 
wishing not for the death of sinners, but rather that they may 
be converted and live, as there is more joy among the angels 
of God over one sinner that repenteth, than over ninety-nine 
just persons who need not repentance. For, inasmuch as 
the senses of all men are prone to evil from their youth up- 
wards, and human nature is more inclined to sin, in order 
that, if exalted only by prosperity, they may not wax proud 
and their pride may ever hold the ascendancy over them, 
He allows them to be humbled, that so, when they shall 
feel sensible that they are afflicted acording to their deserts, 
they may recognize the justice of the judge, and, washing 
away the faults of their repentance with their tears, may be 
turned unto the Lord, and the Lord may be turned unto them ; 
a thing which in the depopulation of the Eastern lands may 
readily be perceived by all. For when men who had now 
grown old in the world, had grown old in well-doing as well, 
and young men, like boys, had waxe$ wanton in the paths of 
vice, for now these hundred years past, and, almost all, like sheep 
going astray, being given up to the lusts of the flesh, wandered, 
every one his own way, the Lord willed by the loss of the pro- 
vince of Jerusalem, so to punish our misdeeds, as, by renewing in 
some measure the mystery of His passion, to open a gate to 
repentance, and a way unto us to salvation. For He who in 
his body suffered for our sins upon the Cross of wood, once again 
suffering crucifixion on that wood for the remission of our 
sins, allowed himself, as it were, to be afflicted, in suffering the 
Cross upon which our Salvation hung, and which He stained 
with His own blood, to be taken by the Saracens, and to be so 
long held in their possession, that He might see if any one 
would grieve at his griefs ; if there should be any one to seek 
that his body should be given up to him ; if there should be any 
one to wrap it in a napkin, and to place it in the sepulchre, and, 
when deposited in the tomb, to place thereupon spices of sweet- 
smelling savour. But we rejoice in the Lord that He who 
gave the cause for repentance, has also bestowed upon many 
the feelings of repentance, and has in His mercy inspired them 
with a wish, assuming the sign of the Cross, to avenge the 
injuries done to Jesus Christ, fulfilling the precept of the 
Gospel, 'If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, 



A.D. 1201. LETTER OF POPE INNOCENT. 525 

and take up his cross and follow me :' 8R that so, leaving behind 
the burden of its hump, the camel may pass through the eye 
of the needle, and the rich man, becoming poor, may enter the 
kingdom of heaven, and may for things temporal receive the 
things eternal. But because many, as we have heard, and 
with grief we mention it, have gone back and have laid aside 
the emblem of the Cross, that they may not appear to have 
come in vain, if they do not perform that which they intended, 
we do by these Apostolic writings strictly command and 
enjoin your brotherhood, all indulgences to the contrary not- 
withstanding (in case it should appear that there have been 
surreptitiously obtained any such from our predecessors), that 
you are to compel all such to assume the sign of the Cross, 
after due warning given, by means of sentence of excommu- 
nication and interdict, all power of appeal being withdrawn ; 
and that you are on each Lord's day and on festivals, with bells 
ringing and candles lighted, stating the names of those of 
whom you have or shall have notice, publicly to denounce 
the same as excommunicated, and to forbid Divine service 
to be celebrated in their presence wheresoever they shall 
come. You are also strictly to warn all who have received 
the sign of the Cross, and, if it shall be necessary, by ec- 
clesiastical rigour to compel them, at the time at which 
our dearly beloved sons, those noble men the earls of Flan- 
ders, Champagne, and Blois, and the others, shall, after pru- 
dent deliberation, by the advice of the wise, have deter- 
mined, during the ensuing summer, to perform their intended 
pilgrimage, to the end that, in the way which shall be 
considered to be most conducive to the interests of the Holy 
Land, they may together pay their obedience unto the Lord. 
The punishment, also, which we command to be inflicted 
upon those who have laid aside the sign of the Cross, in order 
to compel them to resume the same, you are, in like form, 
to inflict upon those who, within the next five years, shall 
presume to frequent tournaments, and are not to revoke the 
sentence which you shall have pronounced on such persons, 
until they shall have solemnly abjured tournaments for the 
said period, that so the blood that should be consecrated to the 
Lord, and whereby, at these times, a heavenly reward may easily 
be obtained, may not be shed unto devils, to the injury of 
the body and the danger of the soul. Each of you in his dio- 
ss St. Matt. xvi. 24. St. Mark viii. 34, x. 2L. St. Luke ix. 23. 



526 ANNALS OF ROGEB DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1201. 

cese is healthfully to remind the members thereof thus to do, 
and diligently to exhort them, frequently explaining to them 
the tenor of the Apostolical remission, to assume the sign of the 
vivifying Cross, in order that at least they may, with their 
property, according to their means, give some assistance to 
the Holy Land ; lest, if they shall, in this moment of emer- 
gency, refuse to assist Christ, they may now and hereafter in 
vain ask for assistance at His hands. Also, as to all these mat- 
ters, brother of Canterbury, we do appoint you our delegate, 
diligently to arouse the negligent to the performance of the 
same. We do further strictly enjoin and command you, that, 
in accordance with the commands which, in our other letters, we 
have given you, you will, each of you, in his respective diocese, 
urgently demand the fortieth part of all the revenues of 
churches and ecclesiastical persons, and of the incomes of clerks, 
and, after obtaining it, diligently collect the same, and, after 
collecting it, have the same trustily kept, without any diminu- 
tion thereof, to be laid out in giving assistance to the Holy 
Land; and so fulfil the Apostolic mandate, that, from your 
works we may perceive your obedience, and may fully under- 
stand how you proceed as regards others in this emergency, not 
s-o much your own as of Christ. Given at the Lateran, on the 
third day before the nones of May, in the fourth year of our 
pontificate." 

In the same year, Eustace, abbat of Elaye, returned to Eng- 
land, and preaching therein the word of the Lord from city to 
city, and from place to place, forbade any person to hold a 
market of goods on sale upon the Lord's day. For he said 
that the commandment under- written, as to the observance of 
the Lord's day, had come down from heaven. 

On the observance of the Lord's day. 

" The holy commandment as to the Lord's day, which came 
from heaven to Jerusalem, and was found upon the altar of 
Saint Simeon, in Golgotha, where Christ was crucified for the 
sins of the world. The Lord sent down this Epistle, which 
was found upon the altar of Saint Simeon, and after looking 
upon which, three days and three nights, some men fell upon 
the earth, imploring mercy of God. And after the third hour, 
the Patriarch arose, and Acharias, the archbishop, and they 
opened the scroll, and received the holy Epistle from God. And 
when they had taken the same they found this writing therein : 



A. D. 1201. ON THE OESEE VANCE OF THE LOKD's DAT. 527 

' I am the Lord, who commanded you to observe the holy day of 
the Lord, and ye have not kept it, and have not repented of your 
sins, as I have said in my Gospel, * Heaven and earth shall pass 
away, but my words shall not pass away.' 87 "Whereas I caused 
to be preached unto you repentance and amendment of life, you 
did not believe me, I have sent against you the pagans, who 
have shed your blood on the earth ; and yet you have not be- 
lieved ; and, because you did not keep the Lord's day holy, for 
a few days you suffered hunger, but soon I gave you fulness, and 
after that you did still worse again. Once more, it is my will, 
that no one, from the ninth hour on Saturday until sunrise on 
Monday, shall do any work except that which is good. And if 
any person shall do so, he shall with penance make amends for 
the same. And if you do not pay obedience to this command, 
verily, I say unto you, and I swear to you, by my seat and by 
my throne, and by the cherubim who watch my holy seat, 
that I will give you my commands by no other Epistle, but I 
will open the heavens, and for rain I will rain upon you stones, 
and wood, and hot water, in the night, that no one may take pre- 
cautions against the same, and that so I may destroy all wicked 
men. This do I say unto you ; for the Lord's holy day, you 
shall die the death, and for the other festivals of my Saints 
which you have not kept : I will send unto you beasts that 
have the heads of lions, the hair of women, the tails of camels, 
and they shall be so ravenous that they shall devour your flesh, 
and you shall long to flee away to the tombs of the dead, and 
to hide yourselves for fear of the beasts; and I will take 
away the light of the sun from before your eyes, and will send 
darkness upon you, that not seeing, you may slay one another, 
and that I may remove from you my face, and may not show 
mercy upon you. For I will burn the bodies and the hearts of 
you, and of all of those who do not keep as holy the day of 
the Lord. Hear ye my voice, that so ye may not perish in 
the land, for the holy day of the Lord. Depart from evil, and 
shew repentance for your sins. For, if you do not do so, even 
as Sodom and Gomorrah shall you perish. Now, know ye, 
that you are saved by the prayers of my most holy Mother, 
Mary, and of my most holy angels, who pray for you daily. 
I have given unto you wheat and wine in abundance, and 
for the same ye have not obeyed me. For the widows and 
orphans cry unto you daily, and unto them you show no mercy. 
8 < St. Matt. xxiv. 35. St. Mark xiii. 31. Su Luke xxi. 33. 



528 ANNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1201. 

The pagans show mercy, but you show none at all. The trees 
which bear fruit, I will cause to be dried up, for your sins ; 
the rivers and the fountains shall not give water. I gave unto 
you a law in Mount Sinai, which you have not kept. I gave 
you a law with mine own hands, which you have not observed. 
For you was I born into the world, and my festive day ye knew 
not. Being wicked men, ye have not kept the Lord's day of 
my resurrection. By my right hand I swear unto you, that if 
you do not observe the Lord's day, and the festivals of my 
Saints, I will send unto you the pagan nations, that they may 
slay you. And still do you attend to the business of others, 
and take no consideration of this ? For this will I send against 
you, still worse beasts, who shall devour the breasts of your 
women. I will curse those who on the Lord's day have 
wrought evil. Those who act unjustly towards their bre- 
thren, will I curse. Those who judge unrighteously the poor 
and the orphans, upon the earth, will I curse. For me you 
forsake, and you follow the prince of this world. Give heed 
to my voice, and you shall have the blessing of mercy. But you 
cease not from your bad works, nor from the works of the 
devil. Beause you are guilty of perjuries and adulteries, there- 
fore the nations shall surround you, and shall, like beasts, de- 
vour you." 

Accordingly, Eustace, the lord abbat of Flaye, came to York, 
and, being honorably received by Geoffrey, the archbishop of 
York, and the clergy and people of the city, preached the word 
of the Lord, and on the breaking of the Lord's Day and the other 
festivals, and imposed upon the people penance and gave absolu- 
tion, upon condition that in future they would pay due reverence 
to the Lord's Day and the other festivals of the Saints, doing 
therein no servile work, and that on the Lord's Day they would 
hold no market of things on sale, but devoutly attend to good 
works and to prayer. This ordinance he appointed to be ob- 
served from the ninth hour on Saturday until sunrise on Monday. 

Upon this, the people who were dutiful to God, at his 
preaching, vowed before God that, for the future, on the 
Lord's Day, they would neither buy nor sell any thing, un- 
less, perchance, victuals and drink to wayfarers. They also 
vowed, that from each five shillings' worth of such things as 
they might sell, they would give one farthing towards buying 
lights for the church and the burial of the poor. And, for the col- 
lection of these sums, the said abbat directed that in each church 



A.D. 1201. DIVINE JUDGMENTS ON BREAKERS OF THE LOPJ)'s DAY. 529 

a hollow chest should be placed, under the care of two or three 
trustworthy men, into which the people might throw the 
money before mentioned. The said abbat also appointed that 
an alms' -dish should be placed every day upon the tables of 
the rich, in which they might place a part of their victuals for 
the benefit of the poor, who had nothing of their own. The 
said abbat also forbade any person to buy or sell any thing, or 
to plead causes, in churches or in the porches thereof. 

Accordingly, through these and other warnings of this holy 
man, the enemy of mankind being rendered envious, he put it 
into the heart of the king and of the princes of darkness to com- 
mand that all who should observe the before-stated doctrines, 
and more especially all those who had discountenanced the 
markets on the Lord's Day, should be brought before the king's 
court of justice, to make satisfaction as to the observance of the 
Lord's Day. But our Lord Jesus Christ, whom it is better to 
obey than man, and who, by His Nativity, and Resurrection, and 
Advent, and by sending the Holy Ghost upon His disciples, 
rendered glorious this day, which we, accordingly, name the 
Lord's Day, and hallowed it as being the most distinguished, 
aroused the miraculous powers of His might, and thus mani- 
fested the same against some breakers of the Lord's Day. 

One Saturday, a certain carpenter of Beverley, who, after the 
ninth hour of the day was, contrary to the wholesome advice of 
his wife, making a wooden wedge, fell to the earth, being struck 
with paralysis. A woman also, a weaver, who, after the ninth 
hour, on Saturday, in her anxiety to finish a part of the web, 
persisted in so doing, fell to the ground, struck with paralysis, 
and lost her voice. At Rafferton also, a vill belonging to 
Master Roger Arundel, a man made for himself a loaf and baked 
it under the ashes, after the ninth hour on Saturday, and ate 
thereof, and put part of it by till the morning, but when he 
broke it on the Lord's Day, blood started forth therefrom ; and 
he who saw it bore witness, and his testimony is true. 

At Wakefield also, one Saturday, while a miller was, after 
the ninth hour, attending to grinding his corn, there suddenly 
came forth, instead of Hour, such a torrent of blood, that the 
vessel placed beneath was nearly filled with blood, and the 
mill-wheel stood immoveable, in spite of the strong rush of the 
water; and those who beheld it wondered thereat, saying, "Spare 
us,0 Lord, spare thy people!" Also, in Lincolnshire a woman 
had prepared some dough, and taking it to the oven after the 

VOL. n. M M 



530 AXNALS OF EOGEE DE HOVEDEN. A. D. 1201. 

ninth hour on Saturday, she placed it in the oven,which was then 
at a very great heat; but when she took it out, she found it raw, 
on which she again put it into the oven, which was very hot; and, 
both on the next day, and on Monday, when she supposed that 
she should find the loaves baked, she found raw dough. In the 
same county also, when a certain woman had prepared her 
dough, intending to carry it to the oven, her husband said to 
her, "It is Saturday, and is now past the ninth hour, put it 
one side till Monday;" on which the woman, obeying her 
husband, did as he had commanded : and so, having covered over 
the dough with a linen cloth, on coming the next day to look 
at the dough, to see whether it had not, in rising, through the 
yeast that was in it, gone over the sides of the vessel, she found 
there the loaves ready made by the Divine will, and well baked, 
without any fire of the material of this world. This was a 
change wrought by the right hand of Him on high. 

And yet, although by these and other miracles of His might, 
the Lord Almighty invited the people to the observance of the 
Lord's day, still, the people, fearing more the royal and human 
favour than the Divine, and fearing those who kill the body, but 
are able to do no more, rather than Him, who, after he has killed 
the body, has power to send the soul to hell, and fearing more 
to lose the earthly things than the heavenly, and things tran- 
sitory than things eternal, have, oh shame ! like a dog to his 
vomit, returned to the holding of markets on the Lord's day. 

In the same year, Hugh Bardolph, and some others of the 
king's justices, came to the fair of Saint Botolph, intending to 
seize in the king's name the woollen cloths that were not two 
ells in width between the lists, in conformity with the assize 
of king Richard. On hearing of this, the dealers prevailed 
with the judges before mentioned that their cloths should not 
1)0 seized, and that the said assize of king Richard should be 
no longer observed, either as to the width of cloth or the mea- 
sure of corn, and that they might be allowed in future to make 
their cloths wide or narrow, just as they pleased. On this 
occasion, to the injury of many, 88 the said justices obtained a 
large sum of money for the king. " Base means of gain ought 
to be'shamed." 89 

In the same year, John, king of England, making satisfaction 
to queen Berengaria, widow of his brother Richard, king of Eng- 

88 Who were afterwards cheated by the dealers. 

89 " Vitanda est turpis lucri causa." 



A. D. 1201. THE BISHOP OF DUHHAM EETTTRNS TO EXGLAHD. 531 

land, for her dowry, gave her the city of Bayeux, with its 
appurtenances, and two castles in Anjou, to hold the same for 
life, with a yearly payment of one thousand marks sterling, of 
which she was to receive each year five hundred marks, at the 
king's exchequer at London, and another five hundred marks 
at Caen, in Normandy. This was done at Chinon, in presence of 
Elias, archbishop of Bordeaux, and Philip, bishop of Durham. 

In the same year, Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, being 
on Saint Bartholomew's day at Westminster, in London, com- 
manded all his suffragans, in virtue of their obedience, and in 
the name of our lord the pope, to make diligent enquiry through- 
out their respective dioceses, and if they should find any per- 
sons who had abandoned their vows to assume the cross, to make 
them resume the same, and to depart on their pilgrimage, appoint- 
ing as the time for them to resume the cross, at the very latest, 
the feast of Saint Martin next ensuing, and as the time for 
their setting out, the Purification of Saint Mary next ensuing. 

In the same year died Theobald, count of Champagne, leaving 
as his heir an only daughter, whom he had by Blanche, his wife, 
sister of Berengaria, queen of England. In the same year 
died the German woman, the daughter of Genest, the wife of 
Philip, king of France, whom pope Innocent, in his letters, called 
an adulteress ; and by whom the said king had a son and a 
daughter ; which daughter the said king of France promised 
that he would give in marriage to Alexander, son of the king 
of Scotland. 

In the same year died Constance, the mother of Arthur, duke 
of Brittany. In this year, also, died Margaret, mother of the 
said Constance, sister of William, king of the Scots, and mother 
of Henry de Bohun, earl of Hereford. In the same year, also, 
died Eobert, prior of the church of Beverley, whose office Geof- 
frey, archbishop of York, conferred on Morgant, his brother, a 
son of king Henry, as was said, in spite of the appeal of Simon, 
dean of the church of York, who said that the same priorate 
had been given to him by the said archbishop, while the before- 
named prior Robert was still alive. 

In the same year, Philip, bishop of Durham, returned to 
England from Saint Jago, having performed his pilgrimage. 
In the same year, John of Salerno, cardinal priest, titular of 
Saint Stephen in Monte Celi, and legate of the Apostolic See 
in Scotland, Ireland, and the islands adjacent, came to York. 
Although he had been one of the two selected for the office of 



532 AXNALS OF KOGER DE HOVEDEK. A.D. 1201. 

Roman Pontiff after the decease of pope Celestinus, he declined 
the election, although ten cardinals would have agreed to his 
election ; and he, with the other cardinals, elected Lothaire, 
cardinal deacon, Pontiff of Rome, under the name of pope Inno- 
cent the Third. 

The said John never ate flesh, nor did he drink wine or cider, 
or any thing with which he might become intoxicated ; but 
for gold and silver he had a considerable thirst. In presence 
of this cardinal, Geoffrey, archbishop of York, made offer to 
Simon, the dean, and to the chapter, of York, to abide by his 
judgment as to all the matters in dispute between them ; sav- 
ing always the dignities and privileges of either party, and 
saving their rights. But this single expression " saving 
their rights" was burdensome and insupportable to them, 
whom the knowledge of their own doings accused ; and they 
used every endeavour that the clause " saving their rights" 
might be expunged. 

In the same year, in order that the peace might be more 
lasting between Philip, king of France, and John, king of 
England, it was enacted, and by writing confirmed, that if the 
king of France should in any way break the peace which he 
had made with the king of England, the barons of France, 
whom he had given as sureties for the observance of the treaty 
of peace, being released, with all their men, from fealty to the 
king of France, should go over to the king of England, in 
order to aid him against the king of France ; and that it should 
be the same as to the barons of the king of 'England, whom he 
had given as sureties for the preservation of the peace, and that 
they should become subject to the king of France, together with 
their men, being released from their fealty to the king of Eng- 
land, if that king should commit a breach of the peace. 

In the same year, "Walter de Lacy, a powerful man in Ire- 
land, had an interview with John de Courcy, lord of Ulster, and, 
attempting by treachery to seize him, slew many of his people. 
Upon this, when the said John had taken to flight, Hugh de 
Lacy, the brother of the before-named Walter, said to him : 
" My lord, come with me, and I will receive you in my castle, 
for which I am your liegeman, until such time as your troops 
shall have assembled, in order that you may take vengeance 
on those who have always held you in hatred." Accordingly, 
the said John believed him, and entered his castle in safety 
from the before-named Walter. 90 But when he wished to de- 
90 It is stated " Hugh," probably by mistake. 






A.D. 1201. LETTEE OF POPE INNOCENT. 533 

part therefrom, Hugh would not let him depart ; indeed, he 
had taken him for the purpose of delivering him up to the 
king of England, who had long wished to take him. However, 
the men of the said John did not cease night and day to ravage 
with fire, sword, and famine the lands of the said Walter and 
Hugh de Lacy, until they had delivered their lord, John de 
Courcy, from the custody of the said Hugh de Lacy. 

In the same year, John, king of England, wishing to challenge 
the barons of Poitou with treachery to himself and to his brother, 
hired many men, and took with him persons well skilled in the 
art of fighting in single combat, and chosen from his territories 
on both sides of the sea. But the barons of Poitou, being warned 
thereof, would not come to his court ; saying that they were an- 
swerable to no one but to their father. 91 And thus, the king of 
England, being baulked of his hopes, returned to Normandy, 
and the men of Poitou from this time became still more hostile 
to him. For the purpose of quelling their violence, the king of 
England appointed Robert de Turnham his deputy. 

In the same year, Master Honorius claimed the archdeaconry 
of Richmond against Roger of Saint Edmund's, and obtained 
a letter from our lord the pope Innocent upon the subject, to 
the following effect : 

The Letter of pope Innocent to the dean and chapter of York, in 
favour of Master Honorius. 

" Innocent, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his dearly beloved sons, the dean and chapter of York, health 
and the Apostolic benediction. Our dearly beloved son, Master 
Honorius, the archdeacon of Richmond, has signified unto us, 
that whereas he has on many occasions shown obedience and 
ready duteousness to our venerable brother the archbishop of 
York, the archbishop, returning him bad for good, and repaying 
love with hatred, has in many ways molested him, contrary to 
the dignities and liberties of his archidiaconal office ; and that, 
at length, in order to injure him still further, and to aggravate 
him still more, he has raised his adversary, Roger of Saint Ed- 
mund's, a clerk, with whom the said Master Honorius had 
made a compromise, to the said office ; who, on the pretext of 
letters obtained to our dearly beloved sons, the abbats of Saint 
Edmund's and Sibbeton, and the prior of Norwich, by a con- 
cealment of truth, is in many ways molesting him. Wherefore, 

91 Perhaps this means the pope. 



534 ANNALS OF BOGEB, DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1201. 

inasmuch as we have made it our care to revoke the said let- 
ters, as being surreptitiously obtained, and directed to judges 
who lie under our suspicion, we do, by these Apostolic writings, 
command and enjoin your discreetness, to make it your care 
to defend and maintain the said Master Honorius in his rights; 
and so to assist him as your fellow-brother and companion, 
that for so doing, you may merit our commendation, and he 
himself may, as a matter of duty, be rendered still more at- 
tached to you." 

The Letter of pope Innocent to the bishop of Ely and the arch- 
deacon of Northampton. 

" Innocent, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
his venerable brother, the bishop of Ely, and to his dearly-be- 
loved son, the archdeacon of Northampton, health and the 
Apostolical benediction. When our dearly beloved sons, Master 
Honorius, archdeacon of Richmond, and Master Columbus, our 
subdean, and the delegates of our venerable brother, the arch- 
bishop of York, came to the Apostolic See, we thought proper 
considerately to give them audience in our consistory. On 
part of the said archbishop it was alleged, that the institution 
of ecclesiastical personages and the care of vacant churches in 
his diocese belongs to him both by common law, as also by 
general custom ; but that, some of his predecessors had en- 
trusted to some of the archdeacons personally, both the institution 
as well as the care [of churches], though they still retained the 
same for some time in their own hands, and freely enjoyed the 
same, as was their right ; just as the archbishop, who is now set 
over the church of York, by special favour formerly granted the 
same to the archdeacon of Richmond, at the prayer of Richard, 
king of the English, of famous memory, who having been after- 
wards elected bishop, the archbishop then retained possession 
of them as his own ; and that, when it was his intention to 
confer the said archdeaconry on the before-named master, both 
before he conferred the same, as also on the conferring thereof, 
he expressly stated that he reserved in his own hands the right 
of institution as also the care [of vacant churches] ; on which, 
the archdeacon made answer, that he should be acting against 
God, and in derogation of canonical rights, if he should pre- 
sume to usurp the right of institution to churches, which 
belonged to the archbishop alone. And that, then renounc- 
ing those rights, he reduced his renunciation thereof to writ- 



A.D. 1201. LETTER OF POPE INNOCENT. 535 

ing, and, for the sake of greater precaution, by his own 
seal corroborated the same, and finally gave his corporeal oath 
that he would in nowise intermeddle therewith. In answer 
to this, the archdeacon himself stated, that, when Henry the 
First, of glorious memory, king of England, wished to create 
a new episcopal see at Carlisle, because by that step the arch- 
deaconry of Richmond received injury, that king requested one 
of the archbishops of York, of blessed memory, by way of re- 
compense for some portion of what was withdrawn from the 
said archdeaconry, to grant the before- mentioned dignities 
thereto ; on which, the archbishop acceded to his requests, and 
presented the rights of institution, as also the care [of vacant 
churches], not personally to the then archdeacon, but by a 
real and free grant, with the consent of the chapter of York, 
to the archdeaconry for ever ; and that, whereas the said arch- 
deaconry had been in continuous possession thereof, as also 
of other privileges, in the times of many archbishops, kings, 
and archdeacons, and the archbishop so often named, with- 
out any condition being made, granted him the same, after 
having so conferred it, the said archbishop asserted that he had 
given the same with all its liberties, the right of institution 
and the care of vacant churches excepted. That he, however, 
knowing full well the habit of the said archbishop, easily to give, 
and speedily to repent, and fearing lest if he should expressly 
contradict him, inasmuch as he had not yet gained possession 
of the archdeaconry, either his obtaining the same might be 
altogether hindered, or might for a long time be put off, made 
answer that 93 not only about that matter, but as to all his 
revenues as well, he would act in such manner as should be 
agreable to the archbishop. That, after he had entered into 
possession of the archdeaconry, he freely enjoyed the liberties 
thereof, as his predecessors had been in the habit of doing. 
That afterwards, when, contrary to all justice, the archbishop 
had deprived him of the said archdeaconry, and he could in no 
way obtain restitution thereof, without by deed renouncing the 
said privileges, he, knowing that his right would still hold good, 
being thus despoiled, gave to the archbishop himself, a letter of 
renunciation thereof, sealed with his own seal ; but that he 
never did, as alleged by the other side, abjure the same, but, 

93 A rather unbecoming defence to be made by a minister of religion 
before the pope, notwithstanding the opinion of pope Alexander, mentioned 
in the next page. 



536 ANNALS OF ROGEE DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1201. 

on the contrary, with the object of obtaining the benefit of 
restitution, enjoyed the same privileges as before, although the 
said archbishop, in manifold ways, aggrieved him and his clerks 
in relation thereto and to other matters, after appeal had been 
lawfully interposed. That, the grant of the before-mentioned 
liberties was not as it were that of one person to another per- 
son, but the same 94 were rather granted as it were by the 
actual dignitary himself, and were delivered, not by special 
favour to any individual, but as a matter of right, together 
with the archdeaconry, of the entirety of which, they doubtless, 
from the original gift made by way of compensation, formed a 
part. That, although any archbishop might perhaps enjoy the 
same while he held the archdeaconry in his own hands, still, 
no prejudice could be produced thereby to the archdeaconry, 
as it is understood as a matter of course that they are afterwards 
granted therewith. 95 Moreover, inasmuch as, by the council of 
Tours, all withholdings of prebends, dignities, and benefices, 
are prohibited, and the council of Lateran, where it forbids new 
taxes to be imposed, or old ones to be increased, adds thereto, 
' Let no one presume to appropriate to his own use any part of 
the revenues,' it is evident that the archbishop ought not to, 
and cannot, deprive the archdeaconry of any of its dignities and 
privileges. That besides, it cannot be believed that before the 
grant [of the office], or on the occasion of the grant, it was 
agreed that the archbishop should retain possession of the afore- 
said privileges, because, if he had chanced to attempt thus to 
usurp possession of what did not belong to himself, he would 
have seemed to be incurring the guilt of simony. That his 
renunciation could not injure the archdeacon, as he had re- 
nounced the same when despoiled thereof, and that pope Alex- 
ander, of blessed memory, our predecessor, asserted that a 
renunciation of that nature is not valid. Besides, although 
the collation to the archdeaconry belongs to the said archbishop, 
the entirety thereof belongs to the dignities of the church of 
York, and neither the archbishop nor the archdeacon could, 
without the consent and knowledge of the chapter of York, 
inflict so great an injury upon the dignities and privileges of the 
said archdeaconry. With reference to these points, the other 
side replied, that although renunciation or abjuration might 
not injure the archdeaconry, still, in consequence thereof, the 

94 This passage is evidently imperfect. 

85 " In ipsa" seems to stand for " in ipso." 



A.D. 1201. LETTER OF POPE INNOCENT. 537 

archdeacon was deprived of all means of attempting to recover 
the same. To this, however, the archdeacon made answer, that 
he was not attempting to recover the same, inasmuch as he was 
freely exercising them, just as formerly, at the time when he 
set out on his way to the Apostolic See, and was in enjoyment 
of the possession thereof. He also added, that inasmuch as 
the archbishop had, by shamefully retaining the dignity in his 
hands against the law of the constitution [of the Church], mu- 
tilated the same, he ought not, alleging, as it were, his own 
infamy, to be heard against him, the possessor thereof, on the 
point of his subsequent renunciation, or even his abjuration, 
if such there had been. Accordingly, after hearing what was 
alleged on both sides, and fully understanding the same, we 
pronounced that the archdeacon must be left in full possession 
of the privileges of the said archdeaconry, until it should have 
been proved by the other side, that the said liberties had been 
conceded [personally] by the archbishops to the archdeacons; for 
in such case, the archbishop would be at liberty, both before and 
after, as well as at the moment of granting [the archdeaconry], 
lawfully to make reservation thereof, as being his own ; or else, 
until it should have been lawfully proved that the archdeacon 
had abjured the said privileges ; but that in the latter case, if 
the concession of them 96 was a valid one, no right or benefit 
could accrue to the archbishop thereby, for that we, on petition 
of the church of York, or of ourselves, should consult the be- 
nefit of the said archdeaconry thereon. If, therefore, either of 
these positions shall be lawfully proved, let silence be im- 
posed upon the archdeacon as to the said privileges ; if nei- 
ther, then upon the archbishop. "We do therefore strictly 
command, and by these Apostolic writings enjoin you, forth- 
with to call the said parties before you, and to hear what 
shall be alleged on both sides, according to the form in 
the precedents set forth; always remembering, that if any 
change has been made by the archbishop or his people rela- 
tive to the said privileges since appeal was lawfully inter- 
posed, or since the archdeacon set out upon his way to Rome, 
you are, at the commencement of the investigation, all power 
of appeal withheld, to replace the same in its former state : 
and you are, all obstacle by appeal removed, to bring the 
same to a due conclusion, if you shall be unable, by the con- 
sent of the parties, to settle the same ; or else, you are to refer 
96 At the moment of granting the office. 



538 ANNALS OF EOGER DE HOVEDEN. A. I). 1201. 

the case, fully drawn up, to us for decision. If we were to have 
due regard to the doings of our venerable brother the arch- 
bishop of York, and wished to answer him, in accordance with 
his deserts, we should not only deprive him of the power of 
inflicting injury, but should even curtail his authority, who 
thus misuses it for oppressing those subject to him. For how 
and how long he has annoyed our dearly-beloved son Honorius, 
the archdeacon of Richmond, whom, in consideration of his 
learning and his integrity, he ought to have honored, the com- 
plaints of the archdeacon have fully shown to us ; for he has both, 
as he therein asserts, for some time, without cause, deprived 
him of his archdeaconry, and has frequently, at the impulse 
of his own will, launched against him and his clerks, and 
others as well, sentence of excommunication and suspension. 
Consequently, if we made it our care duly to provide for the 
welfare of the said archdeacon, we should take care to pro- 
nounce him for ever exempt from the jurisdiction of the said 
archbishop, as one of our predecessors is known in his time 
also to have exempted certain persons. However, it being our 
wish so to protect the archdeacon, as not for the present to 
curtail the authority of the said archbishop, we do command 
and enjoin you, upon our authorization, carefully to warn the 
said archbishop, and to forbid him to presume, without mani- 
fest and reasonable cause, and only in a reasonable manner, to 
pronounce sentence of excommunication, suspension, or inter- 
dict upon the said archdeacon, or his clerks or laymen, or 
churches in his archdeaconry. But if he shall do so, you are, 
supported by our authorization, to pronounce the sentences so 
given, to be null and void in law, all power of appeal on his part 
withheld ; and you are carefully to protect the archdeacon and 
his people for the future against the excesses of the arch- 
bishop, revoking as null and void, all power of appeal with- 
held, whatever attempts, in his rashness, he shall think proper 
to make against them. And further, if he shall disdain to 
listen to your advice, we shall make it our care duly to pro- 
vide against the same, not without confusion and disgrace to 
himself and his advisers.'* 

The Letter of pope Innocent on the same subject, to king John. 

" Innocent, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to 
the illustrious king of the English, health and the Apostolic 
benediction. It is the interest of your royal highness to pro- 



A.D. ;20J. LETTER OF POPE ITOTOCEOT. 539 

tect churches and ecclesiastical persons in their rights, and 
powerfully and lawfully to bridle the attempts of evil doers, 
when striving to molest them. Wherefore, inasmuch as our 
beloved son, Master Honorius, archdeacon of Richmond, is a 
man so learned and so virtuous, that, not only from his learn- 
ing and virtue, honor is reflected upon the church of York, 
but his duteous services may possibly prove advantageous to 
yourself, we do ask, advise, and exhort your serene highness in 
the Lord (and the more urgently, inasmuch as we are aware 
that he has attended not less diligently than faithfully to the 
business committed to his charge by your serene highness at 
our court,) to maintain and defend him in his rights, and not to 
permit him or his clerks, in contravention of the privileges of 
the archdeaconry of Richmond, to be aggrieved by molestation 
on part of any person whatsoever. Tare well." 

Another Letter of pope Innocent on the same subject. 

" Our dearly-beloved son, Honorius, archdeacon of Richmond, 
having come to our presence, and having presented to us his 
petition, has shown to us that, whereas we did formerly entrust 
to our dearly-beloved son, Peter, cardinal deacon and titular of 
Saint Mary in Via Lata, legate of the Apostolic See, the adju- 
dication of the questions which were moved against those who 
had been intruded into the prebends and dignities of the 
church of York, he, reserving to himself the final sentence 
thereon, did entrust to our venerable brother, the bishop, and 
our dearly-beloved sons, the dean and subdean of Lincoln, the 
hearing of the charge which was made against Roger of Saint 
Edmund's, in relation to the archdeaconry of Richmond. But 
although, observing due and legal form, they would have pro- 
ceeded to pronounce a definite sentence, at last, through the 
mediation of the chapter of York, there was an amicable and 
fair compromise effected, between Honorius, the archdeacon, 
and the before-named Roger, which each party, on oath, pro- 
mised to observe. However, shortly after, the said Roger, not 
taking into consideration the compromise made, and the oath 
which he had taken thereon, obtained letters from ourselves 
against the said archdeacon, addressed to you, who, as he 
asserted, attempted in many ways, contrary to justice, to 
injure him. For he alleged that, whereas he had set out 
to come to our presence, to set forth his legitimate excep- 
tions, and had utterly declined you, son, abbat of Saint Ed- 



540 ATTXALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEIST. A.D. 1291. 

mund's, as being suspected by him, both because the said [arch- 
deacon] was on too close terms of intimacy with you, and because, 
as he asserted, he himself is related to you by blood, as also 
because you had manifestly shown favour towards the said arch- 
deacon in relation to the said matters, and had shown opposi- 
tion to the said Roger, by petitioning our most dearly-beloved 
son in Christ, the illustrious king of England, and our vene- 
rable brother, the archbishop of Canterbury, 97 although he had 
offered to make good his objections to you, in presence of judges 
chosen for the purpose, you, nevertheless, our sons, the abbat 
of Sibbeton and the prior of Korwich, presumed, as it was 
stated, to pronounce judgment. And, further, that whereas men- 
tion was made unceasingly in our letters of the revenues that had 
accrued from the archdeaconry, you, contrary to the laws and 
canons, deprived him of the benefit of such command. On 
the other hand, although the said archdeacon had objected in 
our presence, that his said adversary was an excommunicated 
person, and was ready to prove the same 98 within a competent 
time, and to make corporeal oath that he had not made such alle- 
gation as a cause for delay, you, nevertheless, not allowing the 
exception, pronounced that he was not to be heard, unless he 
should prove forthwith that which he had by way of objection 
alleged. Wherefore, when the said archdeacon felt that he 
was aggrieved by you " on these and other points, he appealed 
to our presence, and set out on the road, for the purpose of 
prosecuting his appeal. But you, as it is said, being by no 
means withheld from taking cognisance of the cause, after 
appeal made, proceeded therewith, both to the prejudice and 
in favour of, the said archdeacon. Wherefore, inasmuch as 
we wish no one, in contravention of justice, to be aggrieved, 
and the bearing or decision of causes so to proceed, that 
neither party may have a just cause for complaint, we do, by 
these Apostolic writings, command your discreetness, that since, 
if, in the letters which the said Roger obtained to you from us 
no mention is made of the compromise that took place as to 
the archdeaconry, and of the oath that was taken, because 
he obtained the same by means of suppression of the truth, 

97 Probably in favour of archdeacon Honoring. 

98 To make any sense of this passage, which, like the greater part of 
the letter, is evidently imperfect, it is clear that " hoc' must stand in 
place of " non." 

8a " Nobis" is clearly a misprint for " vobis." 



A.D. 1201. LETTER OF POPE INNOCENT. 541 

and because, according to the canonical sanctions, a lying suitor 
ought to lose his suit, we will that the said letters shall have 
no validity whatever. If also, you have refused to admit of 
the lawful objections of the before-named archdeacon, and 
have presumed, after appeal lawfully interposed, to take fur- 
ther proceedings in the said cause, we do will nevertheless, 
and do command you, entirely to desist from any further proceed- 
ings in the said cause, and to pronounce what has been done 
by you therein to be utterly null and void. We do also will, 
that the cause itself shall be placed in the hands of such judges 
as ought to be suspected by neither party, or else shall be ter- 
minated before ourselves, due justice being done therein. And 
if you shall chance to neglect our commands, in consequence of 
the favour or fear of any person, know that we, by our letters, 
have commanded our venerable brother, the bishop of Roches- 
ter, and our dearly-beloved sons, the abbat of Foxley and the 
prior of Leeds, learning the truth thereon, to perform our com- 
mands, all obstacles whatsoever, by way of contradiction or of 
appeal, removed. Given at the Lateran, on the thirteenth day 
before the calends of January, in the third year of our ponti- 
ficate." 

Another Letter of pope Innocent on the same subject. 

" Innocent, the pope, to the abbats, priors, deans, parsons, 
sheriffs, clerks, and laymen throughout the archdeaconry of 
Eichmond appointed, greeting. Our dearly-beloved son, Master 
Honorius, your archdeacon, has explained to us that whereas he 
had canonically obtained the archdeaconry of Richmond, and had 
for some time been in possession thereof, a disagreement after- 
wards ensuing between him and our venerable brother, the 
archbishop of York, Roger of Saint Edmund's, a clerk, calling 
himself the archdeacon of Richmond, keeping silence on the 
truth of the matters aforesaid, obtained letters from us to our 
dearly-beloved sons, the abbats of Saint Edmund's and of Saint 
Benedict de Holwey, 1 and to the prior of Tofts, directing them, 
having first given you warning, by ecclesiastical censure, all 
power of appeal withheld, to compel you to show to him all 
obedience and respect, and to make him satisfaction for the in- 
juries that had been done to nim. But, inasmuch as a lying suitor 
ought, according to lawful enactment, to lose his suit, we do, by 
these Apostolic writings, enjoin and command the whole of you 

1 The abbat of Sibbeton and the prior of Norwich previously named. 



512 AXXALS OF ROGEK DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1201. 

that, inasmuch as we have commanded the said letters to be re- 
voked, as being obtained and sent to judges held in suspicion, by 
means of the suppression of truth and the assertion of falsehood, 
inviolably preserving the rights of the said archdeacon, you will, 
the said letters notwithstanding, all power of appeal with- 
held, show to him and his officers due obedience and respect, 
just as you paid the same to him before he set out on his road to 
the Apostolic See. And if not, such sentence as he or his officers 
shall think proper reasonably to pronounce upon you for the 
same, we do will to be ratified by us, and inviolably observed." 
Accordingly, upon the presentation of these and other letters 
of our lord the pope, which Honorius produced, Roger of Saint 
[Edmund's making answer thereto, the judges delegate above- 
named, in consequence of the appeals made by both parties, 
and of the varying testimony of witnesses, having drawn up 
the case to the best of their ability, sent the cause to our lord the 
pope, to be determined by him ; and the said Honorius and 
Hoger prosecuted their appeals. 

TJie Letter of the Master of the Hospital at Jerusalem to the Prior 
and his brethren throughout England. 

" The Master of the Hospital at Jerusalem to the Prior of 
England, greeting. As rumours transpire, it is our desire to 
inform the minds of our friends thereof. Accordingly, in con- 
formity with our usual custom, we were sending you the ru- 
mours that were circulating in the land of Jerusalem on the 
mournful occasion of the lately attempted passage ; but, the ship 
being wrecked on the sea-coast of Tripolis, before Biblius, the 
bishop of Acre, and many most deserving men among our 
brethren, who had been despatched to you upon the affairs of 
the Holy Land, it so pleasing God, to the grief and sorrow of 
the whole people of Christendom, perished, together with many 
pilgrims both of noble and of the lower rank. Since this ship- 
wreck, we believe that no ship has made a passage, at least it is 
so said by all ; for some ships, on board of which were our 
messengers, making the attempt to proceed upon the voyage, 
after leaving Acre and sailing three days or more, having lost 
their sailyards through the usual violence of the winds and the 
tempests, returned to Tripolis, with great difficulty escaping ship- 
wreck. Having, however, obtained such opportunity as we could, 
of a ship sailing, we have to inform your brotherhood, that that 
most wicked enemy of the Christians, Saphadin, the lord of Da- 



A.D. 1201. LETTEB OF THE MASTEE OF THE HOSPITAL. ,543 

mascus, has been made lord of Babylon, for, like a perndious and 
perjured man, he has expelled his nephew and others, whose 
rights to the succession he dreaded, from the kingdom of Baby- 
lon. There still nourish between him and the Sultan Aleph, 
and many others, great dissensions, which can never come to 
an end, and will never cease or fade away. Saphadin also, 
himself, being odious and abominable to his own followers, is 
in dread of domestic treachery, and, thinking himself safe in no 
place (as he has proved a traitor and perjured to his nephews, 
whom he is attempting also utterly to disinherit), does not dare 
go out of Babylon, a thing which, in the last year, has proved 
our safety and protection. For he had, in his boisterous manner, 
and going beyond all bounds, been making preparations to 
overrun us, and utterly to demolish the remnants of Christianity 
that still remained. But God has struck with the rod of His 
power the regions of Babylon in that river of Paradise, 2 which 
used to water the lands of the enemy, so as to cause it not to now, 
and in the past year it has sent forth no stream. In conse- 
quence of this, they are perishing by famine, and have lost 
their animals ; many of them have not scrupled to sell their 
sons, the rich the poor, the powerful the weak, that so they 
may preserve their lives from the famine, which they ap- 
prehend will be the result of the river being dried up, if it does 
not flow. Any prudent person indeed might imagine this, that 
if the river, by the will of God, should not flow, and thereby 
irrigate the fields, they will be in great danger of their lives. 
Consequently, infinite multitudes, compelled by necessity and 
the severity of famine, have now filled our lands like swarms of 
locusts, for the purpose of sustaining their bodies ; where some 
moil 3 at the soil belonging to the Church, some, after the manner 
of beasts, feed upon the shrubs in the woods, while others, dying 
of hunger, are found in spots in the woods wondrously eaten 
away by worms and birds. Wherefore, we, putting our trust 
in the Lord, who, when He wills, puts an end to battles, do 
hope that He is about to make a beginning of shewing com- 
passion upon the Christian people, when He thus bruises their 
enemies. There is also afforded matter for astonishment among 
the nations, in that, a certain Saracen, of youthful age and of low 

2 Meaning the Nile. 

3 This may possibly signify that they had to extract sustenance from the 
clay of the earth. 



544 A2TXALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEX. A.D. 1201. 

degree, having been brought up in simplicity among shepherds 
from his youth, has on a 'sudden appeared to all so learned, that 
all are in admiration of his wisdom ; he also publicly preaches 
the name of Jesus Christ, and so successfully, that already, 
more than two thousand of the pagans have believed in him, 
and, at his exhortations, have become converted to our faith, 
and have been born again at the font of holy baptism, and 
grieve that they submitted to the pain of circumcision. How- 
ever, our enemies are exulting with unbounded joy, because 
they know that we are but few in number, and impoverished 
in means, and think that we are in want of troops. Where- 
fore, unto you do we cry with the voice of lamentation, and 
do piteously entreat you, that, among both the higher and the 
lower classes, you will think us worthy to be aided by your 
counsel and assistance, and will make it your care promptly 
to induce our lord the king of England, and whatever other 
persons you can, to aid us, and diligently advise them to 
come to our succour. For we tremble on account of their in- 
finite resources, and the more so, as their wealth is increased 
by the merchandize brought by many merchants, a circumstance 
which strikes us all with greater alarm than usual ; and con- 
sidering that, whereas against the single kingdom of Babylon 
or of Damascus the whole people of the Land of Promise 
used to be hardly able to defend itself, at the present time two 
kingdoms, joined under one master, by their threats inspire 
terror in us, a residue so small in number. This is assuredly 
the true state of the Land of Promise and of the enemies of 
Christ; which, if it remained as at present, if we were to 
receive sufficient aid from Christendom, we should with the 
propitious favour of heaven, suppose ourselves able to avenge 
both the injuries of Christ and the disgraces of the Christians. 
Wherefore, good brother, as it suffices to say but little, you, know- 
ing full well what necessities and how great are imposed upon 
us, hear now what beyond measure afflicts us. The land of the 
kingdom of Sicily is being ravaged both by the Germans and 
the Lombards, our house at Baroli has been deserted, our breth- 
ren remain within, [shut up] in the city ; our houses outside, 
from which we received our support, have been brought to ruin, 
and no one is for staying in the city. Moreover, since you left the 
land, we have had no assistance whatever from the kingdom of 
Sicily up to the present time, and for this year past we have 
had to buy corn, wine, barley, flesh-meat, cheese, and all neces- 



A.D. 1201. LETTEIi OF THE EABL OF ESSEX. 545 

saries for the whole of our houses and fortresses, upon all which 
the necessary outlay has been incalculable. TJnless we shall 
receive some money from our houses beyond sea, we shall be 
unable to obtain it elsewhere ; and it is now a long time since 
we have received anything whatever for the support of our ex- 
penditure. Know also, that we have incurred a great number 
of debts ; and, awaiting your help and that of our other good 
brethren, we do, by the love of God and our own, entreat you, 
so far as you can, by the first ship that makes her passage in 
the month of March, to send us some assistance. Farewell." 

On hearing of this, our lord the pope Innocent sent a car- 
dinal to the king of France and to the king of England, request- 
ing that assistance might be given by their territories towards 
the relief of the land of Jerusalem; and accordingly, at his 
command the said kings agreed to give towards the relief of 
the land before-mentioned the fortieth part of all their revenues 
for one year. This the king of England ordered to be given 
from his rents, his escheats, and his wardages in England ; and 
he ordered that all the laymen of his territories should, in like 
manner, give the fortieth part of their revenues, as an alms-gift 
for the succour of the land of Jerusalem. Upon this occasion, 
Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, at this time chief justice of England, wrote 
to the sheriffs and bailiffs of England to the following effect : 

The Letter of Geoffrey Fitz-Peter as to the collection of the 
fortieth part of revenues for the succour of the Holy Land. 

" Geoffrey Fitz-Peter, earl of Essex, to all the sheriffs in his 
jurisdiction, greeting. Know ye, that our Lord the king of 
England, at the instance and at the preaching of a certain 
cardinal sent into France by the Supreme Pontiff, has, from 
the parts beyond sea, 4 by the advice of his nobles, granted, for 
the succour of Holy Jerusalem, the fortieth part of the value 
of all his revenues and lands for one year, including those 
accruing from wards and escheats in his hands. The same 
also has been voluntarily contributed by his nobles them- 
selves beyond sea. At their instance also, our lord the king 
of England has, by his letters patent, written to all the 
nobles of England, begging and entreating that they will, 
with pure heart, and from motives of Christian love, make a 
like grant from the value of all their revenues and lands for 
the space of one year ; which, however, is neither conceded nor 
4 In relation to France and Normandy. 

VOL. II. NN 



546 ANNALS OF ROGER DE HOVEDEN. A.D. 1201. 

demanded as a matter of right, or of custom, or of compul- 
sion, or as based upon any other 5 Apostolical authority what- 
ever. Wherefore, he has ordered that all the earls and barons 
in each jurisdiction shall immediately be advised and carefully 
urged, forthwith, each for himself, to make the said collection 
on his lands, in the following manner, namely; each is to 
contribute the fortieth part of the value of each vill that 
belongs to him, according to the sum at which it might be let 
to farm per annum. And if in the said vill there shall happen 
to be any tenants by knight service, they are to contribute the 
fortieth part in manner aforesaid : and if there shall be free- 
holders, they are likewise to pay a similar portion in man- 
ner aforesaid, on a computation of the annual rent which 
they are paying to their lords. This collection also they 
are to make by means of discreet and lawful persons, who 
both can and understand how, to perform the same, and who 
are to receive it from the earls and barons aforesaid. And 
after the same shall have been collected by their hands, the 
receivers of the said collection are to have it reduced dis- 
tinctly and openly to writing how much they have received 
from each person, both earls as well as barons, knights, and 
freeholders ; as also the names of each, and of the vills, and 
how much they have received from each, and to whom each 
vill belongs ; all which they are to have duly registered. The 
sums also, received from the demesnes, and from the wards, 
escheats, and rents of our lord the king, they are to have 
separately registered. Also, if any clerk shall have a lay fee 
in any jurisdiction, or any tenants holding a lay fee, the said 
collection is to be made upon their lands by the said col- 
lectors in manner aforesaid. On the lands also of those who 
have assumed the cross, the said collection is to be made in 
manner aforesaid, but so that the money received from them 
is set apart from the rest ; and the amount of the said money 
is to be set down, and the names of each person by whom the 
said money shall have been so paid is to be written beneath it, 
in order that those who shall have set out on the expedition, 
may promptly receive repayment of their money. Also, due 
care is to be taken that the said money is so collected, that 
each sheriff, together with the collectors, has it in readiness 
at the New Temple, in London, within fifteen days after the 
day of Saint Hilary, as also a register drawn up in manner 
5 Than the suggestion of the cardinal legate. 



A. D. 1201. LETTER OF THE EARL OF ESSEX. 547 

aforesaid, that is to say, stating the amount of the money, the 
names of those who have paid it, the names of the vills from 
which the said money has been paid, and how much has been 
paid by each. And if any persons shall refuse to give their 
consent to the said collection, their names are to be entered 
in the register, and made known to us at London at the time 
aforesaid; and the present writ and the names of the col- 
lectors are to be there presented. Farewell. " 



INDEX. 



Acca, bishop, i. 4 
Aclea, i. 27 

Acre, ii. 127, 171, 217 
Adeline, queen, i. 214 
Adrian I. pope, i. 15, 30. 

IV. pope, i. 255 
^Egyptian days, ii. 116 
Agistment, ii. 435 
Agnelles, Henry de, i. 325 
Agreement between kings Richard 

and Philip, ii. 195 
Aid levied by king Richard, ii. 420 

king John, ii. 472 
Akington church, ii, 69, 129, 425 
Alberic, Clement, ii 211 
Albert, cardinal, i. 347 
Albigenses, the, i. 423, 471 
Albinus, i. 13 

Alexander III. pope, i. 256, 279 
Alexis, emperor, i. 525 
Alfred, king, 40, 44, 47 
Alfred. Clito, i. 108 
Algar, i. 122 

Alice, princess, her marriage, ii. 371 
Almaric, king, i. 312 
Almeida, i. 251 
Alnwick, i. 380, 381 
Alphonso, i. 439, ii. 78, 449 
Alwulph, i. 29 
Amauri, king, i. 223 
Ambrosebury, i. 438 
Amimoli, the Emir, i. 354, ii.189 
Anacletus, pope, i. 223 
Anagni, cardinal John of, ii. 129 
Andely, ii. 387 
Andredeswald, i. 23 
Androneus, emperor, i. 525 
Anlaf, king, i. 64, 65, 80 
Anselm, archbishop, i. 187 
Anselm, the monk, ii. 40 
Antichrist, ii. 181 
Antioch, i. 188, patriarch of, ii. 84 



.Archipresbyteri, ii. 79 
|Armenfred, bishop, i. 127, 149 
(Arms, assize as to, ii. 9 
jArnaldia, the malady, ii. 207 
Appellatio, ii. 113 
Arthur, prince, ii. 62, 456 
Assarts, ii. 435 

Assize of Northampton, i. 407 
Astrology, ii. 36 
Austria, pestilence in, ii. 345 
Avranches, decrees of, i. 360 
Award of king Henry II. to the kings 

of Castille and Navarre, i. 449 
Aylesford, ii. 489 

Baldwin, archbishop, ii. 33 
Baldwin, king, i. 223, ii. 62 
Bamborough, i. 9 
Bardolph, Hugh, ii. 332, 530 
Barres, William des, ii. 191, 431 
Basilius, i. 529 
I Battle Abbey, i. 180 
Bearn, i. 10, 26 

Beauvais, Philip, bishop of, ii. 400 
Becket, Thomas a, i. 254, 258,337 
Bede, Venerable, i. 6 
Bedlington, i. 143 
Bela, king, ii. 55 
Belesmains, Robert, ii. 489 
Belesme, Robert de, i. 193 
Benedict the Jew, ii. 119 
Beornred, king, i. 23 
Berengaria, queen, ii. 204, 307, 523, 

530 

Berter of Orleans, i. 378 
Berwick, the bridge of, ii. 465 
Bethune, Baldwin de, ii. 373 
Beverley, ii. 517 
Bigot, Hugh, i. 229 
Boiville, Arnold de,i. 402 
Boniface, archbishop, i. 5 
Saint, ii. 352 
N N 3 



550 



INDEX. 



Bothwin, abbat, i. 11 

Botilda, queen, ii. 304, 373, 479, 

500, 507 

Bourdin, antipope, i. 215 
Brentford, i. 100 
Brihtelm, i. 72 
Bristol, siege of, i. 397 
Brithnoth, i. 79. 
Brithric, i. 11, 19, 87 
Brithwulph, king, i. 41 
Briton, Richard, i. 335 
Broc, Robert de, i. 335 
Brachus, ii. 444 
Brunenburgh, battle of, i. 64 
Brunswick, battle of, ii. 481 
Burgundy, duke of, ii. 220, 269 
Busses, ii. 127 

Calixtus, antipope, i. 209, 312, 459 
Canons of York, their appeal, ii. 333 

Canterbury, i. 90 
Canute, king of England, i. 92 

king of Denmark, ii. 455, 507 
Carlisle, siege of, i. 379 
Carloman, i. 56 

Carre, i. 36 

Carucates, assessment of, ii. 337 

Cashel, synod of, i. 352 

Catania, ii. 193 

Celestinus II. pope, i. 247, 

III. pope, ii. 197 
Ceolwulpb, i. 6, 53 
Cernwich, battle of, i. 50 
Charlemagne, i. 9, 15 
Chalus, castle of, ii. 452 
Chaumont, Hugh de, ii. 395 
Cheorl, earl, i. 37, 41 
Children, exposure of, ii. 363 
Chirchedowne, Adam de, i. 413 
Christian, archbishop, i. 518, ii. 29 
Churches, investiture of, i. 199 
Clergy, decrees as to the, i. 201 
Clement, antipope, i. 175 

III. pope, ii. 77 
Clif, manor of, ii. 439 
Clinton, Geoffrey de, i. 223 
Clito, the title, i. 71 
Conan, duke, i. 257 

Conference of king John, and Wil- 
liam, king of Scotland, ii. 503 



Conon, cardinal, i. 205 
Constantine, king, i. 63 
Conrad, marquis, ii. 66, 208. 267 
Constance, countess, ii. 62, 531, 

empress, ii. 449 

Corumphira the astrologer, ii. 36 
Cospatric, earl, i. 69 
Coterelli, i. 503 
Courcy, John de, i. 439, ii. 518, 

532 

Coventry, monks of, ii. 412 
Cric, i. 8 
Cross, ordinances as to assuming the, 

ii. 121, 445 

Cumin, earl Robert, i, 69,141 
Cuneceastre, i. 52 
Curcelles, battle of, ii. 428 
Cuthbert, Saint, i. 49, 51, 143, 196 
Cuthred, king, i. 20, 51 
Cycles, list of, i. 180 
Cynoth, king, i. 10 

Dandolo, duke, ii. 294 

Danes, their ravages, i. 34 

David, king, i. 231 

Demetffi, i. 49 

Devil, appearance of the, i. 132, 190, 

ii. 49, 439, 486 
Dinant, Peter de, ii. 366 
Dissensions of king Henry II. and 

his sons, ii. 21 
Dol, church of. ii. 467 
Dorsals, i. 70 

Drogo and Anselm, letter of, ii. 329 
Dubricius, Saint, ii. 469 
Dufenald, i. 179 
Dunstan, Saint, i. 65, 71 

Eadbert, king, i. 5, 24 

Pren, i. 30 
Eadburga, i, 19 
Eardulph, i. 16 
Eastry, church of, ii. 489 
Edelhun, i. 20 
Edelred, i. 70 
Edessa, i. 249 
Kdgar, king, i, 73 
Edgitha, queen, i. 258 
Edmund Ironside, i. 04, 95 
Edred, king, i. 66. 



INDEX. 



551 



Edric the Woodsman, i. 40 

Streona, i. 86 
Edward the Elder, i. 59 

the Confessor, i. Ill, 130 

king, i. 77 
Edwin, abbat, i. 18 

the Excellent, i. 103 

king of the Churls, i. 104 
Edwy, king, i. 71 

Egbert, archbishop, i. 3 

king, i. 20, 31 
Egelfleda, queen, i. 61, 73 
Egelred, king, i. 77 
Egelwin, bishop, i. 141 
Egfrith, i. 30 

Eleanor, queen, ii. 112, 472, 480 
Eleemosyna, Philip de, i. 259 
Elfsin, archbishop, i. 72 
Elfwald, king, i. 4, 10, 12 
Elfthritha, queen, i. 73 
Elgiva, queen, i. 65 
Ellendune, battle of, i. 32 
Elswitha, queen, i. 60 
Elphege, Saint, i. 67, 90, 105 
Elpher, duke, i. 76 
Elvet, church of, ii. 440 
Emma, queen, i. 84 
Ermengard, queen, ii. 427 
Eschedun, battle of, i. 46 
Ethelbald, i. 5, 21, 38, 43 
Ethelbert, king, i. 39, 43 

Saint, i. 29 

Ethelred, i. 10, 12, 2?, 30, 39, 43 
Ethelstan, king, i. 37, 63 
Ethelwald, king, i. 6, 73 
Ethelwulph, king, i. 20, 36 

earl, i. 45 

Eugenius III., pope, i. 248, 252, ii. 

470 
Eustace, abbat of Flaye, ii. 486, 526 

the Elder, i. 116 

prince, i. 251 
Exancester, i. 83 

Exchequer, customs of the, ii. 512 
Exemption of the Church of Scot- 
land, ii. 104 

Excommunication of the king of Scot- 
land, ii. 11 

Fasting, ii. 501 



Ferrers, brother of the earl of, i. 

451 

" Finis," meaning of, ii. 512 
Fistulze, i. 169 
Fitz-Bernard, Thomas, ii. 35 
Fitz-Peter, Geoffrey, ii. 426 
Fitz-Urse, Reginald, i. 335 

Richard, i. 244 
Flemings, colony of, i. 203 
Flying-fish, ii. 155 

Folliott, Gilbert, bishop, i. 267, 282 
Fontaines, Walter de. i. 402 
Forestal regard, ii. 133 
Frarnlingham, i. 374 
Franks, origin of the, i. 219 
Frederic, emperor, his letter to Sa- 

ladin, ii. 100 ; his death, ii. 102 
Fulk, king, i. 223 

the priest, ii. 447 

Galilee, the, at Durham, ii. 125 

Gambeson, ii. 1 

Gatesheued, i. 160 

Gelasius II., pope, i. 207 

Geoffrey, archbishop of York, i. 377, 

417, ii. 2, 123, 228, 257, 348, 437, 

465, 488, 501 
Geography of Spain, ii. 151 

of coasts of Europe, ii. 154 
Genevese, the, ii. 207 

Genoa, miracle at, ii. 438 
Ghent, Walter de, ii. 522 
Giffard, bishop Walter, i. 200 
Gilbert, bishop, i. 264 

son of Fergus, i. 423 
Giraldus Cambrensis, ii 469 
Glasgow, church of, i. 411 
Godfrey, king, i. 193 
Godwin, earl, i. 110 
Gratiauus, cardinal, i. 350 
Gregory VIII , pope, ii, 67 
Grundebeof, ii. 482 
Guido, the antipope, i. 262 
Gurdun, Bertram de, ii. 452 
Guthrum, i. 50 

Guiscard, Robert, his history, ii. 252 
Gundulph, bishop, i. 200 

Hacun, earl, i. 106 
Halden, king, i. 49 



552 



IKDEX. 



Hardicanute, king, i. 109 
Harold I. king, 108 

II. king, 128, 130, 138 

the Elder, ii. 392 

Harfager, i. 114 

the Younger, ii. 393 
Hasting, king, i. 58 
Hastings, battle of, i. 138 
Hawisa, queen, divorce of, ii. 483 
Hengistendune, i. 33 

Henry, abbat of Clairval, i. 481 

count of Champagne, ii. 267 
*" dean of York, ii. 136 

duke of Saxony, i. 259, ii. 

175, 427 

III., emperor, 123 

IV., emperor, i. 164 
V., eraperor.i. 204, 218 

VI., emperor, ii. 408 

I., king, his reign, i. 191 ; 
death, i. 124 

II.. king, i. 251 ; reign of, i. 

255; death, ii. Jll 

prince, his death, ii. 26 
Heraclius, the patriarch, ii. 46 
Hereward, i. 151 

Herimar, abbat, i. 115 
Hildebrand, pope, i. 153, 159, 163 
Honorius, Master, ii. 419, 533 
Horae, i. 331 
Hoveden, the vill of, i, 389, ii. 139, 

352, 449, 481 
Hubba, i. 45 
Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, 

ii. 294, 359, 489. 
Hugezun, cardinal, i. 405 
Hugh, earl of Chester, i. 187 

bishop of Coventry, ii. 231 

bishop of Durham, ii. 139, 
257, 353 

bishop of Lincoln, ii. 257, 
502 

Hundredesfield, i. 145 
Hyperpera, i. 519 

Indiction, year of, i. 59 

Inguar, i. 45 

Innocent II. pope, ii. 417 

III. pope, ii. 449 
Ireland, invasion of, i. 350 



Ireland, bishops of, i. 351 

lands in, divided, i. 455 
Isaac, emperor of Constantinople, ii. 

99 

emperor of Cyprus, ii. 201 
Isabel, queen, ii. 483 

Januarius, Saint, abbey of, ii. 145 
Jerusalem, aid to, ii. 3, 75, 473, 542 

kings of, i. 317 

Jews, burial grounds of, i 457 

persecution of, ii. 119, 137 
Joachim of Curazzo, ii. 177 
Joanna, princess, i. 413 
Jocelyn, bishop of Lodeve, i. 435 

bishop of Glasgow, ii. 455 

archbishop of Dublin, ii. 
407 

John, bishop of Dunkeld, ii. 56 

of Crema, cardinal, i. 218 

earl of Mortaigne, 1, 327, 418, 
ii. 51, 287, 355 

John, king, his reign, ii. 456, first 
cpronation, ii. 459, second corona- 
tion, ii. 501, third coronation, ii. 
521 

of Salerno, cardinal, ii. 531 

of Salisbury, i. 418 
Jordan de Fossa Nova, ii. 277 
Judas, his birth-place, ii. 255 

Kahamnes, William de, i. 244 

Karakois, ii. 211, 218 
iKenulph, king, i. 16 
iKineard, i. 27 

IKinewulph, i. 4, 11, 23, 27, 30, 32 
j King's evil, touch for, i. 133 

Lacy, Walter de, ii. 532 

Lambeth church, ii. 70, 129, 422, 

488 

Lanfranc, i. 149 
Lateran, the decrees of, i. 495 
Lavedal, i. 189 
Laws of William the Conqueror, i. 

538 

of Henry II., i. 541 
Legacestre, i. 6G 
Legions, city of, i. 75 
Leicester, earl of, ii. 387 



ISDEX. 



553 



Leo III., pope, i. 30 
IX., pope, i. 114 
Leofric, earl, i. 124 
Leofwine, i. 161 
Leopold, duke of Austria, his death, 

ii. 346 

Limezun, city of, ii. 202 
Limoges, Aimeric de, i. 412 

Viscount de, ii. 452 
Lincoln, superstition as to, i. 249, 

ii. 502 

Lindisfarne, i. 13 

Lisbon, i. 251 

Liulph, i. 160 

London besieged, i. 98, council of, 
i. 412, synod of, ii. 490 

Londoners assist the king of Portu- 
gal, ii. 147 

Longbeard, William, ii. 388 

Longchamp, Osbert de, ii. 139 

Lord's day, observance of the, ii. 
487, 526, 528, 529 

Losinga, bishop Herbert de, i. 180 

Louis, king, i. 56, 192, 230, 324 

prince, ii. 480 
Lucan, ii. 155, 264, 453 
Lucius III., pope, ii. 12 
Ludecan, king, i. 32 
Lusignan, Aimeric de, ii. 439 

Geoffrey de, ii. 208 

Guido de, i. 316, ii. 55, 126 

Machetad, king, i. 107 

Mac William, ii. 64 

Magna Charta, ii. 521 

Magnus, king, i. 113, 187, 536 

Malcolm, king, i. 177, 253 

Mallory, Anketill, i. 377 

Malvoisin, i. 184 

Mandeville, Geoffrey, i. 247 

Manuel, emperor, i. 419 

Marabotin, i. 451 

Marchades, ii. 390,430, 431, 450, 

454, 480 

Marchewald, ii. 408 
March, earldom of, i. 467 
Margaret, queen, i. 147, 178 
Margarite, ii. 485 
Marmion, Robert, i. 247 
Marseilles, ii. 153 



Mategriffon, ii. 170 

Matilda, the empress, i. 236 

Maurienne, earl of, i. 362 

Measures, assize of, ii. 410, 466 

Mentz, ii. 485 

Meophara, church of, ii. 489 

Merlin, prophecy of, i. 368 

Merseware, i. 36 

Mestoc, ii. 211 

Miracles, i. 12, 28, 51, 55, 65, 70, 
131, 132, 144, 174, 183, 186, 188, 
190, 196, 198, 207, 216, 241, 247, 
248, 331, 332, 528, ii. 19, 31, 49, 
98, 146, 150, 156, 212, 249, 263, 
345, 387, 405, 407, 439, 447, 448, 
486, 504, 506, 507, 529, 530 

Momerfield, i, 209 

Moll Ethelwald, i. 24 

Monks of Canterbury, ii. 34, 422,488 

Monkton, church of, ii. 489 

Monoderus, i. 456 

Morcar, i. 95 

Morell, i. 178 

Moretuil, earl of, i. 225 

Mowbray. Robert de, i. 70, 183 

William de, ii. 482 
Munctorio, Peter de, i. 266 
Munkeceastre, i. 154 
Muschamp, Geoffrey de, ii. 355 

Nicholas, bishop of Wic, ii. 404 

II., pope, i. 125 

Saint, i. 168, ii. 148 
Normandy, dukes of, i. 562 
Northampton, council of, i. 437 
Northumbria, earls of, i. 67 

kings of, i. 2 
Nothelm, archbishop, i. 3 
Nottingham, council of, i. 406 
Nunant, bishop Hugh de, ii. 420 

Robert de, ii. 310 

Nuns of Saint Clement's at York, 
ii. 271 

Obedientiae, ii. 499 
Octavianus, antipope, i. 256 

cardinal, ii. 63, 277, 500, 507 
Odo, bishop, i. 163 

earl, i. 185 

Saint, i. 71 



554 



INDEX. 



Offa, king, i. 23 

Olaf, king, i. 105 

Olanege, i. 102 

Oleron laws, the, ii. 140 

Ordgar, duke, i. 73 

Osbert, king, i. 44 

Osborn, earl, i. 142 

Osgod Clapa, i. 1 11 

Oswald, Saint, i. 80 

Otho IV. emperor, ii, 414, 463, 481 

Pagan captives beheaded, ii. 219 
Pains, Hugh de, i. 222 
Pannage, ii. 435 
Papirius, John, i. 252 
Paris, dissensions at, ii. 484 
Paschal II. pope, i. 203 
Pedreda, synod of, i. 1 50 
Pendredesmuthe, L 37 
Penwithsteort, i. 82 
Pestilence at Rome, ii. 97 
Peter, cardinal, i. 471 

of Blois, ii. 238 
Petroc, Saint, i. 457 
Pharamella the astrologer, ii. 43 
Philip Augustus, king, his corona- 
tion, i. 517, leaves Syria, ii. 218, 
returns from Acre, ii. 247, arrives 
in France, ii. 263. See Botilda 

duke of Suabia, ii. 481 

son of king Richard, ii. 464 
Pilgrimage, ordinances as to, ii. 160 
Pisans, the, ii. 207 

Pleas of the crown, ii. 335, 432 
Plumpton, Gilbert de, ii. 32 
Portarius, i. 442 
Pourprestures, ii. 433 
Prayer for Jerusalem, ii. 103 
Presental, i. 434 
Prester John, i. 491 
Prophecy, an ancient, ii. 172 
Prudhoe, castle of, i. 380 
Purgation of king Henry II., i. 356 

Raymond, earl, i. 249 

earl of Saint Gilles, ii. 487 
Ranulph, chancellor, i. 216 

earl of Chester, i. 238, ii. 69 
Reconciliation of the prelates of York 

and Ely, ii. 323 



Reginald, archbishop, i. 293 

of Cologne, i. 277 
Reimer, i. 248 

Rheims, council of, i. 209. 

Rhodes, ii. 250 

Richard, archbishop, ii. 31 

I., king, reign of, ii. Ill 
laws of, ii. 113 his first corona- 
tion, ii. 117 sets out for the Cru- 
sades, ii. 141 his progress, ii. 
143, 146, 157, 159 his repent- 
ance, ii. 176 his marriage, ii. 204 
his illness, ii. 207 his captivity, 
ii. 270, 278, 281 treaty for his 
release, ii. 2_95 ransom of, ii 290 
his liberation, ii. 306, 309 his 
second coronation, ii. 321 his 
intended assassination, u. 352 
amends his life, ii. 357 his death, 
ii. 453 

[Robbers, oath to apprehend, ii. 368 
Robert, bishop of Hereford, i. 183, 
ii. 289, 315 

duke, i. 179 

earl, i. 167, 170 
Roger, archbishop, i. 265 

bishop, i. 235 

king of Sicily, ii. 253 

of Ripon, his confession, ii. 
396 

Roland, bishop, ii. 18 

Rollo, duke, i. 49 

Romania, ii. 255 

Romans, election of emperor of the, 

ii. 414 

Rome subjected by Charlemagne, i. 25 
Romescot, i. 24 
Rosamond, Fair, ii. 257 
Rotrod, archbishop, i. 261 
Rouen, ii. 481 
Routiers, i. 503 
Rumenel, ii. 486 

Saint Alban, Robert de, ii. 54 

Andrew's, bishopric of, i. 531 

David's, see of, ii. 469 

Edmund's, Adam of, ii. 312 

John the Baptist, ii. 521 
Saladin, ii. 54. 65 

Salarian road, i. 203 



INDEX. 



555 






Salomon, king, i. 104 

Sampson, bishop, i. 186 

Sancho, king, i. 439, ii. 479 

Saxons, the, i. 25 

Saxony, duke of, i. 523 

Scot, John the, i. 53 

Scotland, submission of the king of, 
i. 398 charter of liberties of its 
kings, ii. 131 liberties of the 
kings of, ii. 261 charter to the 
king of, ii. 319 

Scylla and Chary bdis described, ii 
169 

Secundus, the philosopher, ii. 513 

Sedbergh, conveyance of the manor 
of, ii. 120, 142 

Sernpringham, order of, ii. 398 

Seneschal, ii. 513 

Sibylla, queen, ii. 62 

Sicily, earthquake in, i. 261, nobles 
of, arrested, ii. 405 

Sigebert, king, i. 22 

Sigeferth, i. 95 

Simnel cakes, ii. 319 

Simon of Apulia, ii. 302, 375, 488 

Sithric, king, i. 63 

Siward, earl, i. 68, 121 

Spain, the divisions of, ii. 263 

Spanish era, the, i. 144 

Southampton, i. 78 

South weorc, i. 117 

Standard, battle of the, i. 231 

Stapha, i. 459 

Statutes of William the Conqueror, 
i. 538 

Stephen, king, his reign, i. 226, his 
death, i. 254 

Striguil, earl of, i. 312 

Stuteville, William de, ii. 482 

Subsidy for Jerusalem, ii. 79 

Sudarium, i. 4 

Sumerled, i. 262 

Superhumerale, i. 328 

Sutri, i. 215 

Swere Birkebain, i. 537 his coro- 
nation, ii. 341 

Swetbrit, king, i. 3 

Sweyn, earl, i. 1)4 
king, i. 80 

Swithin, Saint, i. 74 



Tancred, king, ii. 163, 169 
Tatwin, archbishop, i. 1 
Tementale. ii. 317 
Tenchebrai, ii. 482 
Terricius, ii. 68, 90 
Theobald, earl, i. 342 
Fheodinus, cardinal, i. 347 
Theodoric, duke, i. 221 
Thomas, archbishop, i. 165 

Saint, his remains, i. 249 
Torkeseie, i. 48 

Tosti, earl, i. 68, 130 

Totehill, ii. 396 

Tournaments held, ii. 339 

Tournouere, Adam de, ii. 390 

Tours, church of, ii. 467 

Tracy, William de, i. 335 

Treaty, between York and Durham, 
i. 389 between kings Louis and 
Henry, i. 465 between kings 
Philip and Henry, i. 521 between 
king Philip and king John, ii. 508 

Tripolis, earl of, ii. 62 

Tuaz, viscount de, ii. 464 

Turcopoles, i. 185 

Turebrand, i. 97 

Turgot, bishop, i. 155 

Turketel, i. 89 

Turkill, earl, i. 87 

Turnham, Robert de, ii. 439 

Stephen de, ii. 460 
Pusculum, ii. 197 
Turstin, abbat, i. 164 

archbishop, i. 206 
Tyrell, Walter, i. 189 

Ucthred, earl, i. 97 
Ulfketel, duke, i. 85 
Tnnust, king, i. 5 
Urban II., pope,i. 175, i. 188 

III., pope, ii. 52 

Vere, Alberic de, i. 245 
Verneuil, siege of, i. 370 
Viaticum, i. 169 

Virgin Mary, appearance of the, ii. 213 
Vivianus, cardinal, i. 350, 417 

Watlingastrete, i. 92 
Walterville, William de, i. 405 



556 



INDEX. 



Waltheof, earl, 153, 158 

Wastels, ii. 319 

Waterspouts, ii. 249 

Wellehare, i. 31 

Werefrith, i. 48 

Werfred, i. 61 

Wessex, kings of, i. 39 

Westminster, synod of, i. 391 

Whitherne, i. 7 

Wigetoft, Ralph de, ii. 395 

Wilaf, king, i. 33 

William, archbishop of Sens, i. 343 

bishop of Ely, ii. 1 74, 230, 235 

the Conqueror, his reign, i. 

135 his death, i. 169 

earl of Flanders, i. 221 

theYounger, king, his reign, i. 

169 his death, i. 189, 201 

king of Scotland, i. 269 



William, king of Sicilv, i. 414, ii. 134, 
340 

prince, the death of, i. 213 
Wincanheale, i. 8 
Winchelcomb, i. 174 
Winchester, synod of, i. 148 
Windsor, treaty of, i. 402 

Wine, statutes as to the measure of, 

ii. 466 

Withgaraburgh, i. 41 
Withebi, i. 154 
Wonwaldremere, i. 12 
Wulnoth, i. 87 
Wulstan, archbishop, i. 66. 

bishop, i. 126, 182 

York, synod of, ii. 362 
Yse, the story of, ii. 248 



ERRATA IN VOLUME I. 

Page 395, line 3, for " incarnnti," read " incarnati." 

4, for " renigenitus," read " unigenitus." 

5, for " supplicitur," read " suppliciter." 

7, for " renigenito," read " unigenito." 

. . 498, . . 19, for " our," read " all." 

. . 523, . . 17, for " Rhone," read " Rhine." 



THE END. 



J. BILLTfcO, PRINTER AND BTEBEOTVPEB, WOKING, SUBSET. 



BOHN'S VAEIOUS LIBRARIES. 



Longfellow's Poetical Works, com- 
plete, including The Wayside Inn. 
Twenty-four page Engravings, by Birket 
Foster and others, and a new Portrait. 

; or, wi-thout the illustrations. 

3s. 6(2. 

Prose Works, complete. Six- 
teen page Engravings by Birket Foster 
and others. 

Marryat's Masterman Ready; or, 

The Wreck of the Pacific. 93 Engravings. 

Mission ; or, Scenes in Af- 
rica. (Written for Young People.) Illus- 
trated by Gilbert and Dalziel. 

Pirate and Three Cutters. 

New Edition, with a Memoir of the 
Author. With 20 Steel Engravings, from 
Drawings by ClarJcson Stansfield, R.A. 

Privateer's-Man One Hun- 
dred Years Ago. Eight Engravings on 
Steel, after Stothard. 

Settlers in Canada. New 

Edition. Ten fine Engravings by Gilbert 
and Dalziel. 

Maxwell's. Victories of Wellington 

and the British Armies. Illustrations on 
Steel. 

Michael Angelo and Raphael, their 

Lives and Works. By DUPPA and QTTA- 

TREMERE DE QuiKCT. With 13 highllj- 

ftnished Engravings on Steel. 

Miller's History of the Anglo-Sax- 
ons. Written in a popular style, on the 
basis of Sharon Turner. Portrait r,f 
Alfred, Map of Saxon Britain, and 12 
elaborate Engravings on Steel. 

Milton's Poetical Works. With a 
Memoir by JAMES MONTGOMERY, TODD'S 
Verbal Index to all the Poems, and Ex- 
planatory Notes. With 120 Engravings 
by Thompson and others, from Drawings 
by W. Harvey. 2 vols. 
Vol. 1. Paradise Lost, complete, with 

Memoir, Notes, and Index. 
Vol. 2. Paradise Regained, and other 
Poems, with Verbal Index to all the 
Poems. 

Mudie's British Birds. Revised by 
W. C. L. MARTIN. Fifty-two Figures and 
7 Plates of Eggs. In 2 vols. 

; or, with the plates coloured. 

7s. 6<Z. per vol. 

Naval and Military Heroes of Great 

Britain ; or, Calendar of Victory. Being a 
Record of British Valour and Conquest 
by Sea and Land, on every day In the 
year, from the time of William the 
Conqueror to the Battle of Inkermann. 
By Major JOHNS, R.M., and Lieutenant 
P. H. NICOLAS, R.M. Twenty-four Por- 
traits. 6s. 



Nicolini's History of the Jesuits : 

their Origin, Progress, Doctrines, and De- 
signs. Fine Portraits of Loyola, l.air>e$, 
Xavier, Borgia,, Acqiiaviva, Fere la C'fuiise, 
and Pope Ganganelli. 

Norway and its Scenery, Compris- 
ing Price's Journal, with large Additions, 
and a Road- Book. Edited by T. FORBSTEB. 
Twenty-two Illustrations. 

Paris and its Environs, including 

Versailles, St. Cloud, and Excursions into 
the Champagne Districts. An illustrated 
Handbook for Travellers. Edited by T. 
FORESTER. Twenty-eight beautiful En- 
gravings. 
Petrarch's Sonnets, and other Poems. 

Translated into English Verse. By various 
hands. With a Life of the Poet, by 
THOMAS CAMPBELL. With 16 Engravings. 

Pickering's History of the Races of 

Man, with an Analytical Synopsis of the 
Natural History of Man. By Dr. HALL. 
Illustrated by numerous Portraits. 

; or, with the plates coloured. 

7s. 6cZ. 

** An excellent Edition of a work ori- 
ginally published at 31. 3s. by the 
American Government. 

Pictorial Handbook of London. Com- 
prising its Antiquities, Architecture, Arts, 
Manufactures, Trade, Institutions, Ex- 
hibitions, Suburbs, &c. Two hundred 
and five Engravings, and a large Map, by 
Lotaty. 

This volume contains above 900 pages, 
and is undoubtedly the cheapest five- 
shilling volume ever produced. 

Pictorial Handbook of Modern Geo- 
graphy, on a Popular Plan. 3s. 6d. Illus- 
trated by 150 Engravings and 51 Maps. 6s. 

: or, with the maps coloured, 

Is. ed. 

Two large Editions of this volume have 
been sold. The present New Edition 
is corrected and improved ; and, besides 
Introducing the recent Censuses of 
England and other countries, records 
the changes which have taken place 
in Italy and America. 

Pope's Poetical Works. Edited by 
ROBERT CARKUTHERS. Numerous En- 
gravings. 2 vols. 

Homer's Iliad. With Intro- 
duction and Notes by J. S. WATSON, M.A. 
Illustrated by the entire Series of Flax- 
man's Designs, beautifully engraved by 
Moses (in the full Bvo. size}. 

Homer's Odyssey, Hymns, 

&c., by other translators, including Chap- 
man, and Introduction and Notes by J. S. 
WATSON, M.A. Flaxman's Designs, beau- 
tifully engraved by Moses. 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Pope's Life. Including many of his 
Letters. By ROBERT CARRUTHERS. New 
Edition, revised and enlarged. Illustra- 
tions. 

The preceding 5 vols. make a complete 
and elegant edition of Pope's Poetical 
Works and Translations for 25s. 

Pottery and Porcelain, and other Ob- 
jects of Vertu (a Guide to the Knowledge 
of). To which is added an Engraved List 
of all the known Marks and Monograms. 
By HENBr G. BOIIN. Numerous Engrav- 
ings. 

; or, coloured. 10s. Qd. 

Prout's (Father) Reliques. New 

Edition, revised and largely augmented. 
Twenty-one spirited Etchings by Maclise. 
Two volumes in one. 7s. 6d. 

Becreations in Shooting. By 

" CRAVEN." 62 Engravings on Wood, 
after Harvey, and 9 Engravings on Steel, 
chiefly after A. Cooper, K.A. 

Bidding's History and Descriptions 

of Wines, Ancient and Modern. Twenty 
beautiful Woodcuts. 

Robinson Crusoe. With Illustrations 
by STOTHAKD and HARVET. Twelve beau- 
tiful Engravings on Steel, and 74 on 
Wood. 

; or, without the Steel illustra- 
tions. 3s. Qd. 

The prettiest Edition extant. 

Rome in the Nineteenth Century. 
New Edition. Revised by the Author. 
Illustrated by 34 fine Steel Engravings. 
2 vols. 

Soathey's Life of Nelson. Wi'.h 

Additional Notes. Illustrated with 61 
Engravings. 

Starling's (Miss) Noble Deeds of 

Women ; or, Examples of Female Courage, 
Fortitude, and Virtue. Fourteen beautiful 
Illustrations. 



Stuart and Revett's Antiquities ol 

Athens, and other Monuments of Greece. 
Illustrated in 71 Steel Plates, and nu- 
merous Woodcuts. 
Tales of the Genii ; or, the Delightful 

Lessons of Horam Numerous Woodcuts, 
and 8 Steel Engravings, after Stothard. 

Tasso's Jerusalem Delivered. Trans- 
lated into English Spenserian Verse, with! 
a Life of the Author. By J. H. WIFFEX, 
Eight Engravings on Steel, and 24 on\ 
Wood, by Thurston. 

Walker's Manly Exercises. Con- 

taining Skating, Hiding, Driving, Hunting, 
Shooting, Sailing, Rowing, Swimming, &c. 
New Edition, revised by " CRAVEN." 
Forty-four Steel Plates, and numerous 
Woodcuts. 

Walton's Complete Angler. Edited 

by EDWARD JKSSK, Esq. To which is 
added an Account of Fishing Stations, <fcc., 
by H. G. BOHN. Upwards of 203 En- 
gravings. 

; or, with 26 additional pagt 

Illustrations on Steel. 7s. Qd. 

Wellington, Life of. By AN 
SOLDIER, from the materials of Maxwell 
Eighteen Engravings. 

White's Natural History of Sel- 

borne. With Notes by Sir WILLIAM JAR 
DINE and EDWARD JESSE, Esq. Illustrates 
by 40 highly-finished Engravings. 

; or, with the plates coloured 

7s. Qd. 

Young, The, Lady's Book. A Ma- 
nual of Elegant Recreations, Arts, Sciences 
and Accomplishments ; including Geology 
Mineralogy, Conchology, Botany, Ento- 
mology, Ornithology, Costume, Ernbroi 
dery, the Escritoire, Archery, Riding 
Music (instrumental and vocal), Dancing 
P^xercises, Painting, Photography, &c. &c 
Edited by distinguished Professors. Twelw 
Hundred Woodcut Illustrations, and seve 
ral fine Engravings on Steel. 7s. Qd. 

; or, cloth gilt, gilt edges, 9s. 



XI. 



Bohn's Classical Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME 
(EXCEPTING THOSE MARKED OTHERWISE). 



JSsehylus. Literally Translated into 
English Prose by an Oxonian. 3s 


, Appendix to. Containing 

the New Readings given in Hermann's 
posthumous Edition of ^schylus. By 
GEORGE BURGKS, M.A. 3s. 6<sL 
10 



Ammianus Marcellinus. History ofl 

Rome from Constantius to Valens. Trans-J 
lated by C. D. YONGE, B.A. Double 
volume, 7s. Qd. 

** This is a very circumstantial and\ 
amusing history. Gibbon expres?et' 
himself largely indebted to it. 



BONN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



Apuleius, the Golden Ass ; Death of 

Socrates; Florida; and Discourse on Magic. 
To which is added a Metrical Version of 
Cupid and Psyche ; and Mrs. Tighe's 
Psyche, frontispiece. 

Aristophanes' Comedies. Literally 

Translated, with Notes and Extracts from 

Frere's and other Metrical Versions, by 

W, J. HICKIK. 2 vols. j 

Vol. 1. Acharnians, Knights, Clouds, 

Wasps, Peace, and Birds. 
Vol. 2. Lysistrata, Thesmopboriazusse, 
Frogs, Ecclesiazusae, and Plutus. 

Aristotle's Ethics. Literally Trans- 
lated by Archdeacon BROWNE, late Classical 
Professor of King's College. 

Politics and Economics. 

Translated by E. WALFORD, M.A. 

Metaphysics. Literally Trans- 
lated, with Notes, Analysis, Examination 
Questions, and Index, by the Rev. JOHN 
H. M'MAHON, M A., and Gold Medallist in 
Metaphysics, T.C.D. 

History of Animals. In Ten 

Books. Translated, with Notes and Index, 
by RICHARD CBKSSWELL, M.A. 

Organon ; or, Logical Treat- 
ises. With Notes, &c. By O.F. OWEN, M.A. 
2 vols., 3s. 6<Z. each. 

Rhetoric and Poetics. Lite- 
rally Translated, with Examination Ques- 
tions and Notes, by an Oxonian. 

Lthenaeus. The Deipnosophists ; or, 

the Banquet of the Learned. Translated 

by C. D. YONGE, B.A. 3 vols. 
Uaesar. Complete, with the Alexan- I 

drian, African, and Spanish Wars. Lite- i 

rally Translated, with Notes. 

ia-tullus, Tibullus, and the Vigil of 

Venus. A Literal Prose Translation. To 
which are added Metrical Versions by 
LAMB, GKAINGEK, and others. Frontis- 
piece. 

Cicero's Orations. Literally Trans- 
lated by C. D. YONGE, B.A. In 4 vols. 

Vol. 1. Contains the Orations against 
Verres, c. Portrait. 

Vol. 2. Catiline, Archias, Agrarian 
Law, Rabirius, Murena, Sylla, &c. 

Vol. 3. Orations for his House, Plancius, 
Sextius, Ccelius, Milo, Ligarius, &c. 

Vol. 4. Miscellaneous Orations, and 
Rhetorical Works; with General In- 
dex to the four volumes. 



on Oratory and Orators. By 

J. S. WATSON, M.A. 

on the Nature of the Gods, 

.Divination, Fate, Laws, a Republic, &c. 
Translated by C. D. YOSGE, B.A., and 
F. BABHAM. 



Cicero's Academics, De Finibus, and 

Tusculan Questions. By 0. D. YONGE, 
B.A. With Sketch of the Greek Philo- 
sophy. 

Offices, Old Age, Friendship, 

Scipio's Dream, Paradoxes, &c. Literally 
Translated, by R. EDMONDS. 3s. &d. 

Demosthenes' Orations. Translated, 
with Notes, by C. RANN KENNEDY. In 5 
volumes. 
Vol. 1. The Olynthiac, Philippic, and 

other Public Orations. 3s. 6d 
Vol. 2. On the Crown and on the Em- 

bassv. 
Vol. 3." Against Leptines, Midias, An- 

drotrion, and Aristocrates. 
Vol. 4. Private and other Orations. 
Vol. 5. Miscellaneous Orations. 

Dictionary of Latin Quotations. In- 
cluding Proverbs, Maxims, Mottoes, Law- 
Terms and Phrases; and a Collection of 
above 500 Greek Quotations. With all the 
quantities marked, & English Translations. 

, with Index Verhorum. 6s. 

Index Verborum only. Is. 

Diogenes Laertius. Lives and Opin- 
ions of the Ancient Philosophers. Trans- 
lated, with Notes, by C. D. YONGE. 

Euripides. Literally Translated. 2 vols. 
Vol. 1. Hecuba, Orestes, Medea, Hippo- 

lytus, Alcestis, Bacchaj, Heraclidas, 

Iphigenia in Aulide, and Iphigenia in 

Tauris. 
Vol. 2. Hercules Furens, Troades, Ion, 

Andromache, Suppliants, Helen, 

Electra, Cyclops, Rhesus. 

Greek Anthology. Literally Trans- 
lated. With Metrical Versions by various 
Authors. 

Greek Romances of Heliodorus, 

Ixingus, and Achilles Tatius. 
Herodotus. A Now and Literal 
Translation, by HKNRY CAKV, M.A., of 
Worcester College, Oxford. 

Hesiod, Callimachus, and Theognis. 

Literally Translated, with Notes, by J 
BANKS, M.A. 

Homer's Iliad. Literally Translated, 
by an OXONIAN. 

Odyssey, Hymns, &c. Lite- 
rally Translated, by an OXONIAN. 

Horace. Literally Translated, by 
SMART. Carefully revised by an OXONIAN. 
3s. 6cZ. 

Justin, Cornelius Nepos, and Eutro- 

pius. Literally Translated, with Notes 
and Index, by J. S. WATSON, M.A. 

Juvenal, Persius, Sulpicia, and Lu- 

citius. By L. EVANS, M.A. With the 
Metrical Version by Gifford. Front ispitce, 
11 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Livy. A new and Literal Translation. 
By Dr. SPILI.AX. and others. In 4 vols. 
Vol. 1. Contains Books 18. 
Vol. 2. Books 926. 
Vol. 3. Books 2736. 
Vol. 4. Books 37 to the end ; and Index. 
Lucan's Pharsalia. Translated, with 

Notes, by H. T. RILEY. 
Lucretius. Literally Translated, with 
Notes, by the Rev. J. S. WATSON, M.A. 
A)id the Metrical Version by J. M. GOOD. 
Martial's Epigrams, complete. Lite- 
rally Translated. Each accompanied by 
one or more Verse Translations selected 
from the Works of English Poets, and 
other sources. With a copious Index. 
Double volume (660 pages). 7s. 6d. 
Ovid's Works, complete. Literally- 
Translated. 3 vols. 
Vol. 1. Fasti, Tristla, Epistles, &c. 
Vol. 2. Metamorphoses. 
Vol. 3. Heroides, Art of Love, &c. 
Pindar. Literally Translated, by DAW- 
SON W. TUSKER, and the Metrical Version 
by ABEAHAM MOOEE. 

Plato's Works, Translated by the 
Rev. H. CAHY and others. In 6 vols. 

Vol. 1. The Apology of Socrates, Crito, 
?ha;do, Gorgias, Protagoras, Phsdrus, 
Theastetus, Euthyphron, Lysis. 

Vol. 2. The Republic, Timaus, &Critias. 

Vol. 3. Meno, Euthydemus, The So- 
phist, Statesman, Cratylus, Parme- 
nides, and the Banquet. 

Vol. 4. Philebus, Charmides, Laches, 
The Two Alcibiades, and Ten other 
Dialogues. 

Vol. 5. The Laws. 

Vol. 6. The Doubtful Works. With 
General Index. 

Plautus's Comedies. Literally Trans- 
lated, with Notes, by H. T. RILEY, B.A. 
In 2 vols. 

Pliny's Natural History. Translated , 

with Copious Notes, by the late JOHN 
BOSTOCK, M.D., F.R.S., and H. T. RILEY, 
B.A. In 6 vols. 

Propertius, Petronius, and Johannes 

Secundus. Literally Translated, and ac- 
companied by Poetical Versions, from 
various sources. 



Quintilian's Institutes of Oratory. 

Literally Translated, with Notes, &c., by 

J. S. WATSON, M.A. In 2 vols. 

Sallust, Floras, and Velleius Pater- 

culus. With Copious Notes, Biographical 

Notices, and Index, by J. S. WATSON. 

Sophocles. The Oxford Translation 

revised. 

Standard Library Atlas of Classical 

Geography. Twenty-tico large coloured 
Maps according to the latest authorities. 
With a complete Index (accentuated), 
giving the latitude and longitude of every 
place named in the Maps. Imp.Svo. 7s. Gd. 

Strabo's Geography. Translated, 
with Copious Notes, by W. FALCONER, 
M.A., aud H. C. HAMILTON, Esq. With 
Index, giving the Ancient and Modern 
Names. In 3 vols. 

Suetonius' Lives of the Twelve 

Cajsars, and other Works. Thomson's 
Translation, revised, with Notes, by T. 
FOBESTEB. 

Tacitus. Literally Translated, with 
Notes. In 2 vols. 
Vol. 1. The Annals. 
Vol. 2. The History, Germania, Agri- 
cola, &c. With Index. 

Terence and Phsedrus. By H. T. 

RILEY, B.A. 
Theocritus, Eion, Moschus, and 

Tyrtajus. By J. BANKS, M.A. With the 
Metrical Versions of Chapman. 

Thucydides. Literally Translated by 
Rev. H. DALE. In 2 vol's. 3s. 6d. each. 

Virgil. Literally Translated by DA- 
VIDSON. New Edition, carefully revised. 
3s. 6d. 

Xenophon's Works. In 3 Vols. 

Vol. 1. The Anabasis and Memorabilia. 
Translated, with Notes, by J. S. WAT- 
SON, M.A. And a Geographical Com- 
mentary, by W. F. AINSWORTH, F.S. A., 
F.R.G.S., &c. 

Vol. 2. Cyropajdia and Hellenics. By 
J. S. WATSON, M.A., and the Rev. H. 
DALE. 

Vol. 3. The Minor Works. By J. S. 
WATSON, M.A. 



XII. 



Bohn's Scientific Library. 

UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY, AT 5s. PER VOLUME 

(EXCEPTING- THOSE MARKED OTHERWISE). 



Agassiz and Gould's Comparative 

Physiology. Enlarged by Dr WRIGHT. 
Upvxirds of 400 Engravings. 

Bacon's Novum Organum and Ad- 
vancement of Learning. Complete, with 
Notes, by J. DEVET, M.A. 
12 



Blair's Chronological Tables, Eevised 

and Enlarged. Comprehending the Chro-l 
nology and History of the World, from \ 
the earliest times. By J. WaLCUGHBYjl 
ROSSE. Double Volume. 10*. ; or, half- 
bound, 10s. Gd. 



BOHN'S VARIOUS LIBRARIES. 



Index of Dates. Comprehending the 
principal Facts in the Chronology and 
History of the World, from the earliest to 
the present time, alphabetically arranged. 
By J. W. ROSSE. Double volume, 10s. ; 
or, half-bound, 10s. 6d. 

Bolley's Manual of Technical Analy- 
sis. A Guide for the Testing of Natural . 
and Artificial Substances. By B. H. PAUL. . 
100 Wood Engravings. 

BRIDGEWATER TEEATISES. 

Bell on the Hand. J ts M echa- 

nism and Vital Endowments as evincing 
Design. Seventh Edition Revised. 

[Recently Published. 

Kirby on the History, Habits, 

and Instincts of Animals. Edited, with 
Notes, by T . RYMEB JONES. Numerous 
Engravings,many of which are additional. 
In 2 vols. 

Kidd on the Adaptation of 

External Nature to the Physical Condition 
of Man. 3s. Qd. 

Whewell'3 Astronomy and 

General Physics, considered with refer- 
ence to Natural Theology. 3s. 6d. 

Chalmers on the Adaptation 

of External Nature to the Moral and In- 
tellectual Constitution of Man. 5s. 

Front's Treatise on Chemis- 
try, Meteorology, and Digestion. Edited 
by Dr. J. W. GRIFFITH. 

Carpenter's (Dr. "W. B.) Zoology. A 

Systematic View of the Structure, Habits, 
instincts, and Uses, of the principal Fami- 
lies of the Animal Kingdom, ai;d of the 
chief forms of Fossil Remains. New edition, 
revised to the present time, under arrange- 
ment with the Author, by W. S. DALLAS, 
F.L.S. Illustrated with many hundred 
fine Wood Engravings. In '2 vols. 6s. each. 
Mechanical Philosophy, As- 
tronomy, and Horology. A Popular Ex- 
position. 183 Illustrations. 

Vegetable Physiology and 

Systematic Botany. A complete Intro- 
duction to the Knowledge of Plants. New 
Edition, revised, under arrangement with 
the Author, by E. LANKESTER, M.D., &c. 
Several hundred Illustrations on Wood. 6s. 

Animal Physiology. New 

Edition, thoroughly revised, and in part 
re-written by the Author. Upwards of 
300 capital Illustrations. 6s. 

Chess Congress of 1862. A Collec- 
tion of the Games played, and a Selection 
of the Problems sent in for the Competi- 
tion. Edited by J. LO'WESTIIAL, Manager. 
With an Account of the Proceedings, and 
a Memoir of the British Chess Association, 
by J. W. MEDLEY, Hon. Sec. 7s. 

Chevreul on Colour. Containing the 
Principles of Harmony and Contrast of 



Colours, and their application to the Arts. 

Translated from the French by CHARLES 

MAKTKL. Only complete Edition. Several 

Plates. 
; or, with an additional series 

of 16 Plates in Colours. 7s. Gd. 
Clark's (Hugh) Introduction to 

Heraldry. With, nearly 1 000 Illustrations. 
IStli Edition. Revised and enlarged by J.K. 
PLAXCH, Esq., Rouge Croix. Or, with all 
the Illustrations coloured, 15s. 

[Just published. 
Comte's Philosophy of the Sciences. 

Edited by G. H. LEAVES. 
Ennemoser's History of Magic. 

Translated by WILLIAM HOWITT. With 
an Appendix of the most remarkable and 
best authenticated Stories of Apparitions, 
Dreams, Table-Turning, and Spirit-Rap- 
ping, &c. In 2 vols. 

Handbook of Domestic Medicine. Po 

pularly arranged. By Dr. HENKY DAVIES. 
700 pages. With complete Index. 
Handbook of Games. By various 
Amateurs and Professors. Comprising 
treatises on all the principal Games of 
chance, skill, and manual dexterity. In 
all, above 40 games (the Whist, Draughts, 
and Billiards being especially comprehen- 
sive). Edited by H. G. BOHN. Illus- 
trated by numerous Diagrams. 

Hogg's (Jabez) Elements of Experi- 
mental and Natural Philosophy. Con- 
taining Mechanics, Pneumatics, Hydro- 
statics, Hydraulics, Acoustics, Optics, 
Caloric, Electricity, Voltaism, and Mag- 
netism. New Edition, enlarged. Up- 
wards of 400 Woodcuts. 

Hind's Introduction to Astronomy. 

With a Vocabulary, containing an Expla- 
nation of all the Terms in present use. 
New Edition, enlarged. Numerous En- 
gravings. 3s. 6d. 

Humboldt's Cosmos ; or Sketch of a 

Physical Description of the Universe. 
Translated by E. C. Orrfi and W. S. 
DALLAS, F.L.S. Fine Portrait. In five 
vols. 3s. 6d. each ; excepting Vol. V., 5s 
*** In this edition the notes are placed 
beneath the text, Humboldt's analytical 
Summaries and the passages hitherto sup- 
pressed are included, and new and com- 
prehensive Indices are added. 

Travels in America. In 3 vols. 

Views of Nature ; or, Con- 
templations of the Sublime Phenomena of 
Creation. Translated by K. C. OiTfi and 
H. G. BOHN. A lac-simile letter from the 
Author to the Publisher ; translations ot 
the quotations, and a complete Index. 

Humphrey's Coin Collector's Ma- 
nual. A popular Introduction to the 
Study of Coins. Highly finished Engrav- 
ings. In 2 vols. 

13 



A CATALOGUE OF 



Hunt's (Robert) Poetry of Science ; 

or, Studies of the Physical Phenomena of 
Nature. By Professor HUNT. New Edi- 
tion, enlarged. 

Index of Dates. See Blair's Tables. 

Joyce's Scientific Dialogues. Com- 
pleted to the present suite of Knowledge, 
by Dr. GRIFFITH. Numerous Woodcuts. 

Knight's (Chas.) Xnowlege is Power. 

A Popular .Manual of Political Economy. 
[Immediately. 

Lectures on Painting. By the Royal 

Academicians. With Introductory Essay, 
and Notes by R.WORNCSI, Esq. 'Portraits. 

Mantell's (Dr.) Geological Excur- 
sions through the Isle of Wight and Dor- 
setshire. New Edition, by T. RUPERT 
JONES, Esq. Numerous beautifully exe- 
cuted Woodcuts, and a Geological Map. 

Medals of Creation ; or, 

First Lessons in Geology and the Study 
of Organic Remains : including Geological 
Excursions. New Edition, revised. Co- 
loured Plates, and several hundred beau- 
tiful Woodcuts. In 2 vols., 7s. 6d. each. 

Petrifactions and their 

Teachings. An Illustrated Handbook to 
the Organic Remains in the British Mu- 
seum. Numerous Engravings. 6s. 

-^ Wonders of Geology ; or, a 

Familiar Exposition of Geological Phe- 
nomena. New Edition, augmented by T. 
RUPERT JONES, F.G.S. Coloured Geological 
Map of England, Plates, and nearly 200 
beautiful Woodcuts. In 2 vols., 7s. 6d. each. 
Morphy's Games of Chess. Being 
the Matches and best Games played by 
the American Champion, with Explana- 
tory and Analytical Notes, by J. LOWEN- 
THAL. Portrait and Memoir. 

It contains by far the largest collection 
of games played by Mr. Morphy extant in 
any form, and has received his endorse- 
ment and co-operation. 

Oersted's Soul in Nature, &c. Portrait. 
Kennie's Insect Architecture. New 

Edition. Enlarged by the Rev. J. G. 
WOOD, M.A. Shortly. 



Richardson's Geology, including 

Mineralogy and Palaeontology. Revise 
and enlarged, by Dr. T. WRIGHT. Upward 
of 400 Illustrations. 

Schouw's Earth, Plants, and Man ; ant 

Kobe 11' s Sketches from the Mineral King 
dom. Translated by A. HENFitKr, F.R.S 
Coloured Map of the Geography of Plants. 

Smith's (Pye) Geology and Scrip- 
ture ; or, The Relation between the Hoi} 
Scriptures and Geological Science. 

Stanley's Classified Synopsis of th 

Principal Painters of the Dutch and Fle- 
mish Schools. 

Staunton's Chess-player's Handbook, 

Numerous Diagrams. 

Chess Praxis. A Supplemen 

to the Chess-player's Handbook. Con 
taining all the most important modern 
improvements in the Openings, illustrated 
by actual Games ; a revised Code of Chess 
Laws; and a Selection of Mr. Morphy' 
Games in England and Franc?. 6s. 

Chess-player's Companion, 

Comprising a new Treatise on Odds, Co 
lection of Match Games, and a Selectio 
of Original Problems. 

Chess Tournament of 1851 



Numerous Illustrations. 

Stockhardt's Principles of Chemis- 
try, exemplified in a series of simple expe 
riments. Upwards of 270 Illustrations. 

Agricultural Chemistry ; or 

Chemical Field Lectures. Addressed t 
Fanners. Translated, with Notes, b 
Professor HENFEEY, F.R.S. To which 
added, a Paper on Liquid Manure, b 
J. J. MECHI, Esq. 
Ure's (Dr. A.) Cotton Manufactur 

o-f Great Britain, systematically investi- 
gated; with an introductory view of its 
comparative st^te in Foreign Countries. 
New Edition, revised and completed to 
the present time, by P. L. SIMMOXDS. One 
hundred and fifty Illustrations. In 2 vols. 

Philosophy of Manufactures ; 

or, An Exposition of the Factory System 
of Great Britain. New Ed., continued to thu 
present time, by P. L. SDIMOKBS. Is. 6cZ 



XIII. 

Bohn's Cheap Series. 



Berber, The; or, The Mountaineer 

of the A tlas. A Tale of Morocco, by W. S. 
MAYO, M.I), is. 6d. 

Boswell's Life of Johnson. Includ- 
ing his Tour to the Hebrides, Tour in 
Wales, Ac. Edited, with large additions 
and Notes, by the Right Hon. JOHN WILSON 
CROKER. The second and most complete 
Copyright Edition, re-arranged and re- 
vised according to the suggestions of 
Lord Macaulay, by the late JOHN 
WJIIGHT, Esq., with further additions by 
14 



Mr. CHOKER. Upwards of 40 fne En- 
gravings on Steel. In 4 vols. cloth, 4s. 
each, or 8 parts 2s. each. 

%* The public has now for 1 6s. what 

was formerly published at 11. 
Boswell's Johnsoniana. A Collection 
of Miscellaneous Anecdotes and Sayings 
of Dr. Samuel Johnson, gathered from 
nearly a hundred publications. A Sequel 
to the preceding, of which it forms vol. 5, 
or parts 9 and 10. Engravings on Steel. 
la 1 vol. cloth, 4s., or in 2 parts, 2s. each. 



Hun 

or, 
Na 
tio 

Indt 
Joyc 

pic 

by 

Kni: 



led 

Ac 

an 

Mai 

sic 
se 
Jc 
cu 



Fi 

I 



F 
n< 
B 

I 
b, 

Mo 

tl 
tl 
t< 

Tl 
O 

a 

n 

Oei 

Ee: 

i 



Be: 



Bo: 

ii 
\ 
a 
C 
C 
v 
I 



BINDING SECT. AUG23 $67 



DA 

200 

H613 

1B53 

v.2 



Moved en, Roger of 

The annals of Roger de 
Hoveden 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



SEEN BY 

PRESERVATION 

SERVICES 



